NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CONSUMER-LENDING DISCRIMINATION IN THE FINTECH ERA
Robert Bartlett
Adair Morse
Richard Stanton
Nancy Wallace
Working Paper 25943
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25943
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2019
Financial support from the Fisher Center for Real Estate and Urban Economics, Haas School of
Financial support from
Business, University of California at Berkeley is gratefully acknowledged. For helpful comments
and suggestions, we thank Manuel Adelino, Sanjiv Das, Andreas Fuster, Andres Liberman,
Manju Puri, Raghu Rau, Amit Seru, Ansgar Walther, Justin Wolfers, and seminar
participants at U.C. Berkeley, Cornell, the University of Michigan, USC, NYU Stern, U.T.
Austin, Texas A&M, Michigan State University, Chicago-Booth, Johns Hopkins University,
Consumer Finance Protection Bureau, the George Washington-Federal Reserve Board
Seminar Series on Household Finance, the Spring 2018 NBER Corporate Finance meeting,
the 2018 NBER Law & Economics Summer Institute, the 2018 Annual Conference on
Empirical Legal Studies, the 2017 Boston JOIM Conference, the 2017 Annual Research
Conference of the Center for International Securities and Derivatives Markets, the 2018
NY Fed./NYU Stern Conference on Financial Intermediation, the 2018 American Law
and Economics Association (ALEA) annual meeting, the 2018 Financial Intermediation
Research Society (FIRS) annual meeting, the 2018 EFA meeting, the 2019 AEA meeting, the
2019 NBER conference on “Big Data: Long-Term Implications for Financial Markets and
Firms,” the 2019 Adam Smith Workshop in Corporate Finance, the 2019 FMA Wine Country
Finance Conference, the Federal Reserve Board, and Freddie Mac.. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Robert Bartlett, Adair Morse, Richard Stanton, and Nancy Wallace. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Consumer-Lending Discrimination in the FinTech Era
Robert Bartlett, Adair Morse, Richard Stanton, and Nancy Wallace
NBER Working Paper No. 25943
June 2019
JEL No. G21,G28,J15,K22,K23,R31
ABSTRACT
Discrimination in lending can occur either in face-to-face decisions or in algorithmic scoring. We
provide a workable interpretation of the courts’ legitimate-business-necessity defense of
statistical discrimination. We then estimate the extent of racial/ethnic discrimination in the largest
consumer-lending market using an identification afforded by the pricing of mortgage credit risk
by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. We find that lenders charge Latinx/African-American
borrowers 7.9 and 3.6 basis points more for purchase and refinance mortgages respectively,
costing them $765M in aggregate per year in extra interest. FinTech algorithms also discriminate,
but 40% less than face-to-face lenders. These results are consistent with both FinTech and non-
FinTech lenders extracting monopoly rents in weaker competitive environments or profiling
borrowers on low-shopping behavior. Such strategic pricing is not illegal per se, but under the
law, it cannot result in discrimination. The lower levels of price discrimination by algorithms
suggests that removing face-to-face interactions can reduce discrimination. Further silver linings
emerge in the FinTech era: (1) Discrimination is declining; algorithmic lending may have
increased competition or encouraged more shopping with the ease of platform applications. (2)
We find that 0.74-1.3 million minority applications were rejected between 2009 and 2015 due to
discrimination; however, FinTechs do not discriminate in loan approval.
Robert Bartlett Richard Stanton
University of California at Berkeley Haas School of Business
890 Simon Hall University of California st Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720 545 Student Services Bldg #1900
rbartlett@law.berkeley.edu Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
stanton@haas.berkeley.edu
Adair Morse
University of California, Berkeley Nancy Wallace
545 Student Services Bldg, #1900 Haas School of Business
Berkeley, CA 94720 University of California at Berkeley
and NBER 545 Student Services #1900
morse@haas.berkeley.edu Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
wallace@haas.berkeley.edu

I. Introduction
Algorithmic decision-making can reduce face-to-face discrimination in markets known to be prone
to implicit and explicit biases. But it can also lead to inadvertent discrimination (Barocas & Selbst, 2016).
The question of whether algorithmic decision-making promotes or inhibits impermissible discrimination is
especially relevant in the context of consumer lending, given both the historical challenge of eliminating
discrimination in this domain and the importance of consumer lending for the well-being of households.
Household debt in the United States as of 2017 was $13 trillion; of that, minority households account for
17.3%, or $2.25 trillion.1 The largest component is home loans, on which $1.65 trillion is owed by minority
households. Every extra basis point of interest charged on a home loan due to discrimination costs
minorities $165 million per year in extra payments. Estimating discrimination, however, is notoriously
difficult due to omitted-variable challenges. In this paper, we test for the presence of discrimination and
estimate its level in mortgages securitized by the Government Sponsored Enterprises (GSEs), Fannie Mae
and Freddie Mac. Using GSE loans allows a novel identification strategy without the omitted variable
concerns that have long challenged empirical studies of discrimination. The GSEs charge each loan a
guarantee fee that depends only on the (observable) credit score and loan-to-value ratio (LTV). In return,
lenders are guaranteed against credit risk. Thus, mortgage interest rate differences between loans within a
given GSE grid cell of credit score and LTV cannot reflect differential credit risk, but must instead reflect
strategic pricing decisions on the part of lenders. Strategic pricing is not illegal, but the law requires that
pricing must not induce a disparate impact.2 Lenders cannot, even inadvertently, charge a higher strategic
mark-up to protected groups. Using this novel identification strategy, we find that discrimination is 7.9
basis points (bps) for purchase mortgages and 3.6 bps for refinance mortgages. Averaging across the
distribution of these products in the U.S., lending discrimination currently costs African-American and
Latinx borrowers $765 million in extra interest per year.
Consumer lending in the United States is changing rapidly, with loan origination becoming almost
exclusively algorithmic. A case in point is the Rocket Mortgage of the platform lender Quicken, which is
the largest-volume mortgage product in the U.S. as of 2018. Algorithmic loan origination is not, however,
just a feature of FinTech companies. We study the 2,098 largest mortgage lenders (inclusive of all the big
banks) over the 2012-2018 period, finding that as of 2018, 45% of them offer complete online or app-based
1 Percent-of-debt estimates are from the 2016 Survey of Consumer Finances. Aggregate debt statistics are from the
Federal Reserve.
2 A disparate impact occurs under U.S. anti-discrimination law when a decision maker's practices do not expressly
discriminate on a protected characteristic (e.g., race or ethnicity), but nevertheless disadvantage one or more groups
having a protected characteristic without a legitimate business justification. Under disparate impact theory, proof of
discriminatory intent is not required to establish liability. As noted below, the U.S. Supreme Court has held that the
disparate impact theory of liability extends to the Fair Housing Act, which (among other things) prohibits
discrimination in home lending.
1

mortgage contracting. Value-weighted, that percentage is much higher. While these lenders continue to
provide conventional, face-to-face loan applications, the trend is clearly toward automated underwriting.
Nor is this simply a mortgage story; one only has to look to the emergence of personal-lending platforms,
such as LightStream by SunTrust Bank and Marcus by Goldman Sachs, to see the broader transformation
in consumer lending.
With algorithmic credit scoring, the nature of discrimination changes from being primarily
concerned with human biases – racism and in-group/out-group bias – to being primarily concerned with
illegitimate applications of statistical discrimination. Even if agents performing statistical discrimination
have no animus against minority groups, they can induce disparate impact by their use of Big Data variables.
Whether these changes induce more or less discrimination was previously unknown. We find that FinTechs
do indeed remove some face-to-face discrimination in loan pricing. In particular, relative to the pricing
discrimination we find across all lenders, FinTechs lenders discriminate nearly 40% less on average across
purchase and refinance mortgages. This reduction is encouraging with regard to the potential for algorithmic
lending to reduce discriminatory lending; however, it also highlights the persistence of discriminatory loan
pricing even in the FinTech era. In addition to the ability of FinTech lenders to diminish face-to-face bias
in loan pricing, our findings also point to two silver linings for the role of FinTechs and algorithmic
decision-making. First, we find that discrimination in loan pricing is declining for all lenders from 2009 to
2015, alongside the advent of FinTech Lending. While we cannot prove causation, this finding is consistent
with borrowers using online platforms to shop around with greater ease and speed, which should diminish
the capacity for lenders to extract rents from minority borrowers. Second, in the loan accept/reject decision
(as opposed to pricing), FinTech lenders reveal no evidence of discrimination, in contrast to our evidence
of discrimination in rejection rates for traditional lenders.
At the core of our paper is the importance – in our identification and in the legal setting – of
statistical discrimination in the new era of algorithmic loan decision-making. Regulators and courts face
heightened hurdles to identify which Big Data variables can give rise to a successful claim of illegal
discrimination under U.S. fair-lending laws (see Inclusive Communities, 2015).3 For economists, the courts’
struggle to untangle legitimate from illegitimate statistical discrimination is the same problem as handling
omitted variables in estimating discrimination. Statistical discrimination arises as a solution to a signal
extraction problem. The signal extraction setting in consumer lending emerges as follows. Economists can
write down a macro-fundamental (life-cycle) model of default risk that applies to everyone.4 The problem
3 The potential for illegitimate statistical discrimination toward protected classes of borrowers was a key aspect of
Congressman Emanuel Cleaver’s 2017 investigation into FinTech lending.
4 Behavioral models may correctly profile individuals on average, but some individuals would be incorrectly profiled,
which could be deemed discrimination by disparate impact under the law.
2