NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SEARCH FOR YIELD IN LARGE INTERNATIONAL CORPORATE BONDS:
INVESTOR BEHAVIOR AND FIRM RESPONSES
Charles W. Calomiris
Mauricio Larrain
Sergio L. Schmukler
Tomas Williams
Working Paper 25979
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25979
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2019
We thank Anil Kashyap, Aart Kraay, Jesse Schreger (discussant), and participants at
presentations held at the 2019 ASSA Meetings, Colorado State University, Columbia Business
School, George Washington Business School, International Monetary Fund, Sao Paulo School of
Economics (FGV), and Stanford University for useful comments. We are grateful to Facundo
Abraham, Belinda Chen, Juan Cortina, Marta Guasch Rusiñol, and Soha Ismail for excellent
research assistance, and to Tatiana Didier for facilitating access to data. We also thank
Zhengyang Jiang and Arvind Krishnamurthy for sharing their data on foreign safe asset demand.
The World Bank Chile Research and Development Center, Knowledge for Change Program
(KCP), and Strategic Research Program (SRP) provided support for this paper. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Charles W. Calomiris, Mauricio Larrain, Sergio L. Schmukler, and Tomas Williams.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Search for Yield in Large International Corporate Bonds: Investor Behavior and Firm Responses
Charles W. Calomiris, Mauricio Larrain, Sergio L. Schmukler, and Tomas Williams
NBER Working Paper No. 25979
June 2019
JEL No. F21,F23,F32,F36,F65,G11,G15,G31
ABSTRACT
Emerging market corporations have significantly increased their borrowing in international
markets since 2008. We show that this increase was driven by large-denomination bond
issuances, most of them with face value of exactly US$500 million. Large issuances are eligible
for inclusion in important international market indexes. These bonds appeal to institutional
investors because they are more liquid and facilitate targeting market benchmarks. We find that
the rewards of issuing index-eligible bonds rose drastically after 2008. Emerging market firms
were able to cut their cost of funds by roughly 100 basis points by issuing bonds with a face value
equal to or greater than US$500 million relative to smaller bonds. Firms contemplating whether
to take advantage of this cost saving face a tradeoff: they can benefit from the lower yields
associated with large, index-eligible bonds, but they pay the potential cost of having to hoard
low-yielding cash assets if their investment opportunities are less than US$500 million. Because
of the post-2008 “size yield discount,” many companies issued index-eligible bonds, while
substantially increasing their cash holdings. The willingness to issue large bonds and hoard cash
was greater for firms in countries with high carry trade opportunities that reduced the cost of
holding cash. We present evidence suggesting that these post-2008 behaviors reflected a search
for yield by institutional investors into higher-risk securities. These patterns are not apparent in
the issuance of investment grade bonds by firms in developed economies.
Charles W. Calomiris Sergio L. Schmukler
Columbia Business School The World Bank
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall MSN MC3-301
New York, NY 10027 1818 H Street, N.W.
and NBER Washington, DC 20433
cc374@columbia.edu Sschmukler@worldbank.org
Mauricio Larrain Tomas Williams
Catholic University of Chile George Washington University
School of Management Department of Economics
Avenida Vicuña Mackenna 4860 2115 G Street, NW
Santiago Room 340
Chile Washington, DC 20052
mauriciolarraine@gmail.com tomaswilliams@gwu.edu

1. Introduction
After the 2008 global financial crisis (GFC), interest rates in developed countries reached
historically low levels, especially for safe assets. Several studies argue that persistently low
interest rates on safe assets have led investors to search for yield by expanding the range
of investments they consider and by making them willing to accept increases in risk. As a
consequence, the search for yield has expanded the demand for emerging market securities,
especially corporate bonds issued in international markets (Becker and Ivashina, 2015;
Bruno and Shin, 2017).1
Because the international market for debt securities is dominated by institutional
investors, who face limits in their incentives or ability to undertake risk in unfamiliar asset
classes, the search for yield does not entail an unlimited willingness to accept new risks as
the demand for emerging market corporate debt rises. One way to limit risk, while
expanding investments into emerging market corporate debt, is to demand liquid
instruments. These securities allow investors to more easily sell positions when needed or
to increase them when desired, with minimal price impact and low transaction costs. Also,
institutional investors are often penalized with withdrawals or rewarded with inflows by
the ultimate investors (who are the principals in those investments). This disciplining
mechanism encourages managers to think of the risk that affects them (as agents) in terms
of deviations from the market benchmark indexes.
By purchasing bonds that are included in major indexes, institutional investors
both enhance liquidity and limit the risk of underperforming relevant indexes.2 Bonds that
1 We use the phrase “search for yield” to describe either (1) a broadening of the range of investments by
institutional investors (e.g., U.S. corporate bond funds) to include riskier (e.g., emerging market corporate)
bonds, or (2) decisions by ultimate individual investors to allocate more of their portfolios to riskier
investments (e.g., emerging market bond funds).
2 There have been several studies that document that institutional investors such as mutual funds do not
deviate too much from their respective indexes. See Cremers and Petajisto (2009) for evidence on the U.S.
equity mutual fund industry. Cremers et al. (2016) and Raddatz et al. (2017) show this pattern at the
international level. An extreme instance of this strategy is that used by exchange-traded funds (ETFs), the
importance of which has increased (Converse et al., 2018).
1

are included in market indexes are bought and sold more frequently and are held by a wide
range of investors, which means that holding a bond that is included in the index enhances
its liquidity. Bonds that are included in the index collectively define the benchmark of
market performance, which means that holding those bonds limits an institutional
investor’s risk of underperforming the market benchmark.
Two of the most relevant benchmark indexes for emerging market bonds are the
J.P. Morgan EMBI Global Diversified Index (which focuses on sovereign bonds) and the
J.P. Morgan CEMBI Narrow Diversified Index (which focuses on corporate bonds).3 Both
indexes include bonds based on certain security attributes, notably the amount of
outstanding debt. Thus, only debt issues with face value equal to or greater than $500
(US$500) million are included in these indexes. A broader index (the CEMBI Broad) also
exists, which includes corporate debt with face value equal to or greater than $300 million.
Because of their advantages, some institutional investors that expand their holdings
of emerging market corporate debt purchase bonds that are included in the major market
indexes. This means purchasing large bonds. One would expect that this preference would
increase bond prices through an inclusion premium and reduce bond yields, an effect that
we label the “size yield discount.” Also, one would expect that this preference would
increase the likelihood of issuing large bonds, as firms participating in international bond
markets take advantage of cheaper financing costs.
In this paper, we analyze how the change in global market conditions after 2008
interacted with market structure to affect the size and pricing of U.S. dollar-denominated
bonds issued by emerging market corporations. Specifically, we analyze a period when the
low interest rate environment created by developed countries’ monetary policies after the
GFC interacted with preferences of international investors that follow rules governing the
3 EMBI stands for Emerging Market Bond Index and CEMBI stands for Corporate Emerging Market Bond
Index.
2