NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INTERMEDIATION VARIETY
Jason Roderick Donaldson
Giorgia Piacentino
Anjan Thakor
Working Paper 25946
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25946
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2019
We gratefully acknowledge helpful comments from Philp Bond (editor), two anonymous referees,
Mike Burkart, Francesca Cornelli, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, Philip Dybvig, Daniel Ferreira, Radha
Gopalan, Vincent Glode, Denis Gromb, Ohad Kadan, Nataliya Klimenko, Mina Lee, Adrien
Matray, Asaf Manela, Alan Morrison, Balazs Szentes, Basil Williams, Andy Winton, Vijay
Yerramilli, Kostas Zachariadis, Jean-Pierre Zigrand and seminar participants at the 2015 EFA
Summer Meetings, the 2015 FIRS Conference, the 2017 Five Star Conference, the London
School of Economics, the 2018 SFS Cavalcade, and Washington University in St. Louis. Xiabo
Yu provided outstanding research assistance. We alone are responsible for any remaining errors.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Jason Roderick Donaldson, Giorgia Piacentino, and Anjan Thakor. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Intermediation Variety
Jason Roderick Donaldson, Giorgia Piacentino, and Anjan Thakor
NBER Working Paper No. 25946
June 2019
JEL No. G21,G23,G24
ABSTRACT
We explain the emergence of a variety of intermediaries in a model based only on differences in
their funding costs. Banks have a low cost of capital due to, say, safety nets or money-like
liabilities. We show, however, that this can be a disadvantage, because it exacerbates soft-budget-
constraint problems, making it costly to finance innovative projects. Non-banks emerge to
finance them. Their high cost of capital is an advantage, because it works as a commitment
device to withhold capital, solving soft-budget-constraint problems. Still, non-banks never take
over the entire market, but coexist with banks in equilibrium.
Jason Roderick Donaldson Anjan Thakor
Olin Business School Washington University in St. Louis
Washington University in St. Louis Thakor@wustl.edu
Simon Hall
1 Olympian Way
St Louis, MO 63130
j.r.donaldson@wustl.edu
Giorgia Piacentino
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway
Uris Hall 813
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
gp2547@columbia.edu

1 Introduction
Depository financial institutions—“banks”—have a low cost of capital,1 most likely be-
cause their liabilities benefit from a moneyness premium and government safety nets.
Perhaps due to this funding-cost advantage, banks provided the bulk of finance un-
til the 1970s. But as competition among banks increased, non-depository financial
institutions—“non-banks”—proliferated. As Remolona and Wulfekuhler (1992) put it,
During the 1980s, U.S. commercial banks faced increased competition in
their lending activities from other financial intermediaries...[which] enjoyed
theirsuccessdespitecarryingapparently heavier capital burdens andlacking
the advantage of deposit insurance (p. 25).
It seemed like non-banks could even replace banks. Indeed, in 1994, Boyd and Gertler
wrote a paper called “Are Banks Dead?” which begins
It is widely believed that in the United States, commercial banking is a
declining industry [because] nonbank credit alternatives have grown rapidly
over the last 15 years (p. 2).
But banks remain alive and well today, with over $12.5 trillion in deposits in the US.2
They still provide much of the finance for traditional projects—commercial and indus-
trial loans to firms in established industries. However, non-banks, such as finance com-
panies and venture capitalists, play an important role in financing innovative projects.
Although these projects are often highly profitable, non-banks still provide only a mi-
nority of funding in the economy. Why do non-banks coexist with banks, even though
they have a funding costdisadvantage? Andwhy dothey remain relatively scarce, even
though they finance profitable projects?
Model preview. To address these questions, we develop a model in which fi-
nanciers’ choices to specialize in banking or non-banking and entrepreneurs’ choices to
do traditional or innovative projects are jointly determined in general equilibrium, and
nd we characterize how these choices depend on competition among financiers.
In the model, ex ante identical entrepreneurs seek financing for two-stage projects
from financiers. When each financier enters, it chooses whether to specialize in bank-
ing or non-banking. When each entrepreneur meets a financier, he chooses whether to
seek financing for a traditional project or an innovative one. Both are plagued by the
soft-budget-constraint problem inherent in staged financing (Dewatripont and Maskin
(1995); Kornai (1979, 1980)). Namely, entrepreneurs can avoid the costs of failure by
1For example, Startz (1979) and Nagel (2016) (online Appendix B) estimate that deposit rates are one-
third to one-half of the competitive rate. See, e.g., Diamond (2019), Donaldson and Piacentino (2019), and
Merton and Thakor (2018) for theoretical foundations.
2SeetheFDICQuarterlyBankingProfileathttps://www.fdic.gov/bank/statistical/stats/2018dec/industry.pdf.
1

refinancing their projects. Anticipating refinancing at the second stage, they are reluc-
tant to work at thefirst stage. To incentivize them, financiers canthreaten termination
following initial failure, but the threat is not credible if either the incumbent financier
or a competing rival is willing to provide new capital. It is especially hard for the in-
cumbent to commit not to finance continuation, since preventing termination can help
it to recoup its initial investment—it can be ex post optimal for the financier to throw
good money after bad, even if it is ex ante optimal to commit not to.
The model is based on two key assumptions. (i) We assume that the innovative
project is associated with high agency costs. This makes entrepreneurs prefer the
innovative project, because they can get agency rents. But, given the soft-budget-
constraint problem, these rents can make it prohibitively costly to finance innovative
entrepreneurs. (ii) We assume that banks have a lower cost of capital than non-banks
(and are otherwise identical). This high cost of capital could seem like a strict disad-
vantage of being a non-bank, but we find that it is not.
Results preview. In fact, our first main result is that non-banks’ high cost of
capital can be an advantage. Because it can make refinancing entrepreneurs unprof-
itable, it can work as a commitment device to not provide additional finance after
the first stage, and thereby harden entrepreneurs’ budget constraints. And, with a
hard budget constraint, entrepreneurs face a credible termination threat, making them
cheap to incentivize. As a result, financing innovative projects becomes viable. Banks’
low cost of capital, on the other hand, makes refinancing entrepreneurs attractive, and
thereby keeps entrepreneurs’ budget constraints soft. As a result, financing innovative
entrepreneurs, with their high agency costs, is not viable. However, financing tra-
ditional entrepreneurs, with lower agency costs, can be attractive, despite their soft
budget constraints, since banks are subsidized by their own low cost of capital.
Our second main result is that non-banks’ hard budget constraints allow them not
only toincentivize entrepreneurs cheaply, but alsotokeep them captive. Indeed, anon-
bank-financed entrepreneur is unable toget any financing from rivals atall. The reason
is that, with no soft-budget-constraint problem, his incumbent non-bank can extract
a high repayment at the first stage. As a result, rivals are unwilling to finance him at
the second stage, given he already owes a high repayment to someone else. Conversely,
a bank-financed entrepreneur preserves access to financing from rivals. The reason is
that, given the soft-budget-constraint problem, his incumbent bank cannot extract a
high repayment at the first stage. As a result, rivals are still willing to finance him at
thesecond stage. Thus, when abank finances atraditional entrepreneur, ithas to leave
rents to the entrepreneur both at the first stage, to incentivize him, and at the second
stage, to prevent him from seeking finance from rivals. The more competition there is
among rivals, the more rents the incumbent bank has to leave to an entrepreneur to
2