NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EVALUATING CENTRAL BANKS' TOOL KIT:
PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE
Eric R. Sims
Jing Cynthia Wu
Working Paper 26040
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26040
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2019
We are grateful to Rich Clarida, Todd Clark, Drew Creal, Andrew Foerster, Yuriy
Gorodnichenko, Rob Lester, Leonardo Melosi, Ken Rogoff, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, as
well as seminar participants at the Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and
Communication Practices (A Fed Listens Event), the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas and
Cleveland, the University of Notre Dame, and the University of Wisconsin-Madison, for helpful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Eric R. Sims and Jing Cynthia Wu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Evaluating Central Banks' Tool Kit: Past, Present, and Future
Eric R. Sims and Jing Cynthia Wu
NBER Working Paper No. 26040
July 2019
JEL No. E10,E32,E5,E52,E58
ABSTRACT
We develop a structural DSGE model to systematically study the principal tools of
unconventional monetary policy – quantitative easing (QE), forward guidance, and negative
interest rate policy (NIRP) – as well as the interactions between them. To generate the same
output response, the requisite NIRP and forward guidance interventions are twice as large as a
conventional policy shock, which seems implausible in practice. In contrast, QE via an
endogenous feedback rule can alleviate the constraints on conventional policy posed by the zero
lower bound. Quantitatively, QE1-QE3 can account for two thirds of the observed decline in the
“shadow” Federal Funds rate. In spite of its usefulness, QE does not come without cost. A large
balance sheet has consequences for different normalization plans, the efficacy of NIRP, and the
effective lower bound on the policy rate.
Eric R. Sims
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
3060 Jenkins Nanovic Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556
and NBER
esims1@nd.edu
Jing Cynthia Wu
Department of Economics
3060 Jenkins Nanovic Hall
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556
and NBER
cynthia.wu@nd.edu

1 Introduction
In response to the Financial Crisis and ensuing Great Recession of 2007-2009, the Fed and
other central banks pushed policy rates to zero (or, in some cases, slightly below zero).
With conventional policy unavailable, central banks launched a sequence of experimental
unconventional policy interventions. The principal tools of unconventional policy include
large scale asset purchases (or quantitative easing, QE), forward guidance (FG), and neg-
ative interest rate policy (NIRP). Even ten years subsequent to the Crisis, many advanced
economies are still plagued by near-zero policy rates. Further, an emerging consensus is that
global forces and demographic trends have lowered the “natural” or “neutral” rate of inter-
est; see Laubach and Williams (2003) and Del Negro, Giannone, Giannoni and Tambalotti
(2017). This means that the Great Recession is likely not a one-off event and heretofore
unconventional tools will become a more conventional part of central banks’ tool kit. The
time is therefore ripe for a comprehensive, quantitative review of these tools in a unified
modeling framework.
Our paper makes a number of important contributions to the literature. First, rather
than introducing them in a piecemeal fashion as in the existing literature, we develop the
first quantitative DSGE model that builds in all three different types of unconventional
tools together. This allows us to study similarities, differences, and potential interactions
between them. Second, we draw attention to two distinct channels by which NIRP can
transmit to the economy. On the one hand, NIRP in our model can be stimulative via a
forward guidance type channel, but on the other hand, it erodes the net worth of financial
intermediaries,whichworksintheoppositedirection. Third,weproposeanovelandintuitive
endogenous specification for QE that is similar to a conventional Taylor rule. We find that
endogenous QE can successfully neutralize the adverse consequences of a binding zero lower
bound(ZLB).Despiteitsusefulness, QEdoesnotcomewithoutacost. Afourthcontribution
of our paper is to address questions relating to the size of a central bank’s balance sheet,
including consequences of different normalization plans as well as the interaction between
the size of the balance sheet and NIRP. Fifth, we provide a first attempt at endogenizing
an effective lower bound (ELB) for policy rates. The ELB depends on the overall size of
a central bank’s balance sheet. Finally, we introduce a novel timing assumption to model
forward guidance, where our approach ameliorates the so-called forward guidance “puzzle”
(Del Negro, Giannoni and Patterson 2015).
Though it shares similarities with canonical medium-scale models (e.g. Christiano,
Eichenbaum and Evans 2005, and Smets and Wouters 2007), our model differs from standard
models in some important ways. Firms are required to issue long term bonds to finance part
1

of investment in new physical capital, similarly to Carlstrom, Fuerst and Paustian (2017).
Asset markets are segmented in that households can only indirectly access long term bonds
via holding short term debt (i.e. deposits) with financial intermediaries. Financial inter-
mediaries are introduced in a way similar to Gertler and Karadi (2011, 2013). A costly
enforcement problem results in an endogenous leverage constraint on intermediaries. This
results in excess returns and time-varying interest rate spreads, which allows QE type poli-
cies to have real effects. New to the literature, we also formally model the central bank’s
balance sheet with interest-bearing reserves. Along with a constraint on minimum reserve
balances at intermediaries, this allows for the interest rate on reserves to potentially differ
from the deposit rate, thereby permitting us to explore the effects of negative interest rate
policy.
During normal times, conventional monetary policy in our model involves the central
bank setting the interest rate on reserves (what we hereafter refer to as the policy rate),
which equals the deposit rate, according to a Taylor (1993) type rule.1,2 QE in our model
entails the central bank purchasing (or selling) long maturity private or government bonds,
financedviathecreation(ordestruction)ofreserves.3 QEpoliciescanbeundertakenwhether
conventional policy is constrained by the ZLB or not, though they are more effective when
short term rates are fixed. Forward guidance in our model involves cutting the desired short
term policy rate implied by the Taylor rule when the actual policy rate is constrained by
zero. This signals a commitment to lower the actual short term rate after the ZLB constraint
has lifted. We introduce into our model a reduced form parameter capturing the perceived
credibility of forward guidance announcements.
Consistent with the experience of many countries that have experimented with NIRP, our
model assumes that the policy rate can go negative, while the deposit rate (the economically
relevant short term interest rate) cannot. To implement NIRP, the central bank can require
intermediariestoholdmorereservesthantheywouldlike. Ontheonehand, NIRPaffectsthe
economy much like forward guidance – it signals the intent to lower economically relevant
short term rates in the future, which in turn can affect long term rates in the present.
Because it involves a tangible action rather than mere words, it may be more credible than
1For a study of Ramsey optimal instrument rules in a model sharing similarities with ours, see Mau
(2019).
2Several related papers (e.g. Gertler and Karadi 2011, 2013 and Carlstrom, Fuerst and Paustian 2017)
do not model reserves at all and instead think of conventional policy as directly setting the deposit rate via
a Taylor rule.
3Clarida (2012) distinguishes between different types of large scale asset purchases, calling purchases of
long term government bonds “quantitative easing” and purchases of privately-issued debt “credit easing.”
Our model features both government and private sector long maturity bonds. We will use the term “quan-
titative easing” as it has been used in the financial press to refer to any type of large scale asset purchase
(either government or non).
2