NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DOES KNOWING YOUR FICO SCORE CHANGE FINANCIAL BEHAVIOR? EVIDENCE
FROM A FIELD EXPERIMENT WITH STUDENT LOAN BORROWERS
Tatiana Homonoff
Rourke O'Brien
Abigail B. Sussman
Working Paper 26048
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26048
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2019
We gratefully acknowledge Marianne Bertrand, Anat Bracha, Michael Collins, Jacob Goldin,
Sam Hartzmark, Emir Kamenica, Neale Mahoney, Sanjog Misra, Devin Pope, Justin Sydnor,
Oleg Urminsky, George Wu, and participants in seminars at NYU, Rutgers, USC, USMA-West
Point, Washington University in St. Louis, Wharton, Wisconsin, Yale, the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York and in the Chicago Booth Behavioral Approaches to Financial Decision-Making
Conference, Cornell IBHF Conference, Boulder Summer Conference on Consumer Financial
Decision Making, the CFPB Research Conference and the Advances in Field Experiments
Conference for conversations and suggestions that have greatly improved the quality of this
project. We also thank Jennifer Chellew, Monica Milone, Ryan Corey, Annat Shrabstein, and
Marie O'Malley from Sallie Mae as well as Joanne Gaskin and Jenelle Dito from FICO for their
assistance throughout the project. Nicholas Herzog provided excellent research assistance. All
remaining errors are our own. This work was supported by the True North Communications Inc.
Faculty Research Funds at The University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Tatiana Homonoff, Rourke O'Brien, and Abigail B. Sussman. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Does Knowing Your FICO Score Change Financial Behavior? Evidence from a Field Experiment
with Student Loan Borrowers
Tatiana Homonoff, Rourke O'Brien, and Abigail B. Sussman
NBER Working Paper No. 26048
July 2019
JEL No. D14
ABSTRACT
One in five consumer credit accounts incur late fees each quarter. Evidence on the efficacy of
regulations to improve behavior through enhanced disclosure of financial product attributes is
mixed. We test a novel form of disclosure that provides borrowers with a personalized measure of
their creditworthiness. In a field experiment with over 400,000 student loan borrowers, treatment
group members received communications about the availability of their FICO Score. The
intervention significantly reduced late payments and increased borrowers’ FICO Scores. Survey
data show treatment group members were less likely to overestimate their FICO Scores,
suggesting the intervention may correct for overoptimism.
Tatiana Homonoff Abigail B. Sussman
New York University University of Chicago
Robert F. Wagner School of Public Service Booth School of Business
295 Lafayette Street, 2nd Floor 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
New York, NY 10012 Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER abigail.sussman@chicagobooth.edu
tatiana.homonoff@nyu.edu
Rourke O'Brien
Yale University
Department of Sociology
493 College Street
New Haven, CT 06511
Rourke.obrien@yale.edu
A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at AEARCTR-0002871

Consumers struggle when making (cid:28)nancial decisions. These di(cid:30)culties often translate to
costly mistakes across several domains of household (cid:28)nance, from investment and retirement
savings decisions to mortgage choice and debt management (Benartzi and Thaler, 2001;
Choi et al., 2009; Gross and Souleles, 2002; Ponce, Seira and Zamarripa, 2017). In the
context of consumer credit, one common and costly behavior is failing to make minimum
payments on time. Past-due accounts can lead to a variety of downstream consequences such
1
as penalty fees, higher interest rates, and lower credit scores. Recent estimates indicate that
approximately 20 percent of consumer credit accounts incur late fees each quarter (CFPB,
2
2015), amounting to more than $11 billion per year in penalty fees for late payments.
Given the direct implications for consumer welfare, improving (cid:28)nancial decision-making
has become a focus in recent decades with actors in the public, private, and nonpro(cid:28)t sec-
tors implementing a wide range of interventions. Recent legislation has focused on improving
consumer decisions by providing enhanced disclosures such as those mandated in the Credit
Card Accountability Responsibility and Disclosure (CARD) Act of 2009 and in state reg-
ulation of payday lending. These disclosures typically aim to simplify information about
(cid:28)nancial products such as interest rates, repayment terms, or penalty fees.
Ourinterventiontestsanovelformofdisclosurethatprovidesborrowerswithinformation
about themselves rather than about attributes of (cid:28)nancial products. Speci(cid:28)cally, we provide
individuals with a personalized, quanti(cid:28)able, and behaviorally-responsive measure of their
creditworthiness: their FICO Score. We present evidence from a large-scale (cid:28)eld experiment
with over 400,000 clients of Sallie Mae, a national (cid:28)nancial institution specializing in student
loans. BeginninginJune2015, SallieMaeo(cid:27)eredborrowersaccesstounlimitedviewsoftheir
FICO Score. This was part of a broader initiative(cid:21) the FICO Score Open Access Program(cid:21)
to increase consumer access to their Scores through partnering (cid:28)nancial institutions. As of
2018, more than 250 million consumer accounts included free access to FICO Scores.
1
https://www.americanexpress.com/us/content/(cid:28)nancial-education/how-late-payments-a(cid:27)ect-your-
credit-score.html; https://www.discover.com/credit-cards/resources/what-happens-if-you-dont-pay-a-
credit-card
2
https://www.wsj.com/articles/amex-raises-its-fee-for-late-payments-1480069802
2

We exogenously vary the likelihood of viewing one’s FICO Score page by randomly as-
signing borrowers to receive direct communications about the program’s availability. To
estimate the e(cid:27)ect of the intervention on (cid:28)nancial outcomes, we examine individual-level
credit report data provided by TransUnion. Borrowers assigned to the treatment group re-
ceived quarterly email messages notifying them that an updated FICO Score was available
to view through Sallie Mae’s website and provided instructions on how to view their Score.
During the (cid:28)rst year of the intervention, 32 percent of treatment group members viewed
their personalized page at least once, an 8 percentage point increase over the control group.
We (cid:28)nd that the intervention led to a signi(cid:28)cant decrease in the likelihood of having a
late payment one year after the intervention. Speci(cid:28)cally, treatment group members were
0.7 percentage points less likely to have an account that was 30 days or more past due, a
4 percent decrease relative to the control group. This change in payment behavior is quite
large, especially given that less than half of treatment group members ever opened the email
and an even smaller fraction ever logged in to view their score. The intervention also led
to a net positive outcome for the borrower’s creditworthiness as indicated by an increase
in the borrower’s FICO Score (a statistically signi(cid:28)cant increase of 0.7 points) and reduced
the proportion of subprime borrowers by 0.4 percentage points. These e(cid:27)ects largely persist
across the full two year study period.
A key component of our intervention entails prompting individuals to view their personal
FICO Score page, which is not included in the email message. This page includes the
borrower’s FICO Score along with two reason codes detailing key factors contributing to
their Score. While the intent-to-treat estimates are the policy relevant estimates for (cid:28)nancial
institutions considering a similar email campaign, we also investigate the e(cid:27)ect of viewing
one’s FICO Score on (cid:28)nancial behaviors by using treatment status as an instrument for the
likelihood of viewing one’s FICO Score page. Our estimates suggest that borrowers who were
induced to view their FICO Score page as a result of our intervention are 9.0 percentage
points less likely to have a 30-day late payment, contributing to an 8.2 point increase in the
3