NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SEATE: SUBJECTIVE EX ANTE TREATMENT EFFECT OF HEALTH ON RETIREMENT
Pamela Giustinelli
Matthew D. Shapiro
Working Paper 26087
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26087
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2019
This research uses data from the Vanguard Research Initiative (VRI) that was developed by a
research team under a program project grant from the National Institute on Aging P01-
AG026571. The Vanguard Group Inc. supported the data collection of the VRI. Vanguard’s
and IPSOS SA
Client Insight Group and IPSOS SA were responsible for implementing the VRI survey and
provided substantial input into its design. John Ameriks, Andrew Caplin, and Matthew D.
Shapiro are co-principal investigator of the VRI. The design of the VRI benefited from the
collaboration and assistance of Joseph Briggs, Wandi Bruine de Bruin, Alycia Chin, Mi Luo,
Minjoon Lee, Brooke Helppie McFall, Ann Rodgers, and Christopher Tonetti as part of the
program project, from Annette Bonner (Vanguard), and Wendy O’Connell (IPSOS SA). This
project uses Survey 4 of the VRI that was designed by Ameriks, Briggs, Caplin, Lee, Shapiro,
and Tonetti. The conditional probability battery used in this paper, which was included in VRI
Survey 4 and a module of the HRS 2016, was designed in collaboration with Michael Hurd, Peter
Hudomiet, Gabor Kezdi, Susann Rohwedder, and Robert Willis. For documentation of the VRI,
including a dynamic link to the survey instrument, see http://ebp-projects.isr.umich.edu/VRI/. For
documentation of the HRS, see HRS 2016 experimental module 5 at https://hrs.isr.umich.edu/
documentation/questionnaires. This research was supported by a grant from the U.S. Social
Security Administration (SSA), funded as part of the Retirement Research Consortium (RRC).
The findings and conclusions expressed are solely those of the author(s) and do not represent the
views of SSA. We thank Feiya Shao, Ann Rodgers, and Dawn Zinsser for their assistance. We are
grateful to Gábor Kézdi, Wilbert van der Klaauw, Eric French, and participants at seminars and
conferences for very helpful comments and discussion. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Pamela Giustinelli and Matthew D. Shapiro. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

SeaTE: Subjective ex ante Treatment Effect of Health on Retirement
Pamela Giustinelli and Matthew D. Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 26087
July 2019
JEL No. C21,C83,D84,J26
ABSTRACT
The Subjective ex ante Treatment Effect is the difference between the probabilities of an outcome
conditional on a treatment. The SeaTE yields ex ante causal effects at the individual level. The
paper gives an interpretation in two workhorse econometric frameworks: potential outcomes and
dynamic programming. It finds large effect heterogeneity of health on work in two surveys of
older workers, the VRI and the HRS. It shows how reduced-form estimates of health on work are
biased when there is unobserved heterogeneity in taste for work. Using the VRI’s panel structure,
it validates the elicited conditional probabilities of work given health.
Pamela Giustinelli
Department of Economics
Bocconi University
Milan, Italy
pamela.giustinelli@gmail.com
Matthew D. Shapiro
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan St
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
shapiro@umich.edu
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26087

“I was thinking about my health, the way things are going in the economy, I don’t know if it’s
going to really pick up [...] There might be a chance of me working and there might be a chance
that there won’t be much work when I’m that age. If I’m in good health [...] Well, I have no
retirement, so if I am working, it’s going to have to be later than 65 if my health is good where I
can work.” (57 years old working man explaining his answer to a question asking the percent
chance that he will be working past age 62.)
I.Introduction
How does a treatment, such as poor health, affect a behavior, such as retirement? In behavioral
data, by which we mean realized outcomes or decisions of economic agents, the econometrician
observes only the behavior conditional on the treatment, but not the counterfactual behavior absent
the treatment. When there is unobserved heterogeneity across individuals, this inherent feature of
behavioral data makes difficult inferences about causal effects. Rather than relying on behavioral
data, the paper uses subjective expectations of a behavior or outcome conditional on values of the
treatment to elicit ex ante treatment effects. This strategy allows each individual to be both
treatment and control, thereby obviating the unobserved counterfactual problem and allowing for
completely unrestricted heterogeneity across individuals. This approach yields an individual-level
estimate of the treatment effect. Thus, this paper provides a strategy for quantifying person-specific
treatment effects and for characterizing the distribution of causal effects across the population.
We implement our approach by asking older workers participating in the Vanguard Research
Initiative (VRI) to report the conditional probability on a 0-100 percent chance scale that they will
be working to specified horizons under alternative scenarios about their future health. Using these
data, we generate individual and aggregate level estimates of the Subjective ex ante Treatment
Effect, or SeaTE, of health on retirement, given by the difference between respondents’
probabilities of working in low versus high health.
Using the panel structure of the VRI, we show that elicited conditional probabilities strongly
predict realized work given realized health two-years ahead. Hence, behavioral outcomes support
the validity of the conditional probabilities. Additionally, we elicit the same conditional probability
measures in the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) to apply the approach to a population-
representative sample.
The Subjective ex ante Treatment Effect (SeaTE) of health on work is highly heterogeneous
across individuals. SeaTE is zero (no effect of health on work) for almost 30 percent of working
respondents aged 57 and higher at both 2- and 4-year horizons. A few respondents report positive
SeaTE (more likely to work in low than in high health). The remaining 70 percent report having a

strictly negative SeaTE, that is, a negative effect of health on work (median of -40 percentage
points and standard deviation of 24 for the 2-year horizon; median of -30 and standard deviation
of 25 for the 4-year horizon). Hence, for the median response, the ex ante effect of health on work
is large.
We begin in Section II by reviewing the main strands of literature to which our paper
contributes. These include the longstanding empirical literature studying the causal effect of health
on labor supply using behavioral data on health and work in regression analyses or structural
models and the more recent literature eliciting probabilistic expectations in economic surveys to
study economic decision-making under uncertainty and to estimate causal effects. Relative to the
existing literature, our method shows enormous heterogeneity in the treatment effect of health on
work. We also document that the individual-level treatment effect is correlated with baseline
willingness to work.
In Section III, we interpret SeaTE using two mainstream frameworks of econometric causality:
the potential outcomes framework (POF) and dynamic programming (DP). Starting from the
conditional working probabilities and employing standard econometric assumptions for dynamic
discrete choice models, we further derive expressions for the values of continued work defined in
the DP framework. Like the conditional working probabilities, these measures are health
contingent and completely individual specific.
In Section IV, we describe the VRI study and present descriptive results on the unconditional
work probability, the unconditional health probability, the conditional probabilities of working in
high and low health, and the SeaTE.
In Section V, we present the measures of continued work we derived in Section III and we
estimate a simple econometric model of health and retirement based on these measures. The model
implies that moving from high to low health has a large, negative effect on the mean value of
continued work, but the within-person correlation of this value across the two health states is
substantial. We use a simulation of the simple structural model of labor supply to show that
reduced-form results using realized health and work will be biased when there is heterogeneity in
taste for work that is also correlated with health.
We take two distinct approaches for validating the conditional probability approach. In the last
part of Section V, we show that the conditional probability-based measures of VRI respondents
match quite well realized work status, both unconditionally and conditional on realized health.
2