NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE FOUNDING OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE, THE GREAT DEPRESSION AND
THE EVOLUTION OF THE U.S. INTERBANK NETWORK
Matthew S. Jaremski
David C. Wheelock
Working Paper 26034
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26034
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2019
The authors thank Dan Bogart, Charles Calomiris, and two anonymous referees for comments on
a previous version of this paper, as well as conference participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland’s 2018 Financial and Monetary History Workshop and the 2018 World Economic
History Conference. The paper greatly benefited from a grant from the Yale Economic Growth
Center. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
official positions of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, the Federal Reserve System, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Matthew S. Jaremski and David C. Wheelock. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Founding of the Federal Reserve, the Great Depression and the Evolution of the U.S.
Interbank Network
Matthew S. Jaremski and David C. Wheelock
NBER Working Paper No. 26034
July 2019
JEL No. G21,L14,N22
ABSTRACT
Financial network structure is an important determinant of systemic risk. This paper examines
how the U.S. interbank network evolved over a long and important period that included two key
events: the founding of the Federal Reserve and the Great Depression. Banks established
connections to correspondents that joined the Federal Reserve in cities with Fed offices, initially
reducing overall network concentration. The network became even more focused on Fed cities
during the Depression, as survival rates were higher for banks with more existing connections to
Fed cities, and as survivors established new connections to those cities over time.
Matthew S. Jaremski
Utah State University
Department of Economics and Finance
3565 Old Main Hill
Logan, UT 84322
and NBER
matthew.jaremski@usu.edu
David C. Wheelock
Research Division
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
P.O. Box 442
St. Louis, MO 63166-0442
david.c.wheelock@stls.frb.org

The Founding of the Federal Reserve, the Great Depression and the Evolution of the U.S.
Interbank Network
Abstract
Financial network structure is an important determinant of systemic risk. This
paper examines how the U.S. interbank network evolved over a long and
important period that included two key events: the founding of the Federal
Reserve and the Great Depression. Banks established connections to
correspondents that joined the Federal Reserve in cities with Fed offices, initially
reducing overall network concentration. The network became even more focused
on Fed cities during the Depression, as survival rates were higher for banks with
more existing connections to Fed cities, and as survivors established new
connections to those cities over time.
1. Introduction
The interconnected nature of financial networks can propagate shocks, increase systemic
risk, and magnify economic downturns. A growing literature finds that contagion in networks of
interlinked financial institutions was important during recent and historical financial crises (e.g.,
Puhr, Seliger, and Sigmund 2012; Cohen-Cole, Patacchini, and Zenou 2016; Calomiris and
Carlson 2017; Mitchener and Richardson 2019). Insights from theoretical studies suggest that the
tendency of interbank networks to amplify shocks reflects the relative size of network members,
the extent of interconnections between them, and the magnitude of shocks hitting the system,
whereas the systemic risk posed by individual institutions depends on heterogeneity in network
structure and the concentration of counterparty exposures (Cont, Moussa, and Santos 2013).
Prominent in this literature is the idea that greater interconnectedness can make networks
“robust-yet-fragile” (e.g., Allen and Gale 2007; Acemoglu, Ozdaglar, and Tahbaz-Salehi 2015).
1

Specifically, greater interconnectedness makes an interbank network more resilient to relatively
minor shocks, but can be destabilizing if adverse shocks are sufficiently large to eliminate the
excess liquidity of the banking system. This is especially true for core-periphery systems that
have a small number of well-connected banks at the center of the network, including those of
Germany (Craig and von Peter 2014), the United Kingdom (Gai, Haldane, and Kapadia 2011),
and the United States.1
Although studies suggest that network structure affects systemic risk, there has been
relatively little empirical work on how the structures of interbank networks evolve. Using newly
digitized data on the entire U.S. interbank network in 1900, 1910, 1919, 1929, and 1940, this
paper studies how the network evolved over a relatively long and important period in U.S.
financial history that included two key events: the founding of the Federal Reserve (Fed) and the
Great Depression. Both events seem likely to have produced lasting changes in the structure of
the interbank network. The founding of the Fed established a lender of last resort and new
federal banking regulator, a new structure of reserve requirements, and a new payments provider.
The Great Depression eliminated some one-third of U.S. banks and led to further substantive
changes in bank regulation. By examining quantitatively how the network evolved over the first
forty years of the 20th century, we can confirm a long-established, but largely descriptive
understanding of the interbank network and study how the network evolved following these two
key events.2
1 Other theoretical studies of the channels through which networks can transmit shocks include Allen and Gale
(2000), Dasgupta (2004), Allen and Babus (2009), and Freixas, Parigi, and Rochet (2000).
2 Descriptive studies of the interbank network and correspondent system include Watkins (1929) and Myers (1931),
and more recently James (1978) and James and Weiman (2010).
2