NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ARE ANALYST TRADE IDEAS VALUABLE?
Justin Birru
Sinan Gokkaya
Xi Liu
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 26062
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26062
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2019
Birru is at Fisher College of Business, The Ohio State University. Gokkaya is at Ohio University
and a Visiting Scholar at Fisher College of Business, The Ohio State University. Liu is at Farmer
School of Business, Miami University. Stulz is at Fisher College of Business, The Ohio State
University, NBER, and ECGI. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26062.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Justin Birru, Sinan Gokkaya, Xi Liu, and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Are Analyst Trade Ideas Valuable?
Justin Birru, Sinan Gokkaya, Xi Liu, and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 26062
July 2019
JEL No. G11,G12,G14,G20,G23,G24
ABSTRACT
Using a novel database, we show that the stock-price impact of analyst trade ideas is at least as
large as the impact of stock recommendation, target price, and earnings forecast changes, and that
investors following trade ideas can earn significant abnormal returns. Trade ideas triggered by
forthcoming firm catalyst events are more informative than ideas exploiting temporary
mispricing. Institutional investors trade in the direction of trade ideas and commission-paying
institutional clients do so earlier than non-clients. Analysts generating trade ideas are more
established and are more likely to produce ideas for stocks with high dollar trading commissions
in their coverage universe.
Justin Birru Xi Liu
Department of Finance Farmer School of Business
Fisher College of Business Department of Finance
The Ohio State University 800 E. High St.
2100 Neil Avenue Oxford, OH 45056
Columbus, OH 43210 liux60@miamioh.edu
birru.2@osu.edu
René M. Stulz
Sinan Gokkaya The Ohio State University
Department of Finance Fisher College of Business
Ohio University 806A Fisher Hall
gokkaya@ohio.edu Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu

1.Introduction
A voluminous literature dating back to Cowles (1933) devotes considerable attention to understanding
the value of analyst stock recommendations, earnings forecasts, and target prices. To gauge sell-side
analysts’ research outputs deemed most important by institutional investors, the primary and largest
customers of analyst research, a 2015 Bloomberg survey asks buy-side firms what they value the most in
sell-side research and finds that 19% of buy-side institutions value trade ideas compared to only 10% voting
for stock recommendations and 5% voting for other forecasts.2 Despite the importance of trade ideas relative
to the analyst output extensively studied in the academic literature, we are not aware of a study of analyst
trade ideas.3 In this paper, we manually construct a novel and comprehensive sample of 4,543 trade ideas
to investigate their nature, their role in conveying information to financial markets, how they relate to other
analyst outputs, how they are used by institutions, and analyst incentives to put forth such ideas.4 We find
that trade ideas have a stock-price impact that is at least as large as the impact of changes in stock
recommendations, target prices and earnings forecasts, that institutional investors trade on these ideas, that
investors following trade ideas can earn significant abnormal returns, and that these ideas are generally
offered by more established analysts for higher volume stocks in their coverage universe.
To make these trade ideas more concrete, consider the following two examples from our sample. On
July 10th, 2012, Credit Suisse issued a 30-day catalyst-based trading buy on Tesoro Corporation given rising
earnings and the analyst’s expectation that management could start returning capital to shareholders. On
March 26th, 2010, Morgan Stanley issued a 30-day trading buy on SandRidge Energy Inc. based on the
view that the stock had traded off recently (i.e., temporary mispricing) because of the market’s overblown
concern about the firm’s debt covenants, which made short-term valuation much more compelling.
2 Bloomberg Survey “2015 Broker Vote: What do you Value Most in Research” (e.g., see:
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/future-sell-side-research-post-mifid-ii-world-aviral-sharma/).
3 The neglect of these short-term trading recommendations is likely explained by the fact that trade ideas are not
available on the databases that academics typically use for investigations concerning analyst output, such as I/B/E/S
or Zacks.
4 Henceforth, “trade research”, “trade ideas” and “trade calls” will be used interchangeably.
1

As evidenced by these examples, trade ideas are very different from other analyst outputs that are
generally based on fundamental research (e.g., stock recommendations, target prices, earnings forecasts).
First, trade ideas have a short investment horizon with the average (median) trade idea expiring in 53 (60)
days and 98% of trade calls expiring within one week to three months. This contrasts with price targets or
recommendations that generally have a horizon of at least a year. Second, trade ideas are most often
generated because of expected short-term price changes in response to upcoming news (so-called catalyst
events) or less often because of over- or underreaction to past news that is expected to be corrected in the
relatively short-term. In contrast, fundamental research output tends to be based on longer horizon
expectations of fundamental value supported by valuation models. Third, reinforcing the unique nature of
trade ideas compared with fundamental analyst research, an analyst’s trade idea can recommend a trade in
the opposite direction from the analyst’s rating on a stock (for instance, the analyst can recommend the sale
of a stock on which she has a buy recommendation). Fourth, contrary to fundamental research analyst
outputs, trade ideas are typically disclosed on days with no firm-specific news announcements and no other
analyst reports.
In this paper, we use a comprehensive sample of 4,543 trade ideas manually constructed from Thomson
Reuters Investext and Thomson Reuters Eikon and identify trading buy/sell ideas issued by 688 unique sell-
side analysts employed at 77 unique brokerage houses on 1,619 unique firms. We find that the number of
trade ideas has increased substantially from 111 in 2000 to 679 in 2015 with at least 300 such ideas every
year since 2010. While the number and percentage of sell-side analysts issuing trading calls also exhibits
an upward trend over time, we document that only a relatively small percentage of analysts make trade calls
in comparison with other analyst actions. From 2000 to 2015, roughly 14% of analysts issue trading
research in a given year.
We begin our analysis by examining the immediate price impact associated with trading calls. To the
extent that market participants pay attention to trade ideas and perceive them to be valuable, we should
expect to observe significant price reactions at the time of announcement. We find that this is the case.
Specifically, trading buys and sells have average benchmark-adjusted returns of 0.91% and -1.96% over
2