NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SKIN OR SKIM? INSIDE INVESTMENT AND HEDGE FUND PERFORMANCE
Arpit Gupta
Kunal Sachdeva
Working Paper 26113
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26113
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2019
We would like to thank Jules Van Binsbergen, Maria Chaderina, Quinn Curtis, Nickolay
Gantchev, Qiping Huang, Clemens Sialm, Lin Sun, and Sumudu Watugala (discussants). We
have also benefited from discussions with Simona Abis, Yakov Amihud, Charles Calomiris, Alan
Crane, Kent Daniel, Colleen Honigsberg, Sabrina Howell, Wei Jiang, Ralph Koijen, Anthony
Lynch, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, Tarun Ramadorai, Matthew Richardson, Paul Tetlock, James
Weston, and Jeffrey Wurgler, as well as seminar participants at Berkeley (Haas), Columbia
University (GSB), New York University (Stern), University of Pennsylvania (Wharton), Rice
University (Jones), Yale University (SOM), NBER Long-Term Asset Management, the
NASDAQ DRP Research Day, the 13th Annual Penn/NYU Conference on Law and Finance,
IRMC, the CEPR ESSFM conference in Gerzensee, the Junior Entrepreneurial Finance and
Innovation Workshop, the Hedge Fund Research Symposium, the 10th Hedge Fund and Private
Equity Conference, the University of Kentucky Finance Conference, FIRS, MFA, NFA, SFS
Cavalcade, Two Sigma, Q Group. We thank HFR, CISDM, eVestment, BarclayHedge, and
Eurekahedge for data that contributed to this research. We gratefully acknowledge generous
research support from the NYU Stern Center for Global Economy and Business and Columbia
University. We thank Billy Xu for excellent research assistance. See https://www.skinorskim.org
for Form ADV data used in this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Arpit Gupta and Kunal Sachdeva. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Skin or Skim? Inside Investment and Hedge Fund Performance
Arpit Gupta and Kunal Sachdeva
NBER Working Paper No. 26113
July 2019
JEL No. G23,G32,J33,J54
ABSTRACT
Hedge fund managers contribute substantial personal capital, or "skin in the game," into their
funds. While these allocations may better align incentives, managers may also strategically
allocate their private capital in ways that negatively affect investors. We find that funds with
more inside investment outperform other funds within the same family. However, this
relationship is driven by managerial decisions to invest capital in their least-scalable strategies
and restrict the entry of new outsider capital into these funds. Our results suggest that skin in the
game may work as a rent-extraction mechanism at the expense of fund participation of outside
investors.
Arpit Gupta
Stern School of Business
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
agupta3@stern.nyu.edu
Kunal Sachdeva
Rice University
Janice and Robert McNair Hall
Houston, TX 77005
kunal.sachdeva@rice.edu
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26113
Source Data is available at www.skinorskim.org

Ofthe$3trillioninassetsundermanagementbyhedgefunds,$400billioncanbeattributed
to investments from insiders: general firm partners (GPs) and related parties. While this
large allocation of insider capital can better align incentives between investors and hedge
fund managers, regulators have also raised concerns that insider “skin in the game” may
also have potentially adverse consequences.1 Because insiders have superior private in-
formation, have discretion over which of their funds to invest in, and may subsequently
alter the fund operations; managers with large personal stakes may choose actions which
negatively affect their investors.
UsingaBerkandGreen(2004)-stylemodel,weshowthatthestrategicallocationofpri-
vatecapitalcanhelphedgefundmanagersraiseearningsatthecostofcapitalparticipation
by outside investors. Managers in our model face a tradeoff between the choice of earning
returns on private capital against fee revenue levied on outside investors. This assumption
is realistic, as we find empirically that returns on privately-invested capital are roughly
as large for hedge fund managers as either management or performance fees (Figure I).
When choosing where to allocate personal capital, managers internalize the fact that rais-
ingadditionalcapitaldilutesthefund’sreturnduetodecreasingreturnstoscale. Previous
papers assessing decreasing returns to scale include: Yin (2016), Ramadorai (2013), Get-
mansky (2012), and Teo (2009). As a result, our model predicts that managers will invest
their capital in their least-scalable strategies, and that they will operate these funds with
greater insider capital at a smaller scale by restricting the entry of outside investors. In
equilibrium,returnsarehigherforfundswithmoreinsidercapital,butthisincreasecomes
at the cost of limited entry by outside investors.
In this paper, we examine three hypotheses: (1) hedge fund managers allocate their
insider capital to their less-scalable strategies; (2) insiders will restrict access to outside
investors in these funds; and (3) insider funds, as a consequence, outperform on a risk-
adjusted basis.
1SeeMaryJoWhite,SECChair,onOct. 16,2015: “Examinersobservedthatsomehedgefundadvisers
maynotbeadequatelydisclosingconflictsrelatedtoadvisers’proprietaryfundsandthepersonalaccountsof
theirportfoliomanagers. Examinerssaw,forexample,advisersallocatingprofitabletradesandinvestment
opportunitiestoproprietaryfundsratherthanclientaccountsincontraventionofexistingpoliciesand
procedures.”
2

First, we find evidence that insider capital is deployed to less-scalable funds. Funds
with more insider capital are smaller: one additional percent of inside investment is asso-
ciated with a fund that is smaller by $7–10 million. This result holds both unconditionally
and within-firm.2 We also test the relationship between inside investment and fund scala-
bility. Following the methodology employed by Yin (2016), which measures the decreasing
returntoscalebyregressingstyle-adjustedreturnsagainstlaggedassets,wefindthatfunds
with greater insider investment are also less scalable.
Second, we find that funds with greater insider capital are more likely to restrict out-
sidercapitalentryonbothintensiveandextensivemargins. Ontheintensivemargin,man-
agerslimitoutsiderinflowstothehigh-performinginsiderfunds. Ontheextensivemargin,
insiders can strategically close capital access to outsiders entirely. The presence of funds
closed to outside investors is a challenge for conventional models of delegated asset man-
agement, as managers are not capturing the entire surplus by forgoing the management
fees earned on additional capital. Instead, we find that such funds strongly outperform,
delivering 2–4% additional excess returns yearly. Such strong performance suggests that
outside investors are in fact rationed from fund participation. Notably, such funds closed
to outside investors are disproportionately funded by inside capital.
Third, we find that inside investment is an important predictor of excess returns when
comparing different funds within firms, and within the same fund over time. Our panel
regression controls for the Fama and French (1992) and Carhart (1997) factors, as well as
the seven factors set out in Fung and Hsieh (2004), at the fund level. An increase in inside
investment by a standard deviation within the same firm (across funds), and within the
same fund (across time), is associated with annualized excess returns of 1.4–1.7%. We
confirm this finding in an event study that focuses on firms that create a second fund. In
these cases, we find that the original fund outperforms when inside capital stays in this
fund relative to when insiders move their capital to the newly-formed fund. These results
suggest the possibility of “skimming” motives on the part of fund managers.
2Byfirms,werefertothefundadvisor—i.e.,thecompanyinchargeofmanagingallfundswithinthe
family.
3