NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SPATIAL MISALLOCATION:
EVALUATING PLACE-BASED POLICIES USING A NATURAL EXPERIMENT IN CHINA
Binkai Chen
Ming Lu
Christopher Timmins
Kuanhu Xiang
Working Paper 26148
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26148
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2019
We are thankful to the helpful comments from Colin Lixin Xu, and the seminar participants at
Fudan University, Shanghai Jiaotong University, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, National
University of Singapore, Renmin University, Wuhan University and University of Nottingham
Ningbo China, and the financial support of China's National Science Funds (71703097) and
National Social Science Funds (14ZDB120). The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Binkai Chen, Ming Lu, Christopher Timmins, and Kuanhu Xiang. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Spatial Misallocation: Evaluating Place-Based Policies Using a Natural Experiment in China
Binkai Chen, Ming Lu, Christopher Timmins, and Kuanhu Xiang
NBER Working Paper No. 26148
August 2019
JEL No. O53,R1,R58
ABSTRACT
Using the mass closure of development zones in 2004 as a natural experiment, we examine the
causal effect of development zones on firm level TFP in China. The difference-in-difference
estimator shows that on average, loss of development zone policies results in 6.5% loss of firms’
TFP. Locational heterogeneity is important. Within 500 kilometers from the three major seaports
in China, closure of zones reduced firm-level TFP by 9.62%, whereas closure of zones farther
away did not show significant effects. Market potential and local within-industry spillover effects
can explain much of this locational heterogeneity. We conclude that China’s strategy of using
development zones as a place-based policy to encourage inland development may have led to
spatial misallocation.
Binkai Chen Christopher Timmins
School of Economics Department of Economics
Central University of Finance and Economics Duke University
Beijing, China, 100081 209 Social Sciences Building
chenbinkai@cufe.edu.cn P.O. Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708-0097
Ming Lu and NBER
Shanghai Jiaotong University christopher.timmins@duke.edu
Antai Collage of Economics and
and China Institute for Urban Governance Kuanhu Xiang
1954 Huashan Road Shanghai University
Shanghai 200030 Room 510, School of Economics
China 99 Shangda Road
luming1973@sjtu.edu.cn Shanghai
China
khxiang1986@163.com

I. Introduction
Balancing regional development while simultaneously taking advantage of a
market base is a problem faced by all countries with massive populations and vast
territories. However, a basic characteristic of the global economy is that economic
activities always agglomerate in a few areas, no matter the distances between
countries or within a specific country (World Bank, 2009). Faced with the
disparities of regional development, many countries turn to place-based policies to
promote the development of less developed regions. In China, the government also
launched similar place-based policies in different regions, which allows us to focus
on interregional differences that determine the effectiveness of place-based policies.
If place-based policies do not help improve productivity in lagging regions that are
geographically disadvantaged, moving resources to there may cause spatial
misallocation for the whole country.
From the 1980s onward, more and more development zones (kaifaqu) with
similar preferential policies were implemented all over China, and their role
changed from a development and reform experiment to promoting regional
economic growth. This is typically the objective of these place-based polices. As
Wang (2013) demonstrates, development zones exert positive effects on the
development of their host cities, but these positive effects decline with the passage
of time. In the future, locations targeted by new place-based policies may become
substitutes for former targets (Busso et al., 2013), and this may help to explain
Wang’s (2013) findings on the fading effects of development zone policies.
In this study, we focus on the role of geography in making place-based policies
effective. As argued by Glaeser and Gottleib (2008), the most effective method of
implementing placed-based policies is to encourage the flow of resources into
locations with high productivity and high elasticity of productivity with respect to
agglomeration. However, in China, the location of development zones is strongly
influenced by the central government, which gives high priority to regional balance.
3

Since 1990, more and more newly designated development zones have been located
in inland China. The reason why the Chinese government was willing to build
development zones in economically lagging areas is straightforward: they hoped to
promote the economic development of inland areas by replicating the policies used
in coastal areas, and thus achieve national balance in regional development.
However, there are major concerns about whether governments are able to pick the
best areas in which to implement place-based policies (Glaeser and Gottleib, 2008).
Competition between local governments can improve the efficiency of these
policies at the national level (Moretti, 2011), but such competition-based
mechanisms may take a long time to produce positive results, especially in a
country like China where serious market distortions exist.
In this study, we use the massive administrative closure of development zones
between 2004 and 2006 as a natural experiment to identify the causal effects of
development zone policies on manufacturing firms’ total factor productivities
(TFP). In that movement, about 70% of the development zones (mostly in the
coastal area) were closed, and development zones were more used to encourage
inland growth. Our empirical analysis shows that the average effect of development
zone closures on treated firms’ TFP is negative. Moreover, we find that
geographic heterogeneity does exist: the magnitude of zone closures' effects is
smaller if the city is located farther away from three major seaports: Shanghai,
Hong Kong, and Tianjin. Significantly, when the distance from these cities is
large enough, the negative effects of development zone closures disappear. Our
analysis shows that cities closer to the sea enjoy greater market potential, which
helps firms exposed to preferential policies improve TFP through scale
economies. We also provide evidence that firms enjoy local spillover effects
from other firms in the same industry and city. Thus, when coastal areas lose
output after development zone closure, the effect on TFP is magnified because
of local spillover effects. In a nutshell, place-based policies lead to spatial
misallocation, since preferential policies do not work as well in geographically
4