NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EFFECTS OF COMPETITION IN CONSUMER CREDIT MARKET
Stefan Gissler
Rodney Ramcharan
Edison Yu
Working Paper 26183
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26183
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2019
We thank Bob Adams, Kenneth Ahern, Antonio Bayeh, Mitchell Berlin, Sreedhar Bharath, Fabio
Braggon, Harry DeAngelo, Hiroshi Fujiki, Elena Loutskina, Greg Nini, Wenlan Qian, Amit Seru,
David Sovich, You Suk Kim, Taylor Nadauld, Jordan van Rijn, Hirofumi Uchida and seminar
participants at the Board of Governors, Dutch National Bank, Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia,
Maastricht University, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Rotterdam, Tilburg, Stanford,
and USC Marshall for helpful suggestions. We are especially grateful to Scott Borger, Ralph
Monaco and Scott Vaughan at the NCUA for their detailed comments–all errors remain our own.
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the Federal Reserve Board of Governors, the
Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Stefan Gissler, Rodney Ramcharan, and Edison Yu. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effects of Competition in Consumer Credit Market
Stefan Gissler, Rodney Ramcharan, and Edison Yu
NBER Working Paper No. 26183
August 2019
JEL No. D12,G21,G23
ABSTRACT
This paper finds that banks and non-banks respond differently to increased competition in
consumer credit markets. Increased competition and the greater threat of failure induces banks to
specialize more in relationship business lending, and surviving banks are more profitable.
However, non-banks change their credit policy when faced with more competition and expand
credit to riskier borrowers at the extensive margin, resulting in higher default rates. These results
show how the effects of competition depend on the form of intermediation. They also suggest that
increased competition can cause credit risk to migrate outside the traditional supervisory
umbrella.
Stefan Gissler Edison Yu
Federal Reserve Board Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
20th Street and Constitution Avenue edison4521@gmail.com
NW Washington, DC 20551
stefan.gissler@frb.gov
Rodney Ramcharan
University of Southern California
rramchar@marshall.usc.edu

This paper studies the consequences of competition in local consumer credit markets.
Influential theories of intermediation observe that greater competition in credit markets can
generate more efficient intermediation, reduce borrowing costs and relax credit constraints for
marginalized borrowers.1 But some arguments note that more competition can also erode the
profitability of incumbent financial institutions, leading to changes in credit policy that can
produce riskier lending and unstable banking.2 In the most extreme case, increased competition
can foster an ex-post misallocation of credit to riskier borrowers, producing asset price booms
and busts (Mian and Sufi (2009), Favara and Imbs (2015) and Rajan and Ramcharan (2015)).3
The consequences of credit market competition can also depend on the sources of
competition and regulation. Deposit-taking institutions like banks and credit unions engage in
both relationship and arms-length or transaction banking, while non-banks, such as finance
companies and securitization pools, typically focus only on transaction lending, often within
specialized segments like car loans ((Benmelech, Meisenzahl et al. 2016), (Farhi and Tirole
2018)). Because relationship lending can partially insulate a bank from pure price competition,
the source of competition can cause depository institutions to substitute between relationship and
transaction banking (Boot and Thakor (2000)). In contrast, when faced with increased
competition, non-banks, with less capacity to substitute towards other types of lending and less
encumbered by regulation, might more aggressively defend their market by reducing prices and
lending to riskier borrowers.
Endogenous entry into local markets—the unobserved factors that determine both entry
and ex-post outcomes—makes it difficult to understand the consequences of credit market
competition and assess these varied theoretical predictions. The particular setting that we use to
1
Academic surveys include (Allen and Gale (2004), Beck (2008), and (Vives 2012). Vives (2016) provides a book
length treatment of many of the underlying theoretical ideas. (Bernanke 2009) and (Vickers 2010) discuss some of
the recent policy issues surrounding financial competition within the US and international contexts respectively.
Earlier work on the distributional effects of credit access is surveyed in (Aghion, Caroli et al. 1999)
2 (Bhattacharya 1982), (Hellmann, Murdock et al. 2000), (Keeley 1990) are seminal references in the “franchise
value” literature: How increased competition reduces bank profits and increases the incentives for greater risk-
taking. In contrast, (Boyd and De Nicolo 2005) show that competition can lower lending rates, inducing firms to
choose safer projects and thereby improving bank asset quality and safety (Martinez-Miera and Repullo 2010) point
to the limits of this argument, noting that lower rates also reduce bank revenues, possibly increasing bank failure
rates. A number of papers also emphasize the interaction between information asymmetries, lending standards and
competition. See for example (Dell'Ariccia and Marquez 2006), (Rajan 1994), and (Petersen and Rajan 1995).
3 Recent theories have also hypothesized more general links between the overall structure of intermediation and
economic fluctuations (He and Krishnamurthy (2013), (Brunnermeier and Sannikov 2014)).
2

address this identification challenge is the recent changes in federal regulations that allowed
some credit unions (CUs) to compete directly with banks for deposits and expand their balance
sheets—the “low-income” rule. CUs are a major source of consumer finance. The industry
serves about 105 million people, has about $1.4 trillion in assets, and originates roughly 28
percent of all new car loans and accounts for over 25 percent of all consumer unsecured lending
in the US.4
Individuals with a common bond—such as employees of a university or residents of a
town—can establish a credit union to access financial services. CUs are traditionally restricted
from intermediation outside of their common bond, thereby limiting the ability of CUs to
compete directly with community banks and nearby non-banks. But under the low-income rule,
some CUs that serve lower income customers are exempted from this competition restriction and
can freely accept deposits outside their common bond. In 2008, the industry’s federal regulator
began changing both the legal eligibility standard for the low-income rule and eventually the
process by which a CU could become eligible. Competition increased sharply thereafter. By
2016, the total assets of “low-income” CUs, those without deposit-taking restrictions, rose to
nearly $400 billion—an almost 8-fold increase compared to 2008.
The regulatory roll-out of the low-income rule created plausibly exogenous variation in
local credit market competition. Uncertainty about the low-income eligibility criteria delayed
entry into the program until the regulator issued a notification letter to potentially all eligible
CUs. Once notified of their low-income eligibility, over 90 percent of these institutions took-up
the program within a year. Thereafter, the regulator determined each CU’s eligibility for the low-
income rule at the time of the supervisory exam. Examination schedules are on a preset cycle.
Their timing is not driven by local economic conditions, expectations about future lending
opportunities within the local market, beliefs about local demand, or the behavior of local
lenders. A battery of statistical tests also corroborate the narrative that this regulatory roll-out led
to exogenous variation in local credit market competition.
We find that banks and non-banks respond differently to this plausibly exogenous
increase in competition. Among banks, there is a mirror decline in lending and deposit taking
4
See Experian's 2017 report on http://www.experian.com/assets/automotive/quarterly-webinars/2017-q3-safm-
recording.pdf.
3