NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DANCING WITH ACTIVISTS
Lucian A. Bebchuk
Alon Brav
Wei Jiang
Thomas Keusch
Working Paper 26171
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26171
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2019
This discussion paper was prepared for publication in the Journal of Financial Economics. We
have benefitted from the comments of Manuel Adelino, Amil Dasgupta, Veljko Fotak, Oliver
Hart, Scott Hirst and participants in the 2015 FMA International Consortium on Activist
Investors, Corporate Governance and Hedge Funds in London, the 2015 FMA International
meeting in Helsinki, and workshops at Harvard, INSEAD, NYU, and Maastricht University. We
are especially indebted to an anonymous referee for many valuable suggestions. We also wish to
thank Brady Baldwin, Seung Hwan Bang, Vlad Bouchouev, Hannah Clark, Ahmet Degerli,
Timothy Goh, Robert Holowka, Wenyin Huang, Kirti Kamboj, Kobi Kastiel, Zheng Li, Cong
Liu, Yaron Nili, John Rady, Qingrong Ruan, June Rhee, Ruoxi Tian, Jun Xu, Jiaqi Yang, Zilan
Yang, Kailei Ye, and Lu Zheng for their excellent research assistance. Finally, we are also
grateful to many practitioners affiliated with the Harvard Law School Program on Corporate
Governance, including senior proxy solicitors, investment bankers, and hedge fund officers, for
helpful discussions about activist settlements. Financial support was provided by the INSEAD
Corporate Governance Centre, Columbia Business School, Duke, and Harvard Law School. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Lucian A. Bebchuk, Alon Brav, Wei Jiang, and Thomas Keusch. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Dancing With Activists
Lucian A. Bebchuk, Alon Brav, Wei Jiang, and Thomas Keusch
NBER Working Paper No. 26171
August 2019
JEL No. G12,G23,G32,G35,G38,K22
ABSTRACT
An important milestone often reached in the life of an activist engagement is entering into a
“settlement” agreement between the activist and the target’s board. Using a comprehensive hand-
collected data set, we analyze the drivers, nature, and consequences of such settlement
agreements. Settlements are more likely when the activist has a credible threat to win board seats
in a proxy fight and when incumbents’ reputation concerns are stronger. Consistent with
incomplete contracting, face-saving benefits and private information considerations, settlements
commonly do not contract directly on operational or leadership changes sought by the activist but
rather on board composition changes. Settlements are accompanied by positive stock price
reactions, and they are subsequently followed by changes of the type sought by activists,
including CEO turnover, higher shareholder payouts, and improved operating performance. We
find no evidence to support concerns that settlements enable activists to extract rents at the
expense of other investors. Our analysis provides a look into the “black box” of activist
engagements and contributes to understanding how activism brings about changes in target
companies.
Lucian A. Bebchuk Harvard Wei Jiang
Law School Graduate School of Business
1545 Massachusetts Avenue Columbia University
Cambridge, MA 02138 and 3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 803
NBER New York, NY 10027
bebchuk@law.harvard.edu and NBER
wj2006@columbia.edu
Alon Brav
Fuqua School of Business Thomas Keusch
Duke University INSEAD
One Towerview Drive Boulevard de Constance
Durham, NC 27708 Fontainebleau Cedex 77305
and NBER France
brav@duke.edu thomas.keusch@insead.edu
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26171

1. Introduction
In August 2013, Third Point, the hedge fund led by Daniel Loeb, disclosed a significant
stake in the auction house Sotheby’s, criticized the company for its poor governance and its failure
to take advantage of a booming market for luxury goods, and called for the ouster of the company’s
CEO. Third Point launched a proxy fight for board representation and both sides were preparing
for a contested election at the company’s upcoming annual meeting. However, the day before the
scheduled annual shareholder meeting, the company and the activist fund entered into a settlement
agreement in which Sotheby’s agreed to appoint three of the Third Point director candidates and
Third Point agreed to discontinue the proxy fight. The settlement terms did not require the
company to make any of the operational and executive changes that Third Point was seeking.
However, ten months later, Sotheby’s announced the hiring of a new CEO, the appointment of a
new board chairman, and a plan to return capital to its investors.
While such settlements used to be rare, they now occur with significant frequency, and
they have been attracting a great deal of media and practitioner attention. Understanding settlement
agreements is important for obtaining a complete picture of the corporate governance landscape
and the role of activism within it. Using a comprehensive, hand-collected dataset of settlement
agreements, this paper provides the first systematic empirical investigation of settlements between
activists and target companies. We study the drivers of settlements, their growth over time, the
terms of settlements and their impact on board composition, and the stock market reaction
accompanying them. We further study the aftermath of settlements in terms of CEO turnover,
payouts to shareholders, M&A activity, and operating performance.
With the growing recognition of the importance of hedge fund activism, a large empirical
literature on the subject has emerged [see Brav et al. (2015b) for a recent survey]. This literature
has extensively studied the initiation of activist interventions – the time at which activists announce
their presence, usually by filing a Schedule 13(d) with the SEC after passing the 5% ownership
threshold, and the stock market reactions accompanying such announcements.1 This literature has
1 Studies analyzing such initiations, including the stock market reactions accompanying them, and the stock
accumulations preceding them, include Clifford (2008); Klein and Zur (2009); Boyson, and Mooradian (2011); Brav,
Jiang, Partnoy, and Thomas (2008); Bebchuk, Brav, Jackson, and Jiang (2013); Mietzner and Schweizer (2014);
Edmans, Fang, and Zur (2013); Collin-Dufresne and Fos (2015); Becht, Franks, Grant, and Wagner (2017); Norli,
1

also studied extensively the changes in the value, performance, and behavior of firms in the years
following activist interventions; among other things, researchers have studied the changes in
Tobin’s Q, return on assets (ROA), productivity, innovation, payouts to shareholders, likelihood
of an acquisition, divestitures, internal capital markets, and accounting practices that ultimately
follow activist interventions.2 But there has been limited empirical work on the “black box” in
between – the channels through which activists’ influence is transmitted and is reflected in targets’
economic outcomes.3 In particular, the determinants, nature, and role of settlement agreements –
and the cooperation between activists and companies that they target – have not been subject to a
systematic empirical examination. Our study fills this gap.4
We begin by quantifying the upward trend in activist settlements. We show that the
unconditional likelihood of an activism campaign leading to a settlement increased sevenfold and
almost linearly from 3% for campaign launched in 2000 to 21% for campaigns launched in 2013.
This increase in the prevalence of settlement agreements is much stronger than the increase in
contested votes during the same period. While contested votes also occurred in 3% of all activism
campaigns started in 2000, this ratio only increases to 6% for campaigns started in 2013.
We build on the insights generated by the economics of litigation and settlements to put
forward hypotheses concerning the determinants of which cases will produce a settlement, rather
than end up without either a contested vote or a settlement. We hypothesize that settlements are
more likely in cases in which the activist has good chances to win board seats should a contested
Oostergard, and Schindele (2015); Gantchev and Jotikasthira (2017); Back, Collin-Dufresne, Fos, Li, and Ljungqvist
(2018); and Boyson, Ma, and Mooradian (2016).
2 Studies of the subject include Brav, Jiang, Partnoy, and Thomas (2008); Clifford (2008); Klein and Zur (2009, 2011);
Greenwood and Schor (2009); Becht, Franks, Mayer, and Rossi (2009); Boyson and Mooradian (2011); Cheng,
Huang, Li, and Stanfield (2012); Sunder, Sunder, and Wongsunwai (2014); Gow, Shin, and Srinivasan (2014, 2016);
Cheng, Huang, and Li (2015); Bebchuk, Brav, and Jiang (2015); Brav, Jiang, and Kim (2015a); Boyson and Pichler
(2019); Brav, Jiang, Ma, and Tian (2018); Aslan and Kumar (2016); Boyson, Gantchev, and Shivdasani (2017);
Boyson, Ma, and Mooradian (2016); Corum and Levit (2018); Gantchev, Gredil, and Jotikasthira (2018); Jiang, Li,
and Mei (2018); Krishnan, Partnoy, and Thomas (2016); Johnson and Swem (2017); Swanson and Young (2017);
Bourveau and Schoenfeld (2017); Hege and Zhang (2019); Guo, Utham, and Wang (2019); Kim (2018); and Gantchev,
Sevilir, and Shivdasani (2019).
3 Some studies have provided insights on the engagement process [see, e.g., Appel, Gormley, and Keim (2018); Becht,
Franks, Mayer, and Rossi (2009); Boyson and Pichler (2019); Corum (2018); Gantchev (2013); He and Li (2018);
Levit (2018); and McCahery, Sautner, and Starks (2016)]. However, none of the empirical studies has paid significant
attention to investigating settlement agreements and their role.
4 Recent work by Schoenfeld (2018) studies the determinants (but not the terms or consequences) of contracts between
a wide variety of shareholders (not focusing on activists) and publicly-traded companies. In contrast to the settlement
agreements in our study, the contracts in his study include a variety of provisions that pertain to financing terms,
trading, directorships, payout policy, joint ventures, financial reporting, and selective disclosure.
2