NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DEPOSIT MARKET POWER, FUNDING STABILITY AND LONG-TERM CREDIT
Lei Li
Elena Loutskina
Philip E. Strahan
Working Paper 26163
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26163
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2019
The authors did not receive funding for this project, other than support from their home
institutions. Strahan acts as an academic visitor to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Lei Li, Elena Loutskina, and Philip E. Strahan. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Deposit Market Power, Funding Stability and Long-Term Credit
Lei Li, Elena Loutskina, and Philip E. Strahan
NBER Working Paper No. 26163
August 2019
JEL No. G2
ABSTRACT
This paper shows that banks raising deposits in more concentrated markets have more funding
stability, which enhances banks’ ability to extend longer-maturity loans. We show that banks
raising deposits in concentrated markets exhibit less pro-cyclical financing costs and profits,
which in turn reduces the funding risk of originating long-term illiquid loans. Consistently, banks
with deposit HHI one standard deviation above average extend loans with about 20% longer
maturity than those with deposit HHI one standard deviation below average. Deposit
concentration also allows banks to charge lower maturity premiums. Access to banks raising
funds in concentrated markets improves growth in industries traditionally reliant on long-term
credit.
Lei Li Philip E. Strahan
Federal Reserve Board of Governors Carroll School of Management
Washington, DC, DC 324B Fulton Hall
lei.li@frb.gov Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
Elena Loutskina and NBER
Darden School philip.strahan@bc.edu
University of Virginia
100 Darden Blvd
Charlottesville VA 22903
Loutskinae@darden.virginia.edu

I. Introduction
Why would banks be willing to extent long-term credit? The traditional literature has
focused on how borrower credit risk affects loan maturity and ignored another risk associated with
long-term lending − the lender’s funding risks. Because business loans are illiquid, they must be
held on the originator’s balance sheet for the duration of the loan.1 As such, declines in profits
(during cyclical downturns) or increases in funding costs (during upturns) could constrain a long-
term lender’s ability to make new, profitable loans.2
In this paper, we show that market power in deposits increases funding stability to banks,
thereby allowing them to extend long-term credit. Banks with more deposit market power make
longer maturity loans and charge lower maturity premiums than other banks. This has a real effect:
the greater availability of long-term bank credit leads to faster industry growth, particularly for
firms in need of long-term debt. Our results imply that deposit market power, by increasing long-
term credit supply, helps alleviate credit cycles.
Existing papers exploring bank lending through the business cycle mainly focus on lending
quantities rather than lending terms. The financial accelerator models show that variations in bank
funding costs and capital amplify business cycles, especially for small firms that are more
dependent on bank finance. Macro-economists document that changes in bank funding costs,
engineered by central banks, can limit bank credit availability (e.g., Bernanke and Blinder, 1988;
Gertler and Gilchrist, 1994). Declines in bank capital and bank failures worsen business conditions
because capital-constrained banks tighten credit, thereby exacerbating the initial downturn (e.g.,
1 Flannery (1986) and Diamond (1991) argue theoretically and Berger et. al. (2005) confirm empirically that riskier
borrowers with long-term projects, in anticipation of the higher refinancing risk, will demand more expensive longer
maturity loans.
2 Diamond and Rajan (2006) offer a liquidity version of the lending channel model that emphasizes the risk of funding
long-term projects with unstable short-term funds.
1

Bernanke, 1983; Peek and Rosengren, 2000).3 These papers, however, are silent on how bank
funding affects the supply of long-term credit. Our paper bridges this gap.
In our first set of results, we establish that deposit market power contributes to bank funding
stability. Numerous studies have shown that banks raising deposits in concentrated markets pay
lower rates and earn higher profits than other banks.4 Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl (2017) (DSS
hereafter) take these findings a step further and show that deposit market power provides banks
flexibility in controlling their deposit rates in order to balance the tradeoff between rents extracted
from depositors against the value of funding profitable lending opportunities.5 DSS show that
both the costs of deposits and loan growth are less pro-cyclical for banks raising deposits in
concentrated markets (i.e., banks with a high weighted average of county-level deposit HHIs). We
extend this idea, showing that banks raising funds in concentrated deposit markets also experience
less pro-cyclical profitability and, by extension, equity capital. During downturns (when all other
funding sources are scarce or even unavailable), banks raising deposits in concentrated markets
experience larger deposit inflows and smaller declines in profitability, which collectively stabilizes
bank funding sources and costs.
To link deposit market power to loan maturity, we exploit the 1997-2017 Survey of the
Terms of Business Lending (STBL). These data allow us to study maturity for a large sample of
small business loans. The STBL covers a sample of randomly selected banks’ new commercial
and industrial (C&I) loan originations. The data contain loan-level price and non-price terms on
3 A large academic literature on bank “capital crunches” has extended the seminal approach pioneered by Peek and
Rosengren. See, for example, Ashcraft (2006), Khwaja and Mian (2008), Paravisini (2008), Iyer and Peydro (2011),
and others.
4 See, for example, Berger and Hannan (1989 and 1991).
5 This is a direct implication of Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl’s model with profitable lending opportunities – see
equation (14) from their paper.
2