NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
COVERED INTEREST PARITY DEVIATIONS:
MACROFINANCIAL DETERMINANTS
Eugenio M. Cerutti
Maurice Obstfeld
Haonan Zhou
Working Paper 26129
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26129
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2019
An earlier draft was completed while the authors were all at the IMF Research Department. We
thank Paul Cashin, Oyakhilome Ibhagui, Gee Hee Hong, Anne-Charlotte Paret-Onorato, Piotr
Kopyrski, Roman Lafarguette, and Chris Walker for their comments on the earlier draft. For
comments on this draft, we thank Péter Benczúr (discussant), Wenxin Du (discussant), Jeffrey
Frankel, Hélène Rey, Linda Tesar, and participants at the June 18-19, 2020 virtual meeting of the
NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics. Zhou acknowledges financial support from the
International Economics Section at Princeton University. The opinions expressed herein are
solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting those of the
IMF, its Executive Board, IMF management, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. This
Paper was also published as IMF Working Paper 19/14.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2019 by Eugenio M. Cerutti, Maurice Obstfeld, and Haonan Zhou. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Covered Interest Parity Deviations: Macrofinancial Determinants
Eugenio M. Cerutti, Maurice Obstfeld, and Haonan Zhou
NBER Working Paper No. 26129
August 2019, Revised August 2020
JEL No. F31,G15
ABSTRACT
This paper studies how several macrofinancial factors are associated over time with the evolution
of covered interest parity (CIP) deviations in the decade after the Global Financial Crisis.
Changes in a number of risk- and policy-related factors have a significant association with the
evolution of CIP deviations. Key measures of FX market liquidity and intermediaries’ risk-taking
capacity are strongly correlated with the cross-currency basis (the deviation from CIP), and the
close relationship between broad U.S. dollar strength and the basis is driven mainly by a common
factor depending on other safe-haven currencies’ comovements. Postcrisis monetary policies also
play a role, as demonstrated by the relationship between CIP deviations, central bank balance
sheets, and term premia. Risk-related factors have more explanatory power than monetary policy-
related factors over the entire 2010-2018 period, but they are approximately equally influential
over the period’s second half. Further highlighting the role of bank regulation, we offer evidence
that the year-end dynamics of the three- month dollar basis depend on financial regulations
targeting global systemically important financial institutions.
Eugenio M. Cerutti Haonan Zhou
International Monetary Fund Department of Economics
700 19th Street, NW Princeton University
HQ1 4-292 Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Washington, DC 20431 Princeton, NJ 08544
Ecerutti@imf.org haonan@princeton.edu
Maurice Obstfeld
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
obstfeld@econ.berkeley.edu

2
1 Introduction
The principle of covered interest parity (CIP), set out by Keynes (1923) during the floating ex-
change rate period after World War I, is a fundamental building block of international finance.
Absent counterparty risk, CIP is a pure no-arbitrage relationship that equates the premium of a
currency’s forward over its spot exchange rate (both rates expressed as the price of foreign cur-
rency) to its nominal interest-rate advantage over foreign currency. CIP is the most fundamental
relationship linking integrated money and foreign exchange markets.
ForseveraldecadesuntiltheGlobalFinancialCrisis(GFC),CIPappearedtoholdquiteclosely
– even as a broad macroeconomic description applying to weekly or even daily data. But as a
growing number of studies document, and as we explore further below, the relationship seems
to have broken down since the onset of the GFC. That CIP deviations emerged in the turbulence
oftheGFCisnotsurprisinginviewofcounterpartyfears,andisnotunprecedentedeither. What
has been more puzzling is the continuation of CIP deviations – at times larger, at times smaller
– well after the GFC, and even for virtually riskless transactions (Du, Tepper and Verdelhan,
2018). This phenomenon is important for at least three reasons. First, it may be evidence of
financial-market frictions or unintended policy consequences that potentially entail inefficient
resourceallocation. Second,itmayimplyachangeinthewaymacroeconomicpolicies(especially
monetary policies) transmit across borders. Third, CIP deviations may elucidate asset pricing in
a world where financial intermediary constraints are stochastic and potentially binding (Du,
Hebert and Huber, 2019) – to some degree they capture financial stresses that simultaneously
affect a range of markets.1
Even before the GFC, CIP seems to have rarely held exactly. Detailed tick-frequency studies
suchasAkram,RimeandSarno(2008)wereabletodetectsmallandtransient–buteconomically
meaningful – departures from CIP. Nonetheless, CIP still provided an excellent guide to the
relationship among forward and spot exchange rates and interest rates at the macro level. As
Akram, Rime and Sarno (2008, p.238) put it, "the lack of predictability of arbitrage and the
fast speed at which arbitrage opportunities are exploited and eliminated imply that a typical
researcher in international macro-finance using data at the daily or lower frequency can safely
assume that CIP holds." This claim is no longer valid.2
The failure of CIP has several policy implications. A first relates to the global financial cycle,
andspecifically,theclaimthatevensmalleconomiescanexercisemonetarypolicyindependently
of the Federal Reserve’s interest rate choice because forward and spot exchange rates will adjust
automatically to insulate the domestic monetary policy setting from the Fed’s (Bernanke, 2017).
Unless CIP holds closely, however, this claim is no longer true: domestic actors may be able to
1Levich(2017)surveysthehistoryofresearchonCIPanddiscussesimplicationsofitsbreakdown.
2McBradyandSchill(2007),amongothers,documentedhowsomemarketactorswereabletoexploitlong-termCIP
deviationstoreduceoverallborrowingcostsevenbeforetheGFC.Nodoubtpost-GFCdevelopmentshaveamplified
thefrictionsthatfacilitatedsucharbitrage.

3
borrow or lend synthetically in domestic currency at a rate that is different from the domestic
centralbankrate,butdependentonFedpolicy. Ifso,thefailureofCIPraisesasecondmacroeco-
nomic policy question: precisely how are monetary policies transmitted across borders and into
domestic funding conditions? To know the answer, we need to have a good sense of what drives
CIP departures. Finally, the failure of CIP is a prima facie argument for the importance of central
bank swap lines that allow financial-sector institutions more easily to fund in foreign currencies
when necessary (Bahaj and Reis, 2020a,b).
A growing recent literature tries to rationalize recent CIP deviations. Different authors have
stressed a range of often complementary potential drivers, ranging from regulation-induced or
other arbitrage limits (Ivashina, Scharfstein and Stein, 2015; Du, Tepper and Verdelhan, 2018;
Rime, Schrimpf and Syrstad, 2019; Cenedese, Della Corte and Wang, 2020), to changes in banks’
balance-sheet or risk-taking capacity connected with U.S. dollar appreciation (Avdjiev, Du, Koch
and Shin, 2019), to interest rate differences across currencies and their impact on the FX swap
market (Du, Tepper and Verdelhan, 2018; Borio, Iqbal, McCauley, McGuire and Sushko, 2018;
Bräuning and Ivashina, forthcoming). Rime, Schrimpf and Syrstad (2019) argue that CIP de-
viations are not materially significant for most potential arbitrageurs given their true marginal
dollar funding rates, while those few actors with the lowest dollar funding rates, who are in a
position to engage in covered interest arbitrage, are constrained by regulatory factors.
ThispaperdocumentstheevolutionofCIPdeviationsatthe"macrofinancial"levelreferenced
byAkram,RimeandSarno(2008),usingdifferentmeasurestoevaluatetheimportanceovertime
of key drivers proposed in the literature. An advantage of this approach is that it can indicate
the factors important enough to have driven macro-level CIP deviations since the GFC, and their
potentially changing roles given a shifting macroeconomic environment – comprising (among
otherthings)theeuroareacrisis,unconventionalmonetarypolicies,andkeyregulatorychanges.
A useful way to organize the several drivers of CIP deviations that we will examine is to
placethemintothethreebucketsof(i)factorsreflectingriskappetiteandperceptions,(ii)factors
reflecting monetary policies, and (iii) factors reflecting financial regulations. Of course, some
variables may reflect multiple factors – the U.S. dollar’s exchange rate being a notable example
– while regulatory changes affect CIP deviations by amplifying or dampening the influence of
risk and policy factors. One goal of the paper is to make progress in separately identifying these
effects.
The outline and the main findings of the paper are as follows. Section 2 sets out a methodol-
ogy for investigating correlates of CIP deviations, along with preliminary panel and time-series
resultsacross10advanced-economycurrenciesvis-à-vistheU.S.dollar. Asinanumberofearlier
studies, notably Avdjiev, Du, Koch and Shin (2019), we regress the cross-currency LIBOR basis
– the deviation from CIP – on an initial set of potential risk-based and policy drivers. We focus
on the three-month tenor, and to smooth out high-frequency noise in line with our macro focus,
we work with monthly averges of daily data. Like Avdjiev, Du, Koch and Shin (2019), we find
that CIP deviations emerge abruptly starting with the GFC and that a higher nominal effective