NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE VALUE OF INTERMEDIATION IN THE STOCK MARKET
Marco Di Maggio
Mark L. Egan
Francesco Franzoni
Working Paper 26147
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26147
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2019, Revised July 2021
We thank Malcolm Baker, Vyacheslav Fos, Robin Greenwood, Boris Groysberg, Paul Irvine,
Vincent van Kervel, Brian Levine, Gregor Matvos, Amit Seru, Daniel Strack, Vish Viswanathan
and Mao Ye for their comments and the seminar participants at the Boston Conference on
Markets and Competition, the Columbia Workshop in New Empirical Finance, Erasmus
University, the Finance UC International Conference at Catholic University of Chile, Harvard
Business School, Maastricht University, Norges Bank, The Stanford Institute for Theoretical
Economics Financial Regulation Workshop, University California Berkeley Haas School of
Business, UNC-Duke Corporate Finance Conference, and at the Western Finance Association
Meetings. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Marco Di Maggio, Mark L. Egan, and Francesco Franzoni. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Value of Intermediation in the Stock Market
Marco Di Maggio, Mark L. Egan, and Francesco Franzoni
NBER Working Paper No. 26147
August 2019, Revised July 2021
JEL No. G12, G23, G24, G28
ABSTRACT
We estimate a structural model of broker choice to quantitatively decompose the value that
institutional investors attach to broker services. Studying over 300 million institutional equity
trades, we find that investors are sensitive to both explicit and implicit trading costs and are
willing to pay a premium for access to formal and informal research. Formal and informal
research account for roughly half of the value generated by brokers. Lastly, we use our model to
investigate soft-dollar arrangements, where research and execution services are bundled, and find
that such arrangements allow hedge funds and mutual funds to underreport management fees by
10%.
Marco Di Maggio Francesco Franzoni
Harvard Business School Swiss Finance Institute
Baker Library 265 Via G. Buffi 13
Soldiers Field 6904, Lugano - Switzerland
Boston, MA 02163 and University of Lugano
and NBER francesco.franzoni@usi.ch
mdimaggio@hbs.edu
Mark L. Egan
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 365
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
megan@hbs.edu

1. Introduction
Most institutional investors do not access equity markets directly. Rather, the majority of insti-
tutional investors rely on “high-touch” (non-electronic) brokers, where trading orders are often
placed over the phone.1 Given the development of, in principle, cheaper trading alternatives, such
as direct market access and alternative trading systems, why do institutional investors continue to
executetradesthroughbrokers? Brokersofferavarietyofservicestoinvestorsandcreatevalueby
providing efficient execution, market research, and order flow information. Traditionally, brokers
have bundled these services into one package, and asset managers have paid for these services
withsoftdollars(i.e.,throughtradingcommissions)ratherthanpayingforthemdirectly(i.e.,hard
dollars), which makes it difficult to disentangle how brokers create value for investors.
The use of soft dollars also raises transparency issues about the cost of asset management. The
concern with soft-dollar commission payments is that they are borne by the end-investor and are
opaque, as the value of such soft-dollar payments is not explicitly reported and itemized by the
fund unlike other fund expenses, such as management and distribution fees.2 These transparency
issues have attracted the attention of regulators and policymakers and have subsequently resulted
in several recent policy interventions, such as The Markets in Financial Instruments Directive (Mi-
FID) II, which aim to hold investment managers accountable to best execution standards and offer
greater transparency about the services brokers provide to investors and the associated expenses.3
Ingeneral,thelackoftransparencymakesithardtoassesswhetherinvestmentmanagersabideby
their mandate of best execution.4
In this paper, we develop and estimate a quantitative framework for understanding how insti-
tutional investors execute equity trades using rich microdata. Our empirical framework allows us
to address two important questions in the literature that are central to the policy debate. First,
we quantify the value that institutional investors give to the different services offered by brokers.
For example, a long literature documents that sell-side research analysts impact trading decisions,
but how much do investors value research relative to other services offered by the brokers? The
answer to this question provides information on how institutions interpret their mandate for best
1[https://www.greenwich.com/equities/voice-trading]accessed5/9/2019
2Reporting requirements, such as the SEC Form ADV Part 2, require that funds report whether they pay for
services with “soft dollars.” Funds must describe the nature of the services they received and the potential of
conflicts of interest. However, firms are not required to report the magnitude of soft-dollar transactions (e.g.
https://www.sec.gov/about/forms/formadv-part2.pdf). Some asset management firms report the amount of trading
commissionsthatpayforresearchservicesintheStatementofAdditionalInformation,asupplementtotheProspectus.
Reportingthisinformationisnot,however,mandatory.
3The Markets In Financial Instruments Directive (MiFID) II was rolled out on January 3, 2018. It applies to all
Europeanassetmanagers,butithasrepercussionsonglobalbrokeragefirmsandinvestmentmanagerssellingservices
toEuropeanclients. BeforeMiFIDII,researchcostswereoften‘bundled’intoopaquetransactionfeesbornebyfunds’
clients. Investmentmanagersarenowrequiredtopayforresearchseparatelyfromexecutionservices,andeithercharge
clientstransparentlyorpayforresearchthemselves.
4AccordingtotheSECthedeterminativefactorofbestexecutionisnotjustthelowestpossiblecommissioncost,but
requires that “a money manager should consider the full range and quality of a Broker’s services in placing brokerage
including,amongotherthings,thevalueofresearchprovidedaswellasexecutioncapability,commissionrate,financial
responsibility,andresponsivenesstothemoneymanager.” https://www.sec.gov/rules/interp/34-23170.pdf
1

execution. Moreover, our rich data set and framework allow us to quantify the value of broker
services that are less well studied in the literature, such as the value of relationships. Investors are
likely to form long-term relationships with their brokers, which affect their sensitivity to fees and
propensity to trade with other intermediaries (Goldstein, Irvine, Kandel, and Wiener, 2009). Sec-
ond,weuseourframeworktoquantifythemagnitudeofsoftdollarsintheindustryanddetermine
howmuchhighermanagementfeeswouldbeifinvestmentmanagerspaidforbrokerserviceswith
hard, rather than soft, dollars. These results can inform the debate around the recent proposals to
unbundle payments in the brokerage industry.
A key challenge to studying these issues has been the lack of data since the analysis requires
detailed information on brokerage firms and institutional trading patterns. We can overcome this
challengethankstoarichmicro-datasetcoveringhundredsofmillionsofequitytransactions. Our
primary data set comes from Abel Noser Solutions, formerly Ancerno Ltd. The company performs
transaction cost analysis for institutional investors and makes the data available for academic re-
searchundertheagreementofnon-disclosureofinstitutionalidentity. Oursamplecoverstheperiod
between2001and2014andincludestrade-leveldataforinstitutionalinvestors,accountingforup
to 20% of the institutional trading volume in the U.S. stock market (Puckett and Yan (2011), Hu,
Jo,Wang,andXie(2018)). Importantly,weobservetheidentityoftheinvestmentmanagerplacing
the trade and the broker executing the corresponding trade. We merge the Ancerno sample with
brokerage firm-level data from several sources. From these sources, we extract broker characteris-
tics that allow us to proxy for the different dimensions of the quality of services that brokers offer
to their clients.5
To understand how institutional investors make execution decisions, we develop an empirical
model of brokerage firm choice. We examine an investor’s trading decision process with a particu-
lar emphasis on where investors decide to execute their trades. We model an investor’s execution
decision as a discrete choice problem. Investors choose the broker that maximizes their expected
trading profits. When deciding among brokers, investors trade off explicit trading costs (i.e., com-
missions/fees),implicittradingcosts(i.e.,priceimpact),andthequalityofotherservicesprovided
by the broker such as research and order flow information. The framework allows us to measure
each investor’s subjective valuation of the different services brokers provide.
We estimate this discrete choice framework following the workhorse models used in the indus-
trial organization literature (Berry (1994) and Berry et al. (1995)). Our setting and data are ideal
for such estimation for several reasons. First, we observe individual institutional investors making
tens of thousands of execution decisions. This rich data allows us to estimate our discrete choice
model at the investor level without imposing any parametric assumptions over the distribution of
5Notethatwedonotdirectlyobservetheamountofaspecificservicethatagivenbrokerprovidestoagivenclient
inagiventrade,whichispartofthemotivationforouranalysis. Forexample,wedonotknowhowmuchresearchon
AppleinvestmentmanagerAacquiredfrombrokerBbeforetradingitsstockorthevaluethatmanagerAplacedonthat
research. Rather, weknowhowmanyanalystscoverthetechnologysectoratbrokerB,andwhethertheyarethetop-
ratedanalystsinthesector. Wethenusearevealedpreferenceapproachtomeasurehowthesebrokercharacteristics,
such as the scope and quality of the research coverage at broker B, influence the execution decisions of investment
managers,whichallowsustodetermineeachinvestmentmanager’ssubjectivevaluationofbroker-providedservices.
2