NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CAN PIGOU AT THE POLLS STOP US MELTING THE POLES?
Soren T. Anderson
Ioana Marinescu
Boris Shor
Working Paper 26146
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26146
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2019
We thank: Aria Kovalovich, Doug Murdoch, Anna Terkelsen, and Yuxian Xiao for valuable
research assistance; Nicholas Pharris at the Washington Secretary of State for providing data and
GIS expertise; Yoram Bauman, Gail Gatton, Ben Silesky, and Greg Small for helpful background
and detailed comments; Matt Kahn, Jim Hines, and Matthew Incantalupo for detailed comments;
and seminar participants at UC Davis, Energy Policy Institute at Chicago, UC Berkeley Energy
Camp, MSU-UM-WMU EEE Day Workshop, Purdue University, Heartland Environmental &
Resource Economics Workshop @ Illinois, Oberlin College, the ASSA Annual Meetings in
Philadelphia, Michigan State University, the MPSA meetings in Chicago, the SPPC meeting in
College Park, the NBER Summer Institute, Macalester College, and Brigham Young University
for many helpful comments and suggestions. Ioana Marinescu acknowledges financial support
from the Kleinman Center for Energy Policy at the University of Pennsylvania. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Soren T. Anderson, Ioana Marinescu, and Boris Shor. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Can Pigou at the Polls Stop Us Melting the Poles?
Soren T. Anderson, Ioana Marinescu, and Boris Shor
NBER Working Paper No. 26146
August 2019
JEL No. D72,H23,H71,H72,Q52,Q54,Q58
ABSTRACT
Surveys show majority U.S. support for a carbon tax. Yet none has been adopted. Why? We
study two failed carbon tax initiatives in Washington State in 2016 and 2018. Using a difference-
in-differences approach, we show that Washington's real-world campaigns reduced support by 20
percentage points. Resistance to higher energy prices explains opposition to these policies in the
average precinct, while ideology explains 90% of the variation in votes across precincts.
Conservatives preferred the 2016 revenue-neutral policy, while liberals preferred the 2018 green-
spending policy. Yet we forecast both initiatives would fail in other states, demonstrating that
surveys are overly optimistic.
Soren T. Anderson Boris Shor
Michigan State University Department of Political Science
Department of Economics University of Houston
486 West Circle Drive PGH 389, 3551 Cullen Blvd
East Lansing, MI 48824-1038 Houston, TX 77204
and NBER boris@bshor.com
sta@msu.edu
Ioana Marinescu
University of Pennsylvania School
of Social Policy & Practice 3701
Locust Walk
Philadelphia PA, 19104-6214 and
NBER
ioma@upenn.edu

1 Introduction
Estimates for 2015 put the social cost of carbon at $11-$105 per metric ton of CO .1 A Pigouvian tax
2
on emissions can internalize the social cost of carbon—as can a system of tradable emissions permits (“cap-
and-trade”). Price incentives equalize the marginal cost of reducing emissions across different sources and
thereby minimize the total cost of meeting a given emissions target. Meanwhile, revenue from a carbon
tax can be used (“recycled”) to lower other taxes or to mitigate impacts on low-income households and
energy-intensive industries. This logic appeals to economists from across the political spectrum, as well as
to many commentators and politicians, as exemplified by the informal Pigou Club and more formal Climate
Leadership Council.2 Yet these economic arguments inevitably must confront a key political hurdle: carbon
taxesleadtohigherenergyprices,whicharehighlyunpopular(seee.g.Knittel2014,forgastaxes). Howthen
couldacarbontaxbepassed? Oneargumentisthatformingabipartisancoalitionwouldbeeasierifcarbon
taxesweremoreacceptabletoconservativeswhotendtofavorlimitedgovernment. Thus,thisviewsupports
using carbon tax revenue to lower other taxes, i.e. a revenue-neutral policy. An alternative argument sees
thebipartisanapproachasdoomedtofailuresincetherightwouldrejectacarbontaxofanyflavor,whilethe
left would actually prefer to increase government spending. Thus, this alternative view supports spending
carbon tax revenue on green projects and social programs to maximize liberal support.
Running parallel to this economic and political debate, recent research in the social science literature
uses surveys to measure public support for environmental policies, including a carbon tax. This literature
often finds broad, majority support for a carbon tax—depending on how the tax revenue is used (Amdur,
Rabe, and Borick 2014; Kotchen, Turk, and Leiserowitz 2017). For example, 50% of Americans in a 2016
survey say they support reducing greenhouse gas emissions by taxing carbon-based fuels.3 Meanwhile, 68%
of Americans in a 2018 survey say they support requiring fossil-fuel companies to pay a carbon tax.4 This
number climbs to 72% in 2019.5 Yet to date, we have seen no carbon tax adopted in the United States, be
it a revenue-neutral policy or a tax-and-spend policy.6 What explains this disconnect? Are opinion surveys
reliable measures of voter preferences for a carbon tax? To what extent are voters actually willing to trade
1See here: https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2016-12/documents/social_cost_of_carbon_fact_sheet.pdf.
Thesocialcostcarbonisthepresent-discountedvalueofthestreamofpresentandfutureeconomicdamagesfromclimatechange,
causedbyreleasingoneadditionaltonofcarbonintotheatmosphere. Alsoseehere: https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/
bitstream/handle/10986/24288/CarbonPricingWatch2016.pdf?sequence=4&isAllowed=y.
2The“PigouClub”isadesignationcreditedtofoundingmemberandconservativeeconomist,GregMankiw,andincludes:
fellow economists such as Paul Krugman, Ed Glaeser, Kevin Hassett, and William Nordhaus; Democratic politicians such as
Al Gore; Republican politicians such as Rex Tillerson and Lindsey Graham; conservative/libertarian pundits such as David
FrumandMeganMcArdle;liberal/progressivepunditssuchasBillNyeandDavidLeonhardt;andmanyothersfromacrossthe
political spectrum. The Climate Leadership Council is a bipartisan policy institute founded by Ted Halstead in 2017, which
countsformerFederalReservechairsBenBernankeandJanetYellenamongitsfoundingmembers.
3Seehere: http://closup.umich.edu/files/ieep-nsee-2016-fall-carbon-tax.pdf
4See here: https://climatecommunication.yale.edu/visualizations-data/ycom-us-2018/?est=happening&type=value&
geo=county
5Seehere: https://climatecommunication.yale.edu/publications/politics-global-warming-april-2019/2/
6SeveralCanadianprovinceshaveimplementedacarbontax—thoughAlbertarecentlyrepealeditscarbontax.
1

off higher energy prices for reduced emissions and tax rebates? Does the use of revenue matter politically in
the real world?
To answer these questions, we study voting patterns in two recent, failed carbon tax initiatives in Wash-
ington State from 2016 and 2018. Initiative 732 (I-732) from 2016 would have lowered the state sales tax
from6.5%to5.5%andmatchedthefederalEarnedIncomeTaxCredit(EITC)by25%,whileInitiative1632
(I-1631)from2018wouldhavedevoted95%ofcarbontaxrevenuetogreenprojects(e.g.,renewableenergy).
These policies were otherwise quite similar, i.e. with tax rates starting at $15/tCO and rising gradually
2
thereafter (see table 1). Thus, these initiatives offer an unprecedented opportunity to measure voter pref-
erences for two different flavors of a carbon tax based on actual voting. Our analysis relies on detailed,
precinct-level elections data from Washington State for 2016 and 2018. We complement these data with a
nationalsurveyof3,000peoplefieldedonAmazonMechanicalTurkduringtheNovember2018election(but
before the election results were known).
Our findings address five key questions.
First: What drives differences in support for a carbon tax among voters? Overwhelmingly, we find it to
be ideology. This message emerges clearly from our analysis of precinct-level voting data and is confirmed
in our individual survey data. In both cases, we infer latent ideology from votes and opinions on other
policies (e.g., stricter gun laws or a higher minimum wage). Ideology alone explains 91% of the variation
in actual vote shares across precincts and predicts votes better than partisanship. In contrast, proxies for
higher tax incidence (e.g., car commute or home size), which correlate negatively with support for a carbon
tax,explainrelativelylittleofthevariationacrossprecincts. Likewise,amongindividualsurveyrespondents,
latentideologyexplainstwotimesmoreofthevariationinsupportacrossrespondentsthanpartyaffiliation,
and the results barely budge when including proxies for the incidence of a carbon tax or other demographic
controls. The key takeaway is that ideology is the main driver of support for a state carbon tax in a
referendum.
Second: Do voters prefer a revenue-neutral tax, or spending on green projects? Again, we find that the
answer depends on ideology. I-732 was designed by an economist to be revenue-neutral in an explicit appeal
to political moderates, while I-1631 was designed by a progressive coalition with social and environmental
justiceobjectives. Consistentwiththesedifferentstrategies,wefindinprecinct-levelvotingdatathatI-1631
performed better in liberal precincts, where it picked up 3.3 percentage points—but worse in conservative
precincts, where it lost 0.7 percentage points relative to I-732. Thus, while the green-spending policy
performed slightly better overall (43.4% for I-1631 versus 40.8% for I-732), it also failed to gain majority
support. This failure has less to do with opposition from conservatives, whose support fell slightly, than
tepid enthusiasm among progressives, whose support only grew modestly.
2