NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MANDATORY CSR AND SUSTAINABILITY REPORTING:
ECONOMIC ANALYSIS AND LITERATURE REVIEW
Hans B. Christensen
Luzi Hail
Christian Leuz
Working Paper 26169
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26169
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2019, Revised April 2021
This study is a revision and extension of an earlier, independent research report prepared for the
Sustainability Accounting Standards Board (SASB) in 2018. The full report is available at:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3315673. The Internet appendix accompanying the report provides a
structured overview of the CSR literature and is available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=3313793.
We thank Andreea Moraru-Arfire for her excellent research assistance. We also thank an
anonymous referee, Paul Fischer (editor), Clarissa Hauptmann, Louis Kaplow, Karl Lins,
Giovanna Michelon, Stefan Reichelstein, George Serafeim, Kathryn Spier, and participants at the
Harvard Law, Economics, and Organization workshop, the Fall Corporate Roundtable of the
Institute for Law and Economics at the University of Pennsylvania, and the University of Miami
webinar for their helpful comments. We also thank Jeffrey Hales, Robert Herz, Lloyd Kurtz,
Elisse Walter, and Jean Rogers from the SASB for helpful comments on earlier drafts of the
aforementioned research report. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Hans B. Christensen, Luzi Hail, and Christian Leuz. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Mandatory CSR and Sustainability Reporting: Economic Analysis and Literature Review
Hans B. Christensen, Luzi Hail, and Christian Leuz
NBER Working Paper No. 26169
August 2019, Revised April 2021
JEL No. F30,G30,G38,K22,L21,M14,M41,M48
ABSTRACT
This study collates potential economic effects of mandated disclosure and reporting standards for
corporate social responsibility (CSR) and sustainability topics. We first outline key features of
CSR reporting. Next, we draw on relevant academic literatures in accounting, finance,
economics, and management to discuss and evaluate the potential economic consequences of a
requirement for sustainability reporting for U.S. firms, including effects in capital markets, on
stakeholders other than investors and on firm behavior. We also discuss issues related to the
implementation and enforcement of CSR and sustainability reporting standards as well as two
approaches to sustainability reporting that differ in their overarching goals and materiality
standards. Our analysis yields a number of insights that are relevant for the current debate on
mandatory CSR and sustainability reporting. It also points scholars to avenues for future research.
Hans B. Christensen Christian Leuz
University of Chicago Booth School of Business
Booth School of Business University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Ave 5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637 Chicago, IL 60637-1610
hans.christensen@chicagobooth.edu and NBER
cleuz@chicagobooth.edu
Luzi Hail
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
lhail@wharton.upenn.edu

1. Introduction and Outline of Analysis
In 2019, the Business Roundtable issued a new statement of purpose for corporations and with
a few words made a radical shift. For more than two decades, the group of top executives held the
view that companies’ managers and directors had a primary duty to serve shareholders—but the
updated statement now lists also customers, employees, suppliers, as well as supporting
communities, promising a fundamental commitment to all stakeholders (Business Roundtable
2019). These executives are responding to mounting pressure that a company needs to do “good”
while doing business, whether that means keeping carbon emissions low, waterways clear, or
workers healthy. This shift on the corporate side is closely related to a growing desire by many to
invest sustainably (e.g., Eurosif 2018; BlackRock 2020). For instance, in 2020, $17.1 trillion—or
33%—of assets managed in the United States were branded as sustainable investments (US SIF
2020).
Along with the growing interest in sustainable investments, the demand for information about
corporate social responsibility (CSR) as well as firms’ environmental, social and governance
(ESG) activities and policies has steadily risen (Cohen et al. 2015; Amel-Zadeh and Serafeim
2018). Responding to this demand, 83% of companies registered with the U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC) disclose some sustainability information in their regulatory filings
(SASB 2017c). However, much of this information is considered voluntary. It is therefore perhaps
not surprising that investors complain about a lack of comparable information (Bernow et al.
2019). In addition, the Sustainability Accounting Standards Board (SASB) points out that about
50% of SEC-registered companies provide fairly generic or boilerplate sustainability information
in their regulatory filings (Christensen et al. 2018; SASB 2017c).
1

In response to the demand for information and the state of corporate disclosure, numerous
organizations offer (voluntary) reporting standards for ESG activities that aim to improve or
harmonize reporting practices. For instance, the SASB develops “industry-specific disclosure
standards across financially material environmental, social and governance topics” that firms could
use in SEC filings. Similarly, the GRI (Global Reporting Initiative) strives to help companies
“communicate their impact on critical sustainability issues” by developing global standards for
sustainability reporting. The latest player to enter the fray is the IFRS Foundation proposing a
global approach to sustainability reporting to address the proliferation of standards and standard
setters (IFRS 2020).1
At the same time, many jurisdictions are considering reporting mandates. In the U.S., the
SEC’s Investor Advisory Committee has called for requiring SEC registrants to provide
information related to ESG issues that is material to investors when making investment and voting
decisions (IAC 2020; Coates 2021). The European Union (EU) is further along. Its Non-Financial
Reporting Directive (NFRD 2014/95/EU) requires large companies and groups with more than
500 employees to provide “non-financial and diversity information” in the management report,
starting in 2017. The NFRD adopts a double materiality perspective, stipulating that companies
not only disclose how sustainability issues affect them, but also how their activities affect society
and the environment. The EU is currently reviewing this directive and considering ways to
strengthen it, for instance, by imposing particular standards or audit requirements (EC 2020).
What many of the aforementioned standard setting and regulatory initiatives have in common
is that they see sustainability reporting as a critical ingredient for achieving broader climate and
1 Other players are the TCFD (Financial Stability Board’s Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures), the
CDSB (Climate Disclosure Standards Board), and the IIRC (International Integrated Reporting Council).
2