NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RETIREMENT POLICY AND ANNUITY MARKET EQUILIBRIA:
EVIDENCE FROM CHILE
Gastón Illanes
Manisha Padi
Working Paper 26285
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26285
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2019
A previous version of this paper was circulated as “Competition, Asymmetric Information, and
the Annuity Puzzle: Evidence from a Government-run Exchange in Chile.” The research reported
herein was performed pursuant to a grant from the U.S. Social Security Administration (SSA)
funded as part of the Boston College Retirement Research Consortium. Padi acknowledges
additional financial support from the Center for Equitable Growth and the National Science
Foundation. The opinions and conclusions expressed are solely those of the authors and do not
represent the opinions or policy of SSA, any agency of the federal government, or Boston
College. The authors would like to thank Benjamin Vatter for outstanding research assistance, as
well as Carlos Alvarado and Jorge Mastrangelo at the Superintendencia de Valores y Seguros and
Paulina Granados and Claudio Palominos at the Superintendencia de Pensiones. We also thank
Pilar Alcalde, Natalie Bachas, Vivek Bhattacharya, Ivan Canay, Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein,
Jerry Hausman, Igal Hendel, J.F. Houde, Koichiro Ito, Mauricio Larrain, Ariel Pakes, James
Poterba, Mar Reguant, Nancy Rose, Casey Rothschild, Paulo Somaini, Salvador Valdes,
Bernardita Vial and Michael Whinston for their useful comments, as well as numerous
conference and seminar participants. The authors declare that they have no relevant or material
financial interests that relate to the research described in this paper. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Gastón Illanes and Manisha Padi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Retirement Policy and Annuity Market Equilibria: Evidence from Chile
Gastón Illanes and Manisha Padi
NBER Working Paper No. 26285
September 2019
JEL No. D15,D82,G22,G28,H31,H44
ABSTRACT
Retirement policy has indirect effects on its beneficiaries, through the “crowd-out” or “crowd-in”
of insurance markets. We study how retirement policy in Chile, which limits the drawdown of
retirement assets but otherwise does not provide or require fixed income in retirement, results in
more than 60%of eligible retirees purchasing private annuities at low prices. We estimate a
demand model to show that replacing this voluntary policy with partial mandatory annuitization
and removing limits on drawdowns causes the private annuity market to partially unravel. Under
our model, this reform leads to a welfare increase equivalent to US$4,000 of additional pension
savings on average, but welfare effects are heterogenous and many retirees would be harmed due
to the higher prices of private annuities. Our results highlight the importance of considering the
impact of policy reforms on the equilibria of related markets.
Gastón Illanes
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
Kellogg Global Hub, Room 3421
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
gaston.illanes@northwestern.edu
Manisha Padi
UC Berkeley
225 Bancroft Way
Berkeley, CA 94720
mpadi@berkeley.edu
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26285

Governments leverage several policy tools to provide financial security to their retirees. Some
publicly provide social insurance, while others require mandatory purchase of certain private in-
surance products.1 In the shadow of these policies, retirees will have different willingness to pay
for private insurance, and the risk of the privately insured population may change. Equilibrium
prices and transaction volumes in the private market will vary based on the government’s regula-
toryapproach,resultingin”crowd-in”or”crowd-out”ofprivatepurchases. Thewelfareimpactof
apolicy,therefore,includesbothitsdirecteffectanditsindirecteffectonprivatemarketequilibria.
We study the relationship between private market outcomes and regulation in Chile, which
allowsachoicebetweenprivatemarketannuitizationandaregulateddrawdownpathofretirement
savings. Thisvoluntarypolicyrequiresneithermandatorypurchaseofprivateinsurancenordoesit
provideadefault“publicoption,”providingauniqueopportunitytoobserveactiveselectionintoa
robust private insurance market without mandates.2 In the shadow of Chile’s voluntary retirement
policy,weobservemanyretireespurchasingprivateannuitiesatlowprices. Ourprojectstudiesthe
welfare of the entire distribution of retirees within this voluntary retirement system that crowds in
arobustprivatemarket,relativetocounterfactualpoliciesthatcrowd-outprivateannuitymarkets.
Annuities have the attractive feature of insuring against longevity risk by providing a fixed
income stream for the remainder of the annuitant’s lifetime. Moreover, they can accommodate
heterogeneouspreferencesacrosstheretireepopulationbyofferingoptionalfeaturessuchasguar-
anteedpaymentstotheannuitant’sheirsordelayingpaymentsuntilalaterage. Becauseofthis,the
previous literature has recognized this class of assets as potentially playing a central role in retire-
ment income portfolios. Despite the theoretical benefits of annuitization, most households in the
developed world choose not to purchase private market annuities. This phenomenon, often called
1Alargeliteratureexplorestheroleofmandatorypurchaseofprivateinsuranceasanalternativeorsupplementto
socialinsurance,includingCrivelli,FilippiniandMosca(2006),BrownandFinkelstein(2008),Einav,Finkelsteinand
Schrimpf(2010),andHackmann,KolstadandKowalski(2015).
2Some papers, including Rothschild (2009) and Hosseini (2015), study private insurance markets without any
mandatesordrawdownlimits.
2

the“annuitypuzzle”,hasspurredaseriesofpapersthatattemptstoexplainretireebehavior.3
Weexploreanalternateexplanationtotheannuitypuzzle-thatmandatorypublicpensionpro-
grams like Social Security crowd-out private annuity markets, while voluntary retirement policies
crowd-in privatemarkets..4 To doso, wetake advantage ofthe uniquecase study ofChile’s priva-
tized social security system. Using novel individual-level data on every annuity and programmed
withdrawal offer provided on this platform from 2004 to 2012, every choice made, and mortality
realizations until mid-2015, we document three key facts about the market for private annuities
in Chile. First, over 60% of retirees in Chile purchase a private annuity, meaning that Chile is
an exception to the annuity puzzle. Second, annuity prices are low: the average accepted annuity
is 3% less generous than the actuarially fair annuity. Third, through the Chiappori and Salanie
(2000)testforasymmetricinformation,weshowthattheChileanequilibriumsurvivesdespitethe
presence of adverse selection. That is, the equilibrium in this system features low prices and high
transactionvolumesdespitedealingwiththesamechallengesfacingmostinsurancemarkets.
We hypothesize that two features of the Chilean retirement policy drive crowd-in of the pri-
vate market - the lack of mandatory annuitization, and the limits placed on the outside option to
annuitization, namely drawdown of retirement assets. Since 2004, Chile has facilitated the sale
of private annuities through a government-run exchange which does not require any retirees to
purchaseafixedincomeproduct. Theexchangeisavirtualplatformwhichtransmitsconsumerin-
formation and preferences to all annuity providers (life insurance companies), solicits offers from
anycompanywillingtoselltothatconsumer,andorganizestheoffersbygenerositytofacilitatethe
retiree’sdecisionprocess. Retireesmayalsochoosenottopurchaseanannuityandinsteadtodraw
down the balance of their retirement savings account, according to a schedule set by the govern-
3Althoughthisliteratureisverybroad,someproposedexplanationsareadverseselectionandhighprices(Friedman
and Warshawsky (1990), Butler and Teppa (2007), Mitchell et al. (1999)), behavioral biases (Davidoff, Brown and
Diamond(2005),BernartziandThaler(2011),Brownetal.(2017)),bequestmotives(Lockwood(2012))anduncertain
healthexpenditures(ReichlingandSmetters(2015))
4Thishaspreviouslybeendiscussedinthetheoryliterature,includingCaliendo,GuoandHosseini(2014).
3