NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MONEY RUNS
Jason R. Donaldson
Giorgia Piacentino
Working Paper 26298
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26298
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2019
For valuable comments, we thank David Andolfatto, Vladimir Asriyan, Svetlana Bryzgalova,
Charlie Calomiris, Catherine Casamatta, John Cochrane, Doug Diamond, Phil Dybvig, Darrell
Duffie, Raj Iyer, Douglas Gale, Brett Green, Robert Hauswald, Todd Keister, Peter Koudijs,
Arvind Krishnamurthy, John Kuong, Mina Lee, Hanno Lustig, Nadya Malenko, David Martinez-
Miera, Cyril Monnet, Sophie Moinas, Ed Nosal, Guillermo Ordoñez, Dimitri Orlov, Cecilia
Parlatore, Sébastien Pouget, Uday Rajan, Roberto Robatto, Hugo Rodriguez, Maya Shaton,
Richard Stanton, Bruno Sultanum, Anjan Thakor, Alberto Trejos, Laura Veldkamp, Randy
Wright, Victoria Vanasco, Adam Zawadowski, Peter Zimmerman, and seminar participants at
Amsterdam Business School, the 9th Annual Conference in Money, Banking, and Asset Markets
Conference at the University of Winsconsin, the 17th Annual FDIC Bank Research Conference,
the 10th Annual Paul Woolley Conference, the 7th Banco de Portugal Conference on Financial
Intermediation, Berkeley, the 2017 CEPR European Summer Finance Symposium at Gerzensee,
Columbia, EIEF, the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the 2018 FIRS Conference, the 2017
FTG Summer Meeting at the LSE, the 2016 IDC Summer Conference, the 2017 OxFIT
Conference, the 2017 Summer Workshop on Money, Banking, Payment and Finance (Bank of
Canada), Stanford GSB (FRILLS), Stanford (Macro Lunch), the Toulouse School of Economics,
the University of Minnesota, WAPFIN@Stern, Washington University in St. Louis, the 2017
WFA, the 2017 Wharton Liquidity and Financial Fragility Conference, and Yale. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Jason R. Donaldson and Giorgia Piacentino. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Money Runs
Jason R. Donaldson and Giorgia Piacentino
NBER Working Paper No. 26298
September 2019
JEL No. G01,G21
ABSTRACT
We develop a model in which, as in practice, bank debt is both a financial security used to raise
funds and a kind of money used to facilitate trade. This dual role of bank debt provides a new
rationale for why banks do what they do. In the model, banks endogenously perform the essential
functions of real-world banks: they transform liquidity, transform maturity, pool assets, and have
dispersed depositors. Moreover, they make their debt redeemable on demand. Thus, they are
endogenously fragile. We show novel effects of narrow banking, suspension of convertibility, and
some other policies.
Jason R. Donaldson
Olin Business School
Washington University in St. Louis
Simon Hall
1 Olympian Way
St Louis, MO 63130
j.r.donaldson@wustl.edu
Giorgia Piacentino
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway
Uris Hall 813
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
g.piacentino@gsb.columbia.edu

In the use of money, every one is a trader.
David Ricardo (1876)
1 Introduction
What is money? Some money, like the physical currency you exchange by hand, is created
by central banks. But most money, like the deposit you exchange electronically by debit card
or bank transfer, is created by private banks.1 Such bank money is not a new thing. Bank
debt has served as a means of payment for hundreds of years. For example, bank-drawn bills
of exchange served as money in early modern Europe, bank-issued notes served as money in
the 19th-century US, and bank-certified checks served as money more recently.
But bank debt is not only a form of money that you can use to make payments, it is also
a financial security that banks use to raise funds. Thus, when banks choose what security
to issue to raise funds, they should take its value as money into account. In practice, banks
choose to issue securities, like banknotes and deposits, that are redeemable on demand. But
such demandable debt can be an unstable form of money. Indeed, many bank panics and
financial crises throughout history, from 18th-century London to contemporary Greece, seem
to have followed from the failure of bank debt to be accepted as money (see below). In such
crises, convertibility is often suspended. This prevents bank runs—you are unable to run on
a bank if you cannot redeem your debt on demand. But it has been argued that it could
also impede circulation—you could be unlikely to accept the debt as payment if you cannot
redeem it on demand.2 Remarkably, however, this has not always been the case. To the
contrary, bank debt sometimes resumes circulation when convertibility is suspended.3
Despite historical precedents, most current theories of why banks choose a fragile fi-
nancial structure are not linked to how bank debt serves as private money (see, notably,
Calomiris and Kahn(1991), Diamond and Dybvig (1983), andDiamond and Rajan(2001b),
discussed further in Section 7). To develop a model based on this link, we model how bank
1E.g., the Bank of Englandestimates that 97%ofbroadmoney is createdby banks (McLeay,Radia,and
Thomas (2014)).
2See, e.g., Dewald (1972) on how the “trade journals reported that depression was accountable to sus-
pension and a lack of loans to sustaintrade” (p. 939),i.e. on how some arguedthat the suspensionimpeded
payments/trade. See also Sprague (1910).
3For example, in the crisis of 1907,despite suspensionof convertibility, bank debt in the formof clearing
house certificates started to circulate as money. See, e.g., Andrew (1908), on how “[s]hops and stores and
places of amusement...generally accepted [certificates], and it is, indeed, surprising...how little real difficulty
wasexperiencedingettingthemtocirculateinlieuofcash” (p.513). Perhapsasaresult,banksremainedsol-
ventinthe panic. Indeed,see,e.g.,Calomiris and Gorton(1991)onhow“the Panicof1907[was]practically
a non-event from the standpoint of national bank failures” (p. 156).
1

debt serves as a means of payment explicitly, following the new monetarist literature (see
Lagos, Rocheteau, and Wright (2017) for a survey).
We use the model to address the following questions. Why is bank money almost always
redeemable on demand, regardless of the form it takes, from physical banknotes to electronic
deposits? Why is demandable debt a fragile form of money? Given it is, why do banks still
choose to issue it, exposing themselves to sudden redemptions, and making the financial
system fragile too? And what are the effects of financial regulations, such as “narrow”
banking and suspension of convertibility?
By modeling the dual role of bank debt—to provide a means of funding to banks and a
means of payment for depositors—we uncover a new rationale for why banks do what they
do. Banks choose to fund themselves with demandable debt to take advantage of a “price
effect of demandability”: demandable debt trades at a high price in the secondary market,
and hence increases banks’ debt capacity in the primary market. But this high price is not
always a good thing. Reluctant to pay it, potential counterparties may decide not to buy
the debt at all, and therefore leave the holder with something he cannot trade, but only
redeem on demand. Such redemption constitutes a new kind of bank run, or “money run,”
resulting entirely from the failure of debt to circulate as money in the secondary market.
In our model, banks are fragile because money is fragile, not the other way around (cf.
Friedman and Schwartz (1963)). However, banks continue to issue demandable debt. To do
so, they exploit economies of scale that arise solely from the price effect of demandability
(independent of the diversification benefits in Diamond and Dybvig (1983) and Diamond
(1984)). Specifically, they transform liquidity, transform maturity, pool assets, and borrow
from dispersed depositors. I.e. they do something that looks like real-world banking. But,
to do it effectively, they exacerbate their exposure to money runs. Narrow banking limits
this fragility, but can also inefficiently constrain bank funding. Suspension of convertibility,
on the other hand, can not only prevent runs, but can, in fact, facilitate circulation.
Model preview. Because we want to show how banking can arise endogenously, we
start with a single borrower B with a single investment (e.g., a corporate loan). Ultimately,
multiple borrowers will form an institution that assumes features of real-world banks. But,
for now, B resembles a bank only insofar as its debt plays a dual role. To capture its role as
a funding instrument, we assume that B is penniless and needs to fund an investment from
a creditor C (i.e. a depositor). To capture its role as a means of payment, we make two
0
assumptions. First, C could be hit by a liquidity shock before B’s investment pays off, as in
0
Diamond and Dybvig (1983). Thus, C couldwant to tradeB’sdebt togetliquidity. Second,
0
C must trade bilaterally in a decentralized market, similar to those in Trejos and Wright
0
(1995) and Duffie, Gârleanu, and Pedersen (2005). We assume that to acquire B’s debt from
2