New Evidence on the Effects of Mandatory Waiting Periods for Abortion
Jason M. Lindo and Mayra Pineda-Torres
NBER Working Paper No. 26228
September 2019, Revised in September 2020
JEL No. I11,I12,I18,J13,K23
ABSTRACT
Beyond a handful of studies examining early-adopting states in the early 1990s, little is known
about the causal effects of mandatory waiting periods for abortion. In this study we evaluate the
effects of a Tennessee law enacted in 2015 that requires women to make an additional trip to
abortion providers for state-directed counseling at least 48 hours before they can obtain an
abortion. Our difference-in-differences and synthetic-control estimates indicate that the
introduction of the mandatory waiting period caused a 48–73 percent increase in the share of
abortions obtained during the second trimester. Our analysis examining overall abortion rates is
less conclusive but suggests a reduction caused by the waiting period. Putting these estimates into
context, our back-of-the-envelope calculations indicate that Tennessee’s MWP increased the
monetary costs of obtaining an abortion by as much as $929 for some women.
Jason M. Lindo
Department of Economics
Texas A&M University
4228 TAMU
College Station, TX 77843
and NBER
jlindo@econmail.tamu.edu
Mayra Pineda-Torres
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77845
mayrabpinedat16@tamu.edu

New Evidence on the Effects of
Mandatory Waiting Periods for Abortion
Jason M. Lindo r Mayra Pineda-Torres
(Certified Random Ordering For Equally Contributing Authors)
September 2020
Abstract
Beyond a handful of studies examining early-adopting states in the early 1990s,
little is known about the causal effects of mandatory waiting periods for abortion. In
this study we evaluate the effects of a Tennessee law enacted in 2015 that requires
women to make an additional trip to abortion providers for state-directed counseling
at least 48 hours before they can obtain an abortion. Our difference-in-differences and
synthetic-control estimates indicate that the introduction of the mandatory waiting
period caused a 48–73 percent increase in the share of abortions obtained during the
second trimester. Our analysis examining overall abortion rates is less conclusive but
suggestsareductioncausedbythewaitingperiod. Puttingtheseestimatesintocontext,
our back-of-the-envelope calculations indicate that Tennessee’s MWP increased the
monetary costs of obtaining an abortion by as much as $929 for some women.
JEL Codes: I11, I12, I18, J13, K23
∗ Lindo (jlindo@tamu.edu) is a Professor at Texas A&M University, a Research Associate at NBER,
and a Research Fellow at IZA. Pineda-Torres (mayrabpinedat16@tamu.edu) is a PhD student at Texas
A&M University. For helpful comments, the authors thank Grace Arnold, Timothy A. Bersak, Marianne
Bitler, Heather Royer, Anca Cotet-Grecu, Pamela Meyerhofer, Christine Piette Durrance, Katie Genadek
and participants at the American Society of Health Economists Annual Meeting, the Eastern Economic
AssociationAnnualMeetings,theWesternEconomicAssociationAnnualMeetings,theTexasA&MApplied
Economics Research Symposium, the American Society of Hispanic Economists Annual Conference, the
APPAM Fall Research Conference, the Southern Economic Association Annual Meetings, and the Allied
Social Science Association Annual Meeting. Lindo acknowledges serving as an expert witness in litigation
regarding abortion regulations, including litigation regarding the regulation examined in this study. All of
the research in this study was conducted after that work was concluded. Each author contributed equally
to this manuscript.

1 Introduction
Currently, 27 states (shown in Figure 1) require women to wait 18-to-72 hours between
pre-abortion consultation and the actual procedure. Fourteen of these states require women
to make an additional trip to the facility so that this consultation can be done in person
(Guttmacher Institute, 2019a). Proponents of mandatory waiting periods (MWPs) argue
that they ensure women receive information about pregnancy and abortion and that they
have ample time to weigh their options before deciding to terminate a pregnancy. Others
have argued that women requesting abortion are already making informed decisions with-
out the MWP; therefore, these laws impose an unnecessary burden that has the potential
to delay or prevent women from accessing abortion care. In particular, women may have
difficulty making arrangements for transportation, time off work, child care, or paying for
any additional costs associated with the consultation appointment.1 In addition, requiring a
separate consultation appointment for all women seeking an abortion may present logistical
challenges for providers thereby reducing the number of women they can serve—as a result,
women may experience difficulties obtaining an appointment from their preferred provider.2
Together, theseissuessuggestthataMWPmaycausedelaysforwomenseekingabortions
because of: (i) the mandatory wait time after their first appointment; (ii) any additional
wait time for appointments due to capacity constraints at facilities; (iii) and any extra
time it takes them to make arrangements for another trip to a facility. Any such delays
are particularly important because they can limit the types of procedures available which
depend on gestational age, and because monetary costs and health risks tend to be higher
1SeeLupferandSilber(1981);AlthausandHenshaw(1994);Karaseketal. (2016);Robertsetal. (2016);
Sanders et al. (2016); White et al. (2016).
2For women requesting an abortion at the end of their first trimester, the MWP could represent an
additional burden because they may be in their second trimester by the time they can get an abortion.
Consequently, they might not be able to have their preferred type of abortion (Roberts et al. 2016), since
medicalabortionislesseffectiveafterthefirsttrimester. Theyarealsolikelytobereferredtoanotherclinic
or to face difficulties finding an abortion provider because fewer providers are available for women at later
stages of pregnancy (Drey et al., 2006; Jones and Jerman, 2014). This could prevent them from terminating
their pregnancies.
1

Figure 1
Mandatory waiting periods for abortion, 2019
Source: The map shows the mandatory waiting period in each state as of August 19th, 2019. The map was created by the
authorsusinginformationonCounseling and Waiting Periods for Abortion fromtheGuttmacherInstitute.
as gestational age increases.3 The same set of issues suggest that a MWP may prevent
some women from obtaining abortions if: (ii) they are unable to make arrangements for
an additional trip; (ii) the delays push them beyond the maximum gestational age for an
abortion; or (iii) the consultation and/or waiting period changes beliefs or preferences. On
the other hand, such effects could be mitigated to some degree if forward-looking women who
know they are pregnant and know they may want an abortion begin to make arrangements
3The counseling visit may represent 11 percent of the actual cost of the abortion and 9 percent of the
totalcostofthetwoappointments(Robertsetal.,2016). Proceduresperformedafter12weeksofpregnancy
pose higher risks of medical complications and mortality than abortions performed earlier (Althaus and
Henshaw, 1994; Drey et al. 2006). The type of procedure used to interrupt pregnancy depends on the stage
of pregnancy. Medical abortion is most effective within the first nine weeks of gestation (UCLA Obstetrics
andGynecology),anditssuccessratedecreasesasgestationalageincreases(Rorbyeetal.,2004). Ifawoman
delays abortion, she becomes more likely to require a surgical abortion which can be more than twice as
expensive as a medical abortion (Jones and Jerman, 2014; Roberts et al., 2016).
2