NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CREDIT SMOOTHING
Sean Hundtofte
Arna Olafsson
Michaela Pagel
Working Paper 26354
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26354
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2019
We thank Andreas Fuster, Michael Haliassos, Ori Heffetz, Constantine Yannelis, Scott Nelson,
Kyle Herkenhoff, Botond Koszegi, Thomasz Piskorski, Jesse Schreger, Michael Weber, and
conference and seminar participants at the NY Fed, Toulouse School of Economics (finance),
University of Mannheim (finance), Nottingham University (economics), University of St. Gallen
(finance), AEA, the 2018 European Household Finance Conference, CFPB Research Conference,
EEA Annual Symposium, Colorado Finance Summit in Vail, and the Workshop on New
Consumption Data at Copenhagen University, WFA, and the Consumer Finance: Micro and
Macro Approaches Conference for valuable comments and advice. We also thank David Laibson,
Peter Maxted, Andrea Repetto, and Jeremy Tobacman for sharing the solution code of their life-
cycle model in Laibson et al. (2017). This project has benefitted from funding from the Carlsberg
Foundation. We are indebted to Meniga and their data analysts for providing and helping with the
data. We also thank Fedra De Angelis Effrem and Andrea Marogg for outstanding research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Sean Hundtofte, Arna Olafsson, and Michaela Pagel. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Credit Smoothing
Sean Hundtofte, Arna Olafsson, and Michaela Pagel
NBER Working Paper No. 26354
October 2019
JEL No. D14,D90,G51
ABSTRACT
Standard economic theory says that unsecured, high-interest, short-term debt — such as
borrowing via credit cards and bank overdraft facilities — helps individuals smooth consumption
in the event of transitory income shocks. This paper shows that — on average — individuals do
not use such borrowing to smooth consumption when they experience a typical transitory income
shock of unemployment. Instead, individuals smooth their credit card debt and overdrafts by
adjusting consumption. We first use detailed longitudinal information on debit and credit card
transactions, account balances, and credit lines from a financial aggregator in Iceland to
document that unemployment does not induce a borrowing response at the individual level. We
then replicate this finding in a representative sample of U.S. credit card holders, instrumenting
local changes in employment using a Bartik (1991)-style instrument. The absence of a borrowing
response occurs even when credit supply is ample and liquidity constraints, captured by credit
limits, do not bind. Standard economic models predict a strictly countercyclical demand for
credit; in contrast, the demand for credit appears to be procyclical which may deepen business
cycle fluctuations.
Sean Hundtofte Michaela Pagel
Better.com and NYU Stern Columbia Business School
shundtofte@better.com 3022 Broadway
Uris Hall
Arna Olafsson New York, NY 10027
Copenhagen Business School and NBER
Department of Finance mpagel@columbia.edu
Solbjerg Plads 3
2000 Frederiksberg
Denmark
ao.fi@cbs.dk

1 Introduction
How does unsecured, high-interest, short-term borrowing respond to income shocks?
Standard consumption models make a clear-cut prediction: if such credit is ever used,
1
thenitisusedtosmoothconsumptionintheeventofadversetransitoryincomeshocks.
However,empiricalevidenceforastrongborrowingresponsetotransitoryincomeshocks
hasremainedscarce. Thiscanpartlybeexplainedbyalackofdatacontainingaccurate,
high-frequency information on both individual credit use and income. Furthermore,
disentangling the e(cid:27)ects of the demand and supply of credit (adverse income shocks
may increase demand but decrease supply) and transitory from permanent income
shocks (the former should entice a borrowing response while the latter should not) is
di(cid:30)cult.
In this paper, we investigate and quantify how credit card and overdraft borrowing
respondstoaquintessentialtransitoryincomeshockduetounemployment. We(cid:28)rstuse
monthly data from a personal (cid:28)nance platform in Iceland (a (cid:16)(cid:28)nancial account aggrega-
tor(cid:17)), containing comprehensive transaction-level information on individual spending,
income, account balances, and credit limits, to investigate how consumer debt changes
upon temporary job loss. The longitudinal nature of our data allows us to include
individual (cid:28)xed e(cid:27)ects in our estimations and thereby control for selection on all time-
invariant (un)observed characteristics.
Using the (cid:28)nancial aggregator data, we (cid:28)nd that, over the average spell of unem-
ployment, individuals reduce their spending, but do not increase their consumer debt
holdings substantially, even if they borrow regularly and have su(cid:30)cient liquidity. More
speci(cid:28)cally, we do not (cid:28)nd an increase in the likelihood to have an overdrawn checking
account, in the number of overdrawn accounts, or in the overdraft amount as measured
1
Unsecured debt or non-collateralized debt refers to loans that are not tied to any asset. In the
U.S. and Iceland as well as other developed countries, unsecured debt consists primarily of credit card
loans and overdrafts from current accounts.
1

by interest payments. The data covers the period 2011 to 2017, a time of economic
expansioninIcelandoverwhichunemploymentwaslowandgenerallyshort-lasting. Un-
employment in such circumstances is a quintessential kind of transitory income shock,
which we con(cid:28)rm in the data by showing that income of individuals is not permanently
a(cid:27)ected by job loss. These (cid:28)ndings thus suggest that large transitory income shocks
are not a major driver of the substantial consumer debt holdings we observe (the base-
line probability of holding an overdraft is approximately 50%, i.e., individuals in our
sample borrow half the time). This (cid:28)nding is inconsistent with a view of unsecured
high-interest borrowing as an important tool for smoothing consumption in the event
of adverse transitory income shocks.
We then turn to the U.S. using household credit data from the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York and the Equifax Consumer Credit Panel (CCP) that covers the
universe of credit card accounts nationwide from 2000 to the present. In this data set,
we con(cid:28)rm and replicate our (cid:28)ndings using the (cid:28)nancial aggregator data from Iceland.
Constructing county-quarter measures of credit outcomes and employing a Bartik-style
shift-share instrument as a plausibly exogenous source of variation in county-level em-
ployment, we estimate the responses of credit card account balances, limits, inquiries,
2
utilization, and delinquencies. We replicate our (cid:28)ndings in that we do not (cid:28)nd large
or statistically signi(cid:28)cant changes in borrowing in response to unemployment shocks.
More speci(cid:28)cally, individuals in counties with adverse unemployment shocks neither
appear to increase their overall outstanding balances (even among those with a slack
in their credit utilization ratios), nor do they appear to increase their inquiries for new
credit relative to counties with less adverse unemployment shocks.
This paper’s analysis using U.S. data faces two challenges: (cid:28)rst, in the credit report
2
Theestimationandinterpretationofcausale(cid:27)ectsusingaBartik-styleinstrumenttoisolateshocks
to labor demand has been employed by a number of authors. An incomplete list of papers includes
Blanchardetal.(1992);Gouldetal.(2002);Aizer(2010);Nguyenetal.(2015);Chodorow-Reichetal.
(2012); Maestas et al. (2016); Keys et al. (2017).
2