UNDERWRITER REPUTATION, ISSUER-UNDERWRITER
MATCHING, AND SEO PERFORMANCE
Charles W. Calomiris
Yehuda Izhakian
Jaime F. Zender
WORKING PAPER 26344

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
UNDERWRITER REPUTATION, ISSUER-UNDERWRITER MATCHING, AND
SEO PERFORMANCE
Charles W. Calomiris
Yehuda Izhakian
Jaime F. Zender
Working Paper 26344
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26344
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2019, Revised January 2021
We are very grateful to Tony Cookson for extensive discussions. We also thank Rob Dam, Shaun
Davies, Kathleen Hanley, Katie Moon, Brian Waters, participants at the Leeds Finance Brown
Bag seminar, and an anonymous referee for helpful comments. Belinda Chen provided excellent
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Charles W. Calomiris, Yehuda Izhakian, and Jaime F. Zender. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Underwriter Reputation, Issuer-Underwriter Matching, and SEO Performance
Charles W. Calomiris, Yehuda Izhakian, and Jaime F. Zender
NBER Working Paper No. 26344
October 2019, Revised January 2021
JEL No. D82,G14,G32
ABSTRACT
The role of underwriters is altered in new seasoned equity offering deal types in which the
offering follows quickly after its announcement. Controlling for the endogenous matching
between issuing firms and underwriters, we find increased underwriter reputation mitigates the
immediate price impact of announcing an accelerated bookbuilt offering, exacerbates the price
impact of announcing a bought offering, and has no immediate price impact for fully marketed
deals. In contrast, underwriter reputation positively affects price outcomes for fully marketed
deals around the offer date. Reputation effects are not apparent in the absence of controlling for
the endogenous matching.
Charles W. Calomiris Jaime F. Zender
Columbia Business School Leeds School of Finance
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall University of Colorado at Boulder
New York, NY 10027 419 UCB
and NBER Boulder, Colorado 80309-0419
cc374@columbia.edu jaime.zender@colorado.edu
Yehuda Izhakian
Zicklin College of Business
One Bernard Baruch Way
New York, NY 10010
yud@stern.nyu.edu

1 Introduction
The potential for asymmetric information between parties to a transaction represents a fundamental
friction in financial markets. A specific transaction for which this friction is a primary concern is a
firm’s sale of equity to external investors. The potential for informational asymmetry between the
firm and arms-length investors is profound and the informational sensitivity of equity value (Myers
and Majluf, 1984) exacerbates this concern. Identifying ways in which the market mechanism or the
design of specific transactions address this friction is a central issue in financial economics. Here, we
examine the differential role of the underwriter in seasoned equity offerings (SEOs) across the various
mechanisms employed for selling seasoned equity to external investors.
Currently,therearethreemechanisms(dealtypes)forperformingafollow-on(orseasoned)offering.
Fully marketed deals follow the format of U.S. initial public offerings (IPOs), including the use of a
“roadshow” and the gathering of indications of interest from investors. This was the dominant type of
deal in the U.S. until about 2009, around which time accelerated mechanisms for follow-on offerings
became more common. In accelerated bookbuilt offerings and bought offerings the offer follows very
quickly(oftenwithin24hours)aftertheannouncementoftheissue.1 Theincreasedutilizationofthese
methods followed the increased use of shelf registration (e.g., Denis, 1991; Bortolotti et al., 2008).
Fully marketed deals involve significant time and expense. The “roadshow” and “bookbuilding,”
whichcharacterizethismechanism, suggestthattheprimaryroleoftheunderwriterinthismechanism
is information production and exchange. This aspect of the mechanism serves to control the potential
adverse selection problem associated with offering new equity. The dramatically compressed time-
line of the accelerated mechanisms limits information production and exchange. Costly information
production of the extent represented by the fully marketed deal structure is, however, not likely to
be necessary for all public firms seeking external capital. For firms that can avoid the cost of such
a process, the cost savings and the ability to sell shares quickly are valuable. However, because it
constrains investors’ due diligence, the use of an accelerated offering accentuates adverse selection.2
The potential adverse selection in an accelerated deal suggests that some method to control this
friction must be embedded in these mechanisms. An important question regarding these new mecha-
nisms is then: what replaces information production as a control for adverse selection in these deals?
A natural answer is underwriter certification (Beatty and Ritter, 1986; Booth and Smith II, 1986;
Carter and Manaster, 1990). The reputational capital of a high-quality underwriter can be used to
certify the value of new issues despite a compressed timeline. However, it is also possible that other
mechanisms may be effective in the limited time span. The purpose of this paper is to examine how
1Accelerated bookbuilt deals are sold directly to external investors, while bought deals are purchased by the under-
writer.
2Blackwell et al. (1990), Denis (1991), and Sherman (1999) have argued that shelf registrations limit due diligence.
1