NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SUBSIDY TARGETING WITH MARKET POWER
Maria Polyakova
Stephen P. Ryan
Working Paper 26367
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26367
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2019, Revised August 2021
We are grateful to David Card, Keith Ericson, Mark Shepard, and Pietro Tebaldi for their
discussions of the paper, and seminar participants at Daniel McFadden 80th Birthday Conference,
Junior Health Economics Summit, Ohlstadt Workshop, Stanford University, London School of
Economics, American Society of Health Economists, Yale University, University of Connecticut,
Columbia University, Bates White Life Sciences Symposium, University of Munich, 2018
REStud Reunion Conference, Rice University, University of Utah, University of Leuven, Georgia
State University, UNC Chapel Hill, SUNY Stony Brook, University of Toronto, MIT, 2019 Penn
State-Cornell Econometrics & IO Conference, Stanford University, University of Wisconsin
Madison, NBER Health Care Meetings, and NBER Public Economics Meetings for helpful
comments. We thank Alan Jaske, Lynn Hua, and Vinni Bhatia for excellent research assistance.
Support of preliminary work related to this research by the Agency for Healthcare Research and
Quality is gratefully acknowledged (grant R03-HS024800). The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Maria Polyakova and Stephen P. Ryan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Subsidy Targeting with Market Power
Maria Polyakova and Stephen P. Ryan
NBER Working Paper No. 26367
October 2019, Revised August 2021
JEL No. H0,H2,H20,H21,H22,H23,H31,H41,H5,H51,I1,I10,I11,I13,I18,I38,L0
ABSTRACT
Public programs frequently use observable characteristics of recipients, such as income, to target
benefits. We show theoretically that when the provision of the subsidized good is decentralized to
intermediaries with market power, targeting of subsidies induces a “demographic externality” that
can distort the incidence and efficiency of public transfers. We examine this possibility
empirically in the context of means-tested subsidies for privately-provided health insurance under
the Affordable Care Act (ACA). We estimate that the overall incidence of premium subsidies on
consumers in ACA Marketplaces is less than 50 percent, and a third of net government spending
on premium subsidies is a deadweight loss. Market power in the presence of means-tested
subsidies leads to regressive redistribution, lowering consumer surplus and rates of insurance in
the poorer population targeted by subsidies. Under sufficiently high social preferences for
redistribution, however, means-tested subsidies still dominate income-invariant transfers.
Maria Polyakova
Center for Health Policy
Stanford School of Medicine
Encina Commons, Room 182
615 Crothers Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
maria.polyakova@stanford.edu
Stephen P. Ryan
Olin Business School
Washington University in St. Louis
Campus Box 1133
One Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130
and NBER
stephen.p.ryan@wustl.edu

1 Introduction
Many public programs, such as housing assistance, food stamps, health insurance, free school
lunch, and energy assistance, are in-kind government transfers targeted to recipients based
on observable characteristics such as income, age, employment, family, or disability status
(Akerlof, 1978; Nichols and Zeckhauser, 1982; Smeeding, 1984; Currie and Gahvari, 2008;
Hoynes and Schanzenbach, 2016). The literature studying the economic costs and benefits of
such transfers has almost exclusively focused on potential distortions in recipients’ behavior,
whileassumingthatthesubsidizedgoodsorservicesareprovidedbyabenevolentgovernment
or perfectly competitive firms (recent examples include Jacob and Ludwig, 2012; Allcott et
al., 2015; Lieber and Lockwood, 2019; Basurto et al., 2017; Hendren and Sprung-Keyser,
2020). In practice, however, governments are increasingly relying on imperfectly competitive
intermediaries to deliver subsidized benefits.1 The fiscal magnitude of this shift is staggering.
In health insurance alone, for example, the US government spends $0.6 trillion annually
in subsidies for products provided by private firms (CBO, 2019a,b,c), with an expansion
projected under the Biden administration for 2021 onward.2 Yet, despite the importance of
understanding the economics of such environments for policy-making, the existing literature
provides little guidance on how the presence of profit-maximizing intermediaries may affect
the productive efficiency and the allocative properties of targeted in-kind transfers.
In this paper, we seek to close this gap by extending the literature along two dimen-
sions. First, we combine insights from both public economics and industrial organization to
outline a set of fundamental economic forces that characterize the equilibrium outcomes of
subsidy targeting under market power. Second, we apply these insights to the subsidized
health insurance market that was launched under the Affordable Care Act in 2014 (hereafter:
“ACA Marketplaces”), an important empirical setting that provides insurance to nearly ten
million people in the United States and costs the federal government more than $40 bil-
lion in annual outlays. Conceptually, we show that in addition to the standard imperfect
pass-through of subsidies to consumers, a subsidy-induced “demographic externality” arises.
Targeted transfers change the relative importance of different consumers in the firm’s profit-
maximization problem and the equilibrium price a given consumer faces becomes a function
1Privateprovisionisfrequentlymotivatedbythedesiretoimproveprogramefficiencythroughcompetition
as well as to reduce fiscal uncertainty for federal and state program budgets.
2Contractingwithprivatefirmstoprovidepublicbenefitsisparticularlycommoninhealthcare. Poterba
(1996)outlinesthestarkdifferencesinthechoiceofpublicpolicyinstrumentsbetweeneducationandhealth
care, highlighting the much more common payment to private agents—rather than direct provision—in the
health domain.
1

of her neighbors’ eligibility for transfers.3 This externality can distort both which consumers
benefit from subsidies and aggregate efficiency. In our ACA setting, we find that only 50%
of surplus generated by subsidies is passed through to consumers, while the rest is captured
by firms. Critically, we find that the interaction of market power with targeting generates
regressive distributional effects in ACA markets, leading to disproportionately lower con-
sumer surplus and insurance rates among lower income and older consumers relative to an
environmentwithperfectcompetition, workingcountertothepolicy-makers’targetinggoals.
The subsidy-driven interdependency of consumers belongs to a broader class of mecha-
nisms where equilibrium outcomes are a function of the distribution of heterogeneous con-
sumers in the same market. An extensive literature has studied several distinct types of
such mechanisms. The classic notion of adverse or advantageous selection, for example, is
a cost-driven demographic externality in which consumers are linked through risk pooling
(Rothschild and Stiglitz, 1976). Tebaldi (2017), which is the closest work to our paper, both
methodologically and in terms of the empirical context, examines such cost-based externality
in the California ACA market. He estimates efficiency distortions that arise because insurers
pool risks across consumers of different ages that have different costs, but are constrained in
how much they can price-discriminate based on age. Demand-driven demographic externali-
ties can arise due to the pooling of consumers with heterogeneous preferences. For example,
features of differentiated products available to a consumer may depend on the preferences of
the consumer’s neighbors (George and Waldfogel, 2003; Waldfogel, 2003). In general, when
price discrimination is prohibited, the price a given group pays is a function of the distribu-
tion of other demand types (Stole, 2007). In markets with selection, differences in consumer
demand types may correlate with differences in costs, combining preference-based and cost-
based spillovers (Finkelstein and McGarry, 2006; Handel et al., 2019; Shepard, 2016). In this
paper, we develop a modeling strategy that encompasses these disparate effects in a unified
framework. This allows us to assess the equilibrium interactions of the cost, demand, and
subsidy spillover channels with market power.
The aggregate direction of distortions attributable to the interaction of market power and
targeted transfers is theoretically ambiguous and is thus an empirical question in any given
setting. In this paper, we ask this empirical question in the context of a publicly subsidized
health insurance market. We consider ACA Marketplaces facilitated through the federal
online platform www.healthcare.gov that operates in 36 states. The ACA Marketplaces
3The externality does not arise if firms are able to perfectly price-discriminate and set a different price
for each group of differentially targeted consumers. Such perfect price discrimination is rarely possible in
practice. In our empirical context, for instance, insurers are regulated to set one price per market.
2