NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FISCAL STIMULUS UNDER SOVEREIGN RISK
Javier Bianchi
Pablo Ottonello
Ignacio Presno
Working Paper 26307
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26307
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2019, Revised October 2023
We are grateful to the editor, Harald Uhlig, and four anonymous referees for valuable
suggestions. We also thank Neele Balke, Sofia Bauducco, Hiuxin Bi, Satyajit Chatterjee, Axelle
Ferriere, Jesús Fernández-Villaverde, Sylvain Leduc, Franck Portier, Oreste Tristani, Juan
Sánchez, Martín Uribe, and Vivian Yue for insightful comments, as well as seminar and
conference participants at various institutions. María Aristizabal-Ramirez, Emilio Colombi,
Dawson Miller, and Houston Scott provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein do not necessarily reflect those of the Board of Governors, the Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Javier Bianchi, Pablo Ottonello, and Ignacio Presno. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Fiscal Stimulus under Sovereign Risk
Javier Bianchi, Pablo Ottonello, and Ignacio Presno
NBER Working Paper No. 26307
September 2019, Revised October 2023
JEL No. E62,F34,F41,F44,H50
ABSTRACT
What is the optimal fiscal policy response to a recession when the government is subject to
sovereign risk? We study this question in a model of endogenous sovereign default with nominal
rigidities. Increasing spending in a recession reduces unemployment, but exposes the government
to a debt crisis. We quantitatively analyze this trade-off between stimulus and austerity and find
that expanding government spending may be undesirable, even in the presence of sizeable
Keynesian stabilization gains and inequality concerns. Consistent with these findings, we show
that sovereign risk is a key driver of the fiscal procyclicality observed worldwide.
Javier Bianchi Ignacio Presno
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Board of Governors of Federal Reserve System
90 Hennepin Avenue 20th Street and Constitution Avenue, N.W.
Minneapolis, MN 55401 Washington, DC 20551
javieribianchi@gmail.com ignacio.presno@frb.gov
Pablo Ottonello
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
Tydings Hall
7343 Preinkert Dr.
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
ottonell@umd.edu

1 Introduction
There is a long-standing view that fiscal policy should play a stabilizing role in business cycles,
especially when there are constraints on monetary policy. The textbook Keynesian argument
is that by spending more in a recession, the government can prop up aggregate demand and
help mitigate the rise in unemployment. Yet most countries around the world do not follow this
prescription (see, e.g., Kaminsky, Reinhart and V´egh, 2004). As shown in Figure 1, the 2011-2012
Eurozone crisis provides an emblematic example in this regard. In the face of a severe recession
and mounting unemployment, governments in southern Europe significantly reduced spending.
This contraction in spending occurred despite their inability to use monetary policy, which left
fiscal policy as the only instrument available for macroeconomic stabilization.
(A) Unemployment rate (B) Government consumption (C) Sovereign spreads
110
25
20
105
20
15 100
95 15
10
90
10
5 85
5
80
0
75 0
2008 2010 2012 2014 2008 2010 2012 2014 2008 2010 2012 2014
Figure 1: Unemployment, Fiscal Policy, and Sovereign Spreads during the Eurozone Crisis
Notes: Unemploymentrateandsovereignspreadsexpressedinpercentage-pointdeviationsfromtheir2008.Q1
values. Government consumption is set to 2008.Q1=100. “Average” denotes the simple average of Greece,
Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain. Data source: Eurostat.
In this paper, we examine the optimal fiscal policy amid sovereign risk and macroeconomic
stabilization concerns. We provide a framework that articulates the dilemma at the heart of the
austerity-stimulus debate (e.g., Barro, 2012; Krugman, 2015; Alesina, Favero and Giavazzi, 2020):
Should the government apply a stimulus to mitigate a recession at the expense of higher sovereign
spreads, or should it practice austerity to reduce the probability of a debt crisis—even if doing so
induces a more severe recession?
We consider a small open economy in which the government borrows externally, subject to
default risk, and nominal rigidities give rise to the possibility of involuntary unemployment.
We first construct a benchmark environment under which Keynesian policies would be optimal,
without the risk of sovereign default. To this end, we incorporate two key elements that have been
identified in theory as providing important scope for fiscal policy as a stabilization tool. First, we
consider nominal rigidities, in the form of downward nominal wage rigidity, and a fixed exchange
1

rate regime. As in the classic Mundell-Fleming argument, an increase in government spending
entails only limited crowding-out effects and is effective for reducing involuntary unemployment.
Second, we consider households that are hand-to-mouth and face an uninsurable idiosyncratic risk
of unemployment. These two elements generate large fiscal multipliers and substantial welfare
gains from countercyclical fiscal policy. Higher spending during recessions leads to a reduction in
the output gap and in inequality.
We first provide a theoretical characterization of the trade-off between stimulus and austerity
in this environment. A modified Samuelson rule decomposes the effects of government spending
into three objects. First, the traditional Samuelson term equates the marginal rate of substitution
between private and public consumption to the marginal rate of transformation. Second, a
stimulus term emerges because an increase in government spending relaxes nominal frictions and
implies that higher public consumption does not fully crowd out private consumption. Finally, an
austerity term captures the costs of raising revenues for the government. An analytical example
shows that when there are no costs from raising tax revenues and the fiscal multiplier is one, the
government achieves full employment and follows a countercyclical fiscal policy. To the extent
that raising tax revenues is costly, this implies that the government may resort to borrowing to
finance spending. However, the presence of endogenous sovereign default generates a motive for
austerity, since higher borrowing raises sovereign spreads for the government. The dilemma the
government faces in a recession is that debt-financed spending lowers unemployment, but it raises
sovereign spreads. Moreover, by increasing the debt burden, this limits future fiscal space and
reduces the ability to mitigate a recession in the future.
A calibrated version of this model for the Spanish economy shows that when the government
can commit to repaying the debt, fiscal policy is essentially Keynesian: During recessions, the
government increases spending that is financed by external borrowing and stabilizes involuntary
unemployment. In this setting, optimal government spending has a strongly negative correlation
with economic activity, and unemployment volatility is an order of magnitude smaller than that
observed in the data. Incorporating default risk drastically changes the desirability of a Keynesian
fiscal stimulus. Quantitatively, despite the large Keynesian benefits from fiscal stimulus, default
risk can overturn the cyclicality of optimal fiscal policy. In the economy calibrated to match
debt and spread levels in the data, we find that optimal policy is strongly procyclical, with a 0.7
correlation with output (vs. −0.8 for the economy without default risk). Moreover, the volatility
in unemployment increases by an order of magnitude relative to the economy without default risk
and is also close to the one observed in the data.
Although the optimal fiscal policy is overall procyclical, the model displays strong state
dependence, whereby the response of government spending is non-monotonic with respect to the
level of sovereign debt. When the stock of debt is relatively low, government spending expands
in recessions because the Keynesian benefits outweigh concerns about sovereign risk. Similarly,
2