NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE BANKING VIEW OF BOND RISK PREMIA
Valentin Haddad
David A. Sraer
Working Paper 26369
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26369
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2019
We gratefully acknowledge the useful comments and suggestions of Stefan Nagel, an Associate
Editor, two anonymous referees, Tobias Adrian, Mikhail Chernov, Anna Cieslak, John Cochrane,
Arvind Krishnamurthy, Augustin Landier, Giorgia Piacentino, Monika Piazzesi, David Thesmar,
Dimitri Vayanos as well as seminar participants at Kellogg, Princeton, the University of
Michigan, Stanford, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the UNC Junior Faculty
Roundtable, the NBER Summer Institute, CITE, the MFS meeting, the Adam Smith Conference,
and the SED Annual Meeting. We have no relevant or material financial interests that relate to
the research described in this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Valentin Haddad and David A. Sraer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Banking View of Bond Risk Premia
Valentin Haddad and David A. Sraer
NBER Working Paper No. 26369
October 2019
JEL No. G0,G12,G21
ABSTRACT
Banks' balance-sheet exposure to fluctuations in interest rates strongly forecasts excess Treasury
bond returns. This result is consistent with optimal risk management, a banking counterpart to the
household Euler equation. In equilibrium, the bond risk premium compensates banks for bearing
fluctuations in interest rates. When banks' exposure to interest rate risk increases, the price of this
risk simultaneously rises. We present a collection of empirical observations supporting this view,
but also discuss several challenges to this interpretation.
Valentin Haddad
University of California, Los Angeles
Anderson School of Management
Office C4.19
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90024
and NBER
vhaddad@ad.ucla.edu
David A. Sraer
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
545 Student Services Building
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
sraer@berkeley.edu

Banks are large sophisticated intermediaries in the market for interest rate risk,
but are absent from standard studies of the yield curve.1 This paper shows that
banks’ balance-sheet exposure to fluctuations in interest rates strongly forecasts ex-
cess Treasury bond returns. We interpret this result through the lens of banks’ risk
managementdecisions,whichtightlyconnecttheirexposuretointerestrateriskwith
the price of this risk. This connection represents a banking counterpart to the clas-
sic household Euler equation. In equilibrium, an increase in future bond returns
compensates any increase in banks’ exposure to interest rate risk.2 This paper estab-
lishes this relationship empirically, presents a collection of facts further supporting
this view and highlights challenges to this interpretation.
We start by constructing a measure of the average bank exposure to interest rate
risk. At the bank-level, we follow Gomez, Landier, Sraer, and Thesmar (2017) and
use the income gap as our measure of interest rate risk exposure. The income gap of
a financial institution corresponds to the difference between the book value of all as-
sets that either reprice or mature within one year and the book value of all liabilities
that mature or reprice within a year, normalized by total assets. This measure, com-
monly used by both banks and bank regulators, is readily available at the quarterly
frequency for the 1986-2014 period through FR Y-9C filings of Bank Holding Corpo-
rations (BHC) to the Federal Reserve. The income gap provides a relevant quantifi-
cation of the net exposure of banks’ income to interest rate risk. Gomez et al. (2017)
1In 2014, private depository institutions (U.S.-chartered depository institutions, foreign banking
offices, banks in U.S.-affiliated areas and credit unions) held 3.2% of all outstanding Treasuries, 25%
ofagencyandGSEbackedsecurities,12.3%ofmunicipalsecurities,33.6%ofmortgagesand49.5%of
allconsumercredit.
2Importantly, this statement describes an equilibrium relation rather than a causal relationship.
Thepriceandquantityofinterestrateriskarejointlydeterminedinequilibrium. However,wesome-
times follow the tradition of the literature on the household Euler equation, which tends to describe
equilibriumrelationsusingamorecausallanguage.
1

showthatthesensitivityofbanks’profitstointerestratesincreasessignificantlywith
their income gap.3 We use the average income gap across banks with more than $1bn
of total assets as our measure of interest rate risk exposure of financial intermedi-
aries.
Werunregressionsofone-yearexcessreturnsonTreasuries—borrowattheshort
rate, buy a long-term bond — on the average income gap available at the beginning
of the period. The estimated coefficient is significant for all bond maturities. With
this single predictor, we find R2 values of 20% on average across maturities. Through
a battery of robustness checks, we show that this result does not spuriously derive
from the persistence of our forecasting variable in a small sample. Additionally, the
forecasting power of the average income gap for Treasuries’ excess returns is not
affected by the inclusion of macroeconomic factors known to predict bond returns
(Ludvigson and Ng, 2009). Represented in Figure 1, the robust correlation between
bonds’ excess returns and the average income gap is the main contribution of the
paper. It offers prima facie evidence of the role of financial intermediaries in asset
pricing (e.g., Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014), He and Krishnamurthy (2013)).
We interpret this finding through the lens of a simple equilibrium restriction on
theyieldcurvefollowingGreenwoodandVayanos(2014). Thisequilibriumrestriction
mustholdinalargefamilyofeconomies. Inthemodel,bankstradeassetsofdifferent
maturitiestomaximizetheirexpectedprofitswhilemanagingtheirrisk. Whenbanks
hold more long-term assets, they must absorb additional interest rate risk. They
do so only if the market compensation for this risk increases. This compensation
3Purnanandam(2007), Begenau, Piazzesi, andSchneider(2015)andEnglish, denHeuvel, andZa-
krajsek (2012) also document that financial intermediaries do not fully hedge out their exposure to
interestraterisk. DiTellaandKurlat(2017)buildamodeltoexplainwhybankoptimallyexposetheir
balancesheetstomovementsininterestrates.
2