NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE CONSUMPTION RESPONSE TO TRADE SHOCKS:
EVIDENCE FROM THE US-CHINA TRADE WAR
Michael E. Waugh
Working Paper 26353
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26353
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2019, Revised December 2019
I thank Chase Coleman for many conversations about this project; Spencer Lyon with whom I
first discussed the ideas behind this project; participants at the 2019 SED meetings, CEMFI, the
University of Cambridge, the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, for CEMFI for hosting me
during the 2019-2020 academic year and the support from Spain’s State Research Agency
MDM-2016-0684 under the María de Maetzu Unit of Excellence Programme, and for financial
support from NYU Stern’s Center for Global Economy and Business. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Michael E. Waugh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Consumption Response to Trade Shocks: Evidence from the US-China Trade War
Michael E. Waugh
NBER Working Paper No. 26353
October 2019, Revised December 2019
JEL No. A0,E0,E21,E65,F0,F13,F4,F6
ABSTRACT
This paper provides evidence on the consumption effects of trade shocks by exploiting changes in
US and Chinese trade policy between 2017 and 2018. The analysis uses a unique data set with the
universe of new auto sales at the US county level, at a monthly frequency, and a simple
difference-in-difference approach to measure the effect of changes in trade policy on county-level
consumption. I estimate the elasticity of consumption growth to Chinese retaliatory tariffs to be
around minus one. This implies that counties in the upper quartile of the retaliatory-tariff
distribution experienced a 3.8 percentage point decline in consumption growth. The fall in
consumption corresponds with decline in both tradeable and retail employment. These results
suggest that Chinese retaliation is leading to concentrated welfare losses in the US.
Michael E. Waugh
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street, Suite 7-160
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
mwaugh@stern.nyu.edu
A Code Repository is available at https://github.com/mwaugh0328/consumption_and_tradewar

1. Introduction
What are the distributional impacts of trade shocks? In the context of the US-China trade
war—the unprecedented tit-for-tat increase in tariffs by the US and China—this paper pro-
vides new evidence on the consumption effects of trade shocks. Both visually and through
formal econometric specifications, I find that the trade war is inducing concentrated losses in
consumptionandemploymentforAmericancommunitiesmostexposedtoChineseretaliatory
tariffs.
The research design is simple: I exploit variation in a county’s exposure to Chinese retaliatory
tariffs on US products between 2017 and 2018 and correlate it with changes in consumption at
thecountylevel. ThefocusonChinesetariffsonUSproductsstemsfromadesiretomeasurea
trade-inducedchangeinlaborincome/productionopportunities;e.g.,soybeanfarmersinIowa
losetheabilitytoselltheirproductduetoChineseretaliation.
The focus on consumption stems from the desire to measure welfare. Consumption, rather
than labor market outcomes, probably better reflects how economic welfare is allocated across
those who are differentially impacted by trade. Moreover, the consumption response assists in
revealing the opportunities households have to adjust to these shocks.1 While studying con-
sumptionhasmanyappealingfeatures,measuringconsumptionatthemicroeconomiclevelis,
in general, difficult. My approach to measuring consumption is to use a unique data set with
the universe of new auto sales at the US county level, at a monthly frequency, over the period
2016-2018(otheryearswillbeaddedasdatabecomeavailable).
Results using data up to January 2019 show that changes in US-China trade policy had large
effects on consumption. Visual and simple comparisons of means show that auto sales growth
is about 2.5 percentage points lower in high-tariff counties relative to low-tariff counties (see
Figure 2 for example) after the start of the trade war in July 2018. In my econometric speci-
fication, I find that the elasticity of consumption growth to tariffs to be around −1—i.e., one
percentage point increase in a county’s exposure to Chinese retaliatory tariffs leads to a 1 per-
centage point decrease in auto sales growth. In terms of magnitudes, this elasticity implies a
nearly 3.8 percentage point decline in auto sales growth for counties in the upper quartile of
thetariffdistributionrelativetocountiesinthelowerquartile.
I connect the decline in consumption with exports and employment growth. Using the same
empirical strategy, I find that Chinese retaliatory tariffs reduced a county’s total exports and
negatively affected the labor market, and especially so for segments of the labor market who
1From a general perspective, see elaborations on this issue in, for example, Krueger and Perri (2006) or the
survey in Attanasio and Pistaferri (2016). As a specific example, in Lyon and Waugh (2019), we find that while
tradehasharshconsequencesforlabormarkets,butinwelfaretermsveryfewlosebecauseofhouseholds’ability
tosmoothouttheshock.
2

are the most sensitive to trade. In particular, I estimate a 0.75 percentage point decline in em-
ploymentgrowthforhightariffcountiesrelativetolowtariffcountiesandthisestimatedoubles
for goods-producing employment. This evidence suggests that the decline in consumption is
relatedtothesenegativelabormarketconsequences.
I also find some evidence that retaliatory tariffs are affecting retail employment. Retail em-
ploymentisanotherproxyforconsumptionexpenditures(see,e.g.,Guren,McKay,Nakamura,
and Steinsson (2018)) and as a way to detect demand driven changes in local economic activ-
ity (Mian and Sufi (2014)). The evidence is mixed because my baseline specifications provide
unclearresults. Butaftercontrollingforacounty’scharacteristicsinatime-varyingway,asize-
able negative effect of retaliatory tariffs on retail employment emerges. The decline in retail
employment suggests that consumption, above and beyond autos, is falling and that effects of
thetradewararespillingoverintoeconomicactivitynotdirectlyexposedtoretaliatorytariffs.
The final part of the paper looks for preexisting trends and announcement effects in the data.
For both auto sales and employment, I find no evidence that highly exposed counties were
growinginanydifferentwayrelativetolessexposedcountiespriortotheannouncementofthe
tradewar(seeFigure4andFigure5a). Forautosales,thereissomeevidencethatconsumption
isreactingtotheannouncementoftheUS’sintentiontoimposetariffsandChina’sretaliationin
MarchandAprilof2018. Thisandotherevidencesuggestthatthedeclineinconsumptionmay
not be fully accounted for by the current changes the labor market, but driven by expectations
andincreasesinuncertaintyaboutfuturelabormarketopportunities.
Two different back-of-the envelope calculations suggest these effects are economically mean-
ingful. Underanassumptionthattheestimatedrelativeeffectsarethesameasabsoluteeffects,
the auto estimates imply a decrease in aggregate consumption of up to $54 billion. Moreover,
thiseffectisconcentratedwithhightariffcountiesexperiencinga$1,600perworkerdecreasein
aggregate consumption. As a lower bound, the retail employment estimates imply a decrease
inaggregateconsumptionof$20billionand$630perworkerforthoseinhightariffcounties.
Twoideasmotivatethispaper. Thefirstisthedesiretomeasurehowtrade-inducedchangesin
labor income or production opportunities feed into consumption. While prior work has tradi-
tionally focused on labor market outcomes, there is little empirical evidence that measures the
labor-market-induced consumption effects of trade. Barrot, Loualiche, Plosser, and Sauvagnat
(2018)ismostcloselyrelatedbystudyingdebtandtheChinashockoftheearly2000s.
Evidence on the response of consumption is important for evaluating the consequences of and
appropriate policy responses to trade exposure for the following reason: The consumption re-
sponse reveals the extent to which households can adjust to trade shocks. For example, if con-
sumption does not change much—even though trade negatively affects the labor market—this
suggests that these shocks are insurable, and hence the distributional consequences and wel-
3