NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
OPTIMAL POLICY FOR MACRO-FINANCIAL STABILITY
Gianluca Benigno
Huigang Chen
Christopher Otrok
Alessandro Rebucci
Eric R. Young
Working Paper 26397
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26397
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2019
This paper is a substantially revised version of Benigno, Chen, Otrok, Rebucci, and Young
(2012). Earlier versions of this paper also circulated under the title "Optimal Policy with
Occasionally Binding Credit Constraints" and "Optimal Stabilization Policy in a Model with
Endogenous Sudden Stops". We thank numerous seminar and workshop participants and
discussants, as well as Javier Bianchi, Anton Korinek, Enrique Mendoza, and Olivier Jeanne for
comments and numerous discussions. The views expressed in this paper are exclusively those of
the authors and not those of the institutions with which they are affiliated, nor do they necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Young thanks the Bankard Fund
for Political Economy for financial support at various stages of this project.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Gianluca Benigno, Huigang Chen, Christopher Otrok, Alessandro Rebucci, and Eric
R. Young. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Optimal Policy for Macro-Financial Stability
Gianluca Benigno, Huigang Chen, Christopher Otrok, Alessandro Rebucci, and Eric R. Young
NBER Working Paper No. 26397
October 2019
JEL No. E61,F38,F41,G01,G18,H23
ABSTRACT
There is a new and now extensive literature analyzing government policies for financial stability
based on models with endogenous borrowing constraints. These normative analyses often build
upon the concept of constrained efficient allocation, where the social planner is constrained by
the same borrowing limit that agents face. In this paper, we show that the same set of policy tools
that implement the constrained efficient allocation can be used optimally by a Ramsey planner to
replicate the unconstrained allocation, thus achieving higher welfare. We establish this in the
context of a well-known model economy, but the result is relevant whenever the policy
instrument that is assigned to the planner can affect the market price that determines the value of
collateral in the borrowing constraint. The result implies that a robust normative analysis in this
model class requires explicit computations of the Ramsey optimal policy problem.
Gianluca Benigno Alessandro Rebucci
London School of Economics Johns Hopkins Carey Business School
Department of Economics 100 International Drive
Houghton Street Baltimore, MD 21202
London WC2A 2AE ENGLAND and NBER
G.Benigno@lse.ac.uk arebucci@jhu.edu
Huigang Chen Eric R. Young
Uber Technologies Inc. University of Virginia
huigang_chen@yahoo.com Department of Economics
Charlottesville, VA 22904
Christopher Otrok USA
Department of Economics ey2d@virginia.edu
University of Missouri
Columbia, MO 65211
and Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis
otrokc@missouri.edu

1 Introduction
The recent global financial crisis has stimulated research on macroeconomic models with
financialfrictions. Oneofthemostpopularapproachesbuildsupontheliteratureonsudden
stops developed in the seminal work of Mendoza (2002, 2010), where financial frictions take
the form of occasionally binding borrowing constraints. The virtue of this approach is
its ability to distinguish between normal states of the economy (when the constraint is
not binding) and crisis states (when the constraint binds). In particular, the amount of
borrowing that agents are allowed to undertake depends on the value of the collateral that
is determined endogenously by a key market price that enters into the borrowing constraint.
For example, in Mendoza (2002), this key market price is the real exchange rate while in
Mendoza (2010) the key market price is the price of physical capital. The presence of
a market price in the collateral constraint creates a mechanism of financial amplification
known as debt-deflation spiral or asset fire sale which is consistent with empirical features
of sudden stop episodes. From a normative point of view, the presence of a relative market
price in the borrowing constraint generates scope for policy intervention because agents
do not take into account the effects that their choices have on the market price when the
collateral constraint binds. This distortion is usually referred to as pecuniary externality
and several papers have studied the inefficiency associated with it and the corresponding
scope for policy intervention in open and closed economy settings.1
This paper aims at strengthening the foundations of the normative analysis in this class
of models. In many papers, the normative analysis builds upon the concept of constrained
efficient allocation. The constrained efficient allocation is defined as a social planner prob-
lem in which the planner faces the resource and technological constraints along with the
borrowing limit. The analysis then proceeds by characterizing the constrained efficient al-
location (SP from now on) relative to the competitive equilibrium (CE for brevity) and by
1See for instance, among others, Lorenzoni (2008), Bianchi (2011), Benigno et al. (2013, 2016), Bianchi
and Mendoza (2018), Korinek (2018), and Jeanne and Korinek (2018, 2019).
2

discussing how to implement it from a decentralized perspective. In this paper, we highlight
a drawback of this approach. In particular, we show that, in a typical specification of the
model economy, the same set of tools that implements the SP allocation from a decentral-
ized perspective can also be used optimally by a Ramsey planner to replicate the allocation
that would arise if the borrowing constraint were not present, i.e. the unconstrained allo-
cation, thereby achieving a much higher level of welfare. This result shows that a standard
Ramsey optimal policy approach is more robust than the SP approach typically used in the
pecuniary externality literature because it attains all the welfare gains that are within reach
of the policy instruments selected. The result highlights also the importance to motivate
the choice of the instrument assigned to the Ramsey planner or used to implement the SP
allocation from the outset of the analysis.
In our analysis, we focus on a production version of the economy used in Bianchi (2011)
and Korinek (2018), as in Mendoza (2002) and Benigno et al. (2013).2 This is a two-
sector small open economy that produces traded and non-traded goods and in which agents
have limited access to international capital market. From the perspective of the small open
economy, foreign borrowing is denominated in units of the tradable good, but it is leveraged
on income generated in both sectors. Thus, the relative price of non-tradeable good (which
is typically interpreted as the real exchange rate in these models) affects the valuation of
non-tradable income and hence the collateral value.
We first show that, in this model economy, one particular tax scheme that implements
the SP allocation relies on the use of a tax on tradable consumption and a tax on firm
non-tradable revenues along with lump-sum transfers to firms and the household.3 We find
that this tax scheme is used only when the constraint binds: since private agents cannot
borrow the desired amount, movements in the relative price of non-tradable are inefficient,
and resources are not allocated efficiently between the two sectors of the economy in this
2The use of a production economy, differently from the endowment case, allows us to introduce a gap
between the competitive and the social planner allocation when the constraint binds.
3This tax scheme is neutral in the sense that is does not redistribute resources between households and
firms.
3