NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ON FREQUENT BATCH AUCTIONS FOR STOCKS
Ravi Jagannathan
Working Paper 26341
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26341
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2019
I did not receive any outside funding – and was funded entirely by the Kellogg School of
Management. The data was made available to me by the Indian School of Business and the
National Stock Exchange of India. I have no material consulting arrangements to disclose. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. I thank Lawrence Glosten, Robert Korajczyk, and Ernst
Schaumburg for helpful comments; and Honghao Wang and Tiange Ye for research assistance.
Special thanks to Shumiao Ouyang for valuable discussions and research assistance.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Ravi Jagannathan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

On Frequent Batch Auctions for Stocks
Ravi Jagannathan
NBER Working Paper No. 26341
October 2019
JEL No. G0,G1,G12,G2
ABSTRACT
I show that frequent batch auctions for stocks have the potential to reduce the severity of stock
price crashes when they occur. For a given sequence of orders from a continuous electronic limit
order book market, matching orders using one second apart batch auctions results in nearly the
same trades and prices. Increasing the time interval between auctions to one minute significantly
reduces the severity stock price crashes. In spite of this and other advantages pointed out in the
literature, frequent batch auctions have not caught on. There is a need for carefully designed
market experiments to understand why, and what aspect of reality academic research may be
missing.
Ravi Jagannathan
Kellogg Graduate School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Leverone/Anderson Complex
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and NBER
rjaganna@kellogg.northwestern.edu

How stocks are traded has dramatically changed during the past two decades1. Tech-
nological innovations have made continuous trading through anonymous electronic order
book markets become the preferred mechanism for securities trading, as foreseen by
Glosten, 1994, and now accounts for a major share of trading in stocks.2 There is
some concern that this may have increased some of the indirect costs. For example,
electronic continuous trading has led to the rise of algorithmic High Frequency Traders
(HFTs). Weller, 2017 finds that algorithmic trading decreases the incentives for gathering
pre- earnings announcement information. Budish, Cramton, and Shim, 2015a show that
competition among HFTs has led to an arms race for speed, resulting in socially wasteful
investment in speed-trading infrastructure, and advocate using frequent, just milliseconds
apart, batch auctions instead of continuous trading.
I argue that frequent batch auctions have another important advantage that has been
overlooked. Allowing for sufficient time interval between successive auctions facilitates
enough orders to arrive before the clearing price is set thereby reducing the severity of
stock price crashes3.
I find that for a given sequence of orders that traders had placed in a continuous limit
order book market, prices and trading volumes will be the same when orders are matched
using periodic batch auctions instead of using a continuously updated limit order book
provided the auction frequency is sufficiently high. Consequently, traders may not have
an incentive to change their behavior when moving to very frequent batch auctions4.
When the time interval between auctions is increased to one minute, prices, volumes,
1See Fox, Glosten, and Rauterberg, 2015 for an excellent discussion
2This is evidenced by the fact that 65% of the 5-day average notional trading volume in U.S. equities
on 8/1/2018 of about $366 billion was due to trading in electronic limit order book markets, i.e., other
than NASDAQ (DQ) and NYSE (DN).
3Technological innovations has made it feasible for making the time interval between batch auctions
a function of market conditions like the depth of the aggregate order book.
4This is not necessarily true. The set of profitable trading strategies under continuous trading may
become infeasible under frequent batch auctions and vice verse. For example, as mentioned earlier,
Budish, Cramton, and Shim, 2015b show that investing in speed would become less attractive under
frequent batch auctions
1

and order fill rates change; crash severity and volumes come down, and some traders
find better execution of their orders. Further, short term traders who carried very little
inventory overnight and contributed to a significant fraction of the volume are worse off
during crashes. Hence we should expect traders’ order submission behavior to change
when moving to one minute apart periodic auctions from continuous trading. However,
even when the change in trader behavior is taken into account, the conclusion that trading
volume would be lower under periodic auctions is likely to hold, since natural buyers and
sellers are more likely to cross without the need for an intermediary. Crashes are likely
to be less severe to the extent they were due to lack of order book depth, since the time
interval between auctions would allow more new orders to come in.
My analysis ignored information gathering and informativeness of prices, which could
be adversely affected. To provide a definitive answer we need a better understanding of
the types of traders in the stock market, their motives for trading, and the difficulties
they face in learning and developing their trading strategies. For example, small and
infrequent impatient traders may feel that learning to bid in auctions involves formidable
set up costs when compared to trading against the limit order book using a marketable
limit order.5
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. I examine how trading volume, trader
surplus, and crash severity change when moving from continuous trading to a batch
auction in Section I. In Section II, I describe the data. I discuss the findings in Section
III and conclude in Section IV.
I. Batch Auction vs Continuous Trading in a Model Economy
In this section I explain why we are likely to see lower trading volumes, higher trader
surplus (ignoring the benefits to immediacy), and less severe crashes under batch auctions
5See Jagannathan, Jirnyi, and Sherman (2015) for related observations.
2