NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CROSS-SECTIONAL DISPERSION OF RISK IN TRADING TIME
Torben G. Andersen
Martin Thyrsgaard
Viktor Todorov
Working Paper 26329
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26329
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2019
Research partially supported by NSF grant SES-1530748. We would like to thank participants at
various conferences and seminars for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26329.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Torben G. Andersen, Martin Thyrsgaard, and Viktor Todorov. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Cross-Sectional Dispersion of Risk in Trading Time
Torben G. Andersen, Martin Thyrsgaard, and Viktor Todorov
NBER Working Paper No. 26329
September 2019
JEL No. C51,C52,G12
ABSTRACT
We study the temporal behavior of the cross-sectional distribution of assets' market exposure, or
betas, using a large panel of high-frequency returns. The asymptotic setup has the sampling
frequency of the returns increasing to infinity, while the time span of the data remains fixed, and
the cross-sectional dimension is fixed or increasing. We derive a Central Limit Theorem (CLT)
for the cross-sectional beta dispersion at a point in time, enabling us to test whether this quantity
varies across the trading day. We further derive a functional CLT for the dispersion statistics,
allowing us to test if the beta dispersion, as a function of time-of-day, changes across days. We
extend this further by developing inference techniques for the entire cross-sectional beta
distribution at fixed points in time. We demonstrate, for constituents of the S&P 500 index, that
the beta dispersion is elevated at the market open, gradually declines over the trading day, and is
less than half the original value by the market close. The intraday beta dispersion pattern also
changes over time and evolves differently on macroeconomic announcement days. Importantly,
we find that the intraday variation in market betas is a source of priced risk.
Torben G. Andersen Viktor Todorov
Kellogg School of Management Department of Finance
Northwestern University Kellogg School of Management
2001 Sheridan Road Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208 2001 Sheridan Road
and NBER Evanston, IL
t-andersen@kellogg.northwestern.edu v-todorov@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Martin Thyrsgaard
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2211 Campus dr
Evanston, IL 60208
martin.thyrsgaard@kellogg.northwestern.edu

1 Introduction
Measuring assets’ exposure to systematic risk, including the sensitivity to the overall market, plays
acentralroleintheimplementationandtestingofassetpricingmodels. Indeed, measurementerror
in the estimated betas, i.e., covariances of asset returns with the systematic risk factors, can have
nontrivial consequences for assessing the ability of asset pricing models to explain the cross-section
of asset prices, see, e.g., Shanken (1992), Jaganathan and Wang (1998), Kan and Zhang (1999),
Gospodinov, Kan, andRobotti(2009)andKleibergen(2009). Thestandardapproachofmeasuring
betas is based on running linear regressions using daily or lower frequency data. This requires the
use of periods spanning multiple years to control the size of measurement errors in the estimated
betas. However, asset betas change over time, and this can be crucial for applications, i.e., an asset
pricing model may hold only conditionally, see, e.g., Hansen and Richard (1987).
One way to accommodate time variation in betas is to model them as functions of observables
such as firm characteristics, macro variables and systematic risk factors, see, e.g., Shanken (1990),
Jagannathan and Wang (1996), Ferson and Harvey (1999), Connor, Hagmann, and Linton (2012),
Gagliardini, Ossola, and Scaillet (2016), among others. An alternative (nonparametric) approach,
following Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard (2004a), is to make use of high-frequency returns. In-
traday data hold the promise of attaining the identical precision in beta estimation as from low
frequency data, but over significantly shorter time windows. The increased liquidity in financial
markets renders such an approach practically feasible; indeed, Bollerslev, Li, and Todorov (2016)
demonstrate the advantage of using high-frequency betas for cross-sectional asset pricing.
Prior studies using intraday data to estimate beta typically ignore any potential intraday vari-
ation in betas by averaging across the trading day. They either compute beta as a ratio of the
daily integrated covariance of the asset with the systematic factor divided by the daily integrated
varianceofthesystematicfactor(asinBarndorff-NielsenandShephard(2004a)), ortheyaggregate
betas estimated over local blocks (as in Mykland and Zhang (2009) and Li, Todorov, and Tauchen
(2017))acrosstheday. Ineithercase,theobjectiveistoenhancetheprecisionoftheestimates. The
premise is that intraday variation in beta is nonexistent or that it is immaterial for asset pricing.
Given the extensive evidence of pronounced intraday variation in second-order return moments,
it is natural to ask if this assumption is empirically justified. As an illustration, in Figure 1, we
plot estimates of the market beta for two large stocks (Caterpillar and Johnson & Johnson) using
high-frequencyreturnsfromdistinctpartsofthetradingday. Thefiguresuggeststhatmarketbetas
vary in a highly systematic manner. The betas of both stocks converge strongly towards unity–the
cross-sectional population average of market betas–over the course of the trading day.
2

1.35 0.72
0.7
1.3
0.68
0.66
1.25
0.64
0.62
1.2
0.6
0.58
1.15
0.56
1.1 0.54
11:00 12:00 13:00 14:00 15:00 11:00 12:00 13:00 14:00 15:00
Figure 1: Intraday Variation in Market Betas. The betas are computed over local windows
of two hours using 3-minute return data, according to equation (18), and averaged over the full
sample of 2010-2018. The left panel represents Caterpillar and the right is for Johnson & Johnson.
Is the above evidence of intraday variation in market betas statistically significant? Does it
hold more generally in the cross-section of stocks? The goal of the current paper is to develop
econometric tools for answering such questions, characterizing the pattern of intraday variation in
betas, and studying its role in explaining the cross-sectional variation in asset prices.
Figure 1 suggests that, if present, the time variation in market beta takes on a particular form.
Specifically, the cross-sectional dispersion of betas may decline monotonically over the trading day.
Formally, we define this quantity (the cross-sectional dispersion of betas) at each point in time as,
N
DN =
1 (cid:88)(cid:16)
β (j) −1
(cid:17)2
, t ∈ N , κ ∈ [0,1]. (1)
t,κ N t−1+κ +
j=1
Here, t indicates the trading day, κ denotes the timing within the trading day (our time unit is
one day), and N is the number of assets in the cross-section. We construct estimates of DN and
t,κ
develop the feasible limit theory needed for formal econometric inference of such objects. Our
measures are constructed from a panel of high-frequency returns on a large cross-section of assets.
The asymptotic setting is one in which the mesh of the observation grid shrinks to zero while the
time span of the data remains fixed. The size of the cross-section may remain fixed or increase
along with the sampling frequency. In the latter case, our inference is for the cross-sectional limit
of DN which, in general, is a random quantity.
t,κ
We form our measure of the cross-sectional dispersion in market beta from the ratio of a local
quadratic covariation estimate for the asset and market return divided by a local estimate for the
quadratic return variation of the market. If the size of the cross-section grows asymptotically, then
the associated limit distribution, evaluated at a fixed and finite set of points during the trading
3