NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PLAYING HIDE AND SEEK:
HOW LENDERS RESPOND TO BORROWER PROTECTION
Youssef Benzarti
Working Paper 26382
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26382
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2019
I thank Erik Eyster, Kyle Meng, Ryan Oprea, Heather Royer, Monica Singhal and Alisa
Tazhitdinova for helpful comments The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Youssef Benzarti. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Playing Hide and Seek: How Lenders Respond to Borrower Protection
Youssef Benzarti
NBER Working Paper No. 26382
October 2019
JEL No. D91,G18,G21,H10
ABSTRACT
This paper uses the universe of mortgage contracts to estimate the response of high-interest
lenders to borrower protection regulations aimed at simplifying and making loan terms more
transparent. Using a quasi-experimental design, we find that lenders substantially reduce interest
rates – by an average of 10% – in order to avoid being subject to borrower protection, without
reducing amounts lent or the number of loans approved. This finding implies that a substantial
number of high-interest lenders prefer to issue obfuscatory mortgage contracts with lower interest
rates rather than more transparent and regulated mortgages with higher interest rates.
Youssef Benzarti
Department of Economics
University of California
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
and NBER
youssef.benzarti@gmail.com

1 Introduction
Gettingamortgageisoneofthemostdauntingfinancialtransactionspeopleengageinduringtheir
lifetime. Mortgages represent a large financial commitment, impose substantial financial risk,
and can be extremely complex. Yet, 60% of US homes currently carry a mortgage. Moreover,
housingis themainform ofwealthaccumulationintheUSand giventheriseinwealthinequality
documented by Saez &Zucman (2016), access to mortgages for low-wealth households can help
reduce the wealth gap.1 Because mortgages are so complex and important to US households, the
US government has imposed borrower protection clauses aimed at disclosing certain important
information and banning certain predatory lending terms. Following the Great Recession, in the
past decade, borrower protection in the mortgage market has received renewed attention, leading
to the 2010 passage of the Dodd-Frank Act and the 2011 creation of the Consumer Financial
ProtectionBureau (CFPB).
Nevertheless,suchprotectionisstillverycontroversial. Aclassicpro-marketargumentagainst
consumerprotectionisthatpredatorylendersofferingcontractswithshroudedattributes(e.g.,hid-
den fees or high penalties) aimed at taking advantage of consumers should be competed away
in well-functioning markets by “transparent lenders.” These lenders would educate borrowers on
the obfuscating terms that predatory lenders include in their mortgage contracts and steer them
away from contracts with shrouded attributes (see Shapiro (1995)). In this case, consumer pro-
tection would be unnecessary since market forces would drive away predatory lending. However,
Gabaix &Laibson (2006) question this argument by showing that as long as there are sufficiently
many inattentive borrowers and even if markets are perfectly competitive, predatory lenders can
survive competition and even thrive. In this case, consumer protection could be desirable since it
wouldpreventpredatory lenders from takingadvantageofconsumerinattentionorlack ofsophis-
tication.
In this paper, we tackle this question by exploring how lenders respond to regulation aimed at
1“U.S.CensusBureau,2017AmericanCommunitySurvey1-YearEstimates”MortgageStatus,Owner-Occupied
HousingUnits. AccessedAugust29th,2019.
1

protectinghigh-interestborrowers. Intheory,ifnoneofthelendersarepredatorylenders,andifthe
regulations are not too bureaucratically burdensome, then they should be indifferent to additional
regulationaimed at informingconsumers and banning hidden fees and high penalties. If instead a
substantialportionoflenderstakeadvantageofconsumers,theymaybewillingtobearsubstantial
costs in order to avoid becoming subject to additional borrower protection regulation. Using a
quasi-experimentaldesign,weprovideevidenceconsistentwiththelatterhypothesis.
Ourempiricalstrategyusestheintroductionofadditionalborrowerprotectionstriggeredbythe
implementation of the Dodd-Frank Act. In January 2014, the CFPB implemented Dodd-Frank’s
2013 Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA) Rule, which applies mainly to high-
interest mortgages and imposes additional borrower protections aimed at better informing bor-
rowers of the mortgage terms they are contracting and banning certain hidden fees, penalties and
obfuscatorypractices. Wediscussthesenewprotectionsindetailin Section 2.2.
Theseregulationswereimposedonloanswithinterestratespreadsabove6.5%forloanamounts
inexcessof$50,000,andabove8.5%forloanamountssmallerthan$50,000. Interestratespreads
aredefinedasthedifferencebetweentheinterestratechargedonaloanandtheaverageinterestrate
charged on a similar loan issued to prime borrowers (borrowers with very good credit histories).
Weusetheseinterestratespreadthresholdstoinvestigatetheresponseofmortgagestothepassage
of these regulations. First, we compare thepre- and post-reform distributionsof mortgagesat and
above the two thresholds. This allows us to assess how many of the loans are reclassified from
abovetobelowthethresholds. Inessence, thisisadifference-in-bunchingapproach,similartothe
identification strategy implemented by Best et al. (forthcoming), and is immune to the criticisms
of Blomquist& Newey (2017). Second, we use a more traditional difference-in-differences (DD)
approach by comparing outcomes of interest for treated loans and control loans before and after
thereform.
Theresponseisstark,asaftertheregulations’implementationin2014,weobservealargeand
rapid decline in the number of mortgages above the thresholds. This decline is compensated by a
largeincreaseinthenumberofmortgagesatandjustbelowthethresholds. Thereisalargeexcess
2