NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MEASURING “DARK MATTER” IN ASSET PRICING MODELS
Hui Chen
Winston Wei Dou
Leonid Kogan
Working Paper 26418
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26418
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2019, Revised December 2021
We are grateful to Stefan Nagel (the Editor), an Associate Editor, and two referees for their
helpful suggestions. We thank Xiaohong Chen, Frank Schorfheide, Martin Schneider, and
especially Lars Hansen for detailed comments and discussions. We also thank Torben Andersen,
Bradyn Breon-Drish, Murray Carlson, John Cochrane, Ian Dew-Becker, Frank Diebold, Stefano
Giglio, Robert Korajczyk, Anna Mikusheva, Tom Sargent, Laura Veldkamp, Jessica Wachter,
Tan Wang, Amir Yaron, Fernando Zapatero, Stan Zin, and seminar and conference participants at
University of Chicago, MIT Sloan, CKGSB, INSEAD, Northwestern, Harvard, NYU Stern, Yale,
Washington University in St. Louis, University of Pennsylvania, Chicago CITE, ITAM Finance
Conference, Macrofinance Society Workshop, Macro Financial Modeling Meeting, NBER Asset
Pricing Meeting, NBER SI Meeting on Capital Markets and Economy, Red Rock Finance
Conference, UBC Winter Finance Conference, Utah Winter Finance Conference, and WFA for
their comments. We thank Di Tian for his superb research assistance. All errors are our own. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Hui Chen, Winston Wei Dou, and Leonid Kogan. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Measuring “Dark Matter” in Asset Pricing Models
Hui Chen, Winston Wei Dou, and Leonid Kogan
NBER Working Paper No. 26418
November 2019, Revised December 2021
JEL No. C52,D81,E32,G12
ABSTRACT
We formalize the concept of “dark matter” in asset pricing models by quantifying the additional
informativeness of cross-equation restrictions about fundamental dynamics. The dark matter
measure captures the degree of fragility for models that are potentially misspecified and unstable:
a large dark matter measure signifies that the model lacks internal refutability (weak power of
optimal specification tests) and external validity (high overfitting tendency and poor out-of-
sample fit). The measure can be computed at low cost even for complex dynamic structural
models. To illustrate its applications, we provide quantitative examples applying the measure to
(time-varying) rare-disaster risk and long-run risk models.
Hui Chen Leonid Kogan
MIT Sloan School of Management MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-637 100 Main Street, E62-636
Cambridge, MA 02142 Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER and NBER
huichen@mit.edu lkogan@mit.edu
Winston Wei Dou
2318 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall
The Wharton School at
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philedalphia, PA 19104
wdou@wharton.upenn.edu

1. Introduction
In cosmology, dark matter is a form of substance that is not directly observable, yet its presence
is required for Einstein’s theory of general relativity to be consistent with the observable motions
of stars and galaxies. Certain economic models rely on an analogous form of “dark matter.” For
instance, to generate desirable predictions, many asset pricing models require subtle dynamics for
the fundamentals (the process of endowment or productivity, for example), which are difficult to
identify directly using the fundamental data alone. Instead, the evidence can only be indirectly
inferred from asset prices through the lens of model-implied restrictions. This phenomenon is
present, for instance, in some of the models of rare disasters, to which John Campbell refers as
the “dark matter for economists” in his 2008 Princeton Lecture in Finance (Campbell, 2018).
Intuitively, a model’s heavy reliance on such “dark matter” features raises at least two
concerns regarding its robustness. First, it is difficult to detect potential misspecification in
the dark matter elements of a model due to our inability to measure them or test against them
using direct evidence. As such, economic dark matter effectively raises a model’s degrees of
freedom. Second, as we estimate structural parameters from the data, the high effective degrees
of freedom are likely to cause the model to overfit the data in sample, and lead to poor expected
fit out of sample. We refer to these two problems as a lack of internal refutability and external
validity, respectively.
Our paper makes two contributions. We propose a quantitative measure of the economic
dark matter in structural models, which is relatively easy to compute even for models with
complex dynamics. Then, under a general semiparametric framework, we formally show that
models with larger dark matter measures tend to have lower in-sample refutability and less
reliable out-of-sample performance owing to their higher tendency to overfit the data.
We define our measure of economic dark matter using a general GMM framework (see Hansen,
1982), under which a structural model is summarized by a fixed set of unconditional moment
restrictions. We focus on a set of model parameters that can be identified by the full set of
moment restrictions, referred to as the full model, and by a subset of the moment restrictions
on the fundamentals, referred to as the baseline model. These parameters can be more precisely
estimated through the additional moment restrictions implied by the structural model. These
additional moment restrictions are often referred to as cross-equation restrictions. Our dark
matter measure quantifies the additional informativeness of cross-equation restrictions about
these model parameters. Specifically, it compares the asymptotic variances of two efficient
GMM estimators based on the baseline model and the full model, which imposes cross-equation
restrictions, and searches for the largest discrepancy between the two asymptotic variances
along all directions. For a model that relies heavily on dark matter, cross-equation restrictions
appear highly informative about the parameters of the fundamental dynamics relative to the
2

fundamental data alone. It is important to note that, despite its close connection to asymptotic
variances of efficient GMM estimators, economic dark matter is a model property and not a
small-sample problem that can be ignored if one has sufficiently many observations.1
We formally connect our measure of economic dark matter to model fragility. Our notion of
model fragility is concerned with testing power and expected out-of-sample fit in the presence of
potential misspecification and local instability of the data-generating process (DGP). Intuitively,
a structural model that can fit the data well in sample because of its high effective degrees of
freedom, with some key model parameters insufficiently disciplined by direct evidence, is difficult
to refute in statistical tests.2 If a model is correctly specified, imposing highly informative
cross-equation restrictions can significantly improve the precision of model parameter estimates,
and thus the accuracy of the model’s fit in and out of sample. However, if cross-equation
restrictions are potentially misspecified, excessive reliance on the information derived from such
restrictions tends to degrade the out-of-sample fit of the model despite its apparently strong
in-sample performance.
We analyze the consequences of misspecification and local instability of the DGP by gener-
alizing the framework of Li and Mu¨ller (2009) to the semiparametric setting.3 We show that
models with large dark matter measures are difficult to reject even when they are misspecified –
thus, such models lack refutability. In fact, we prove that the power of the optimal specification
tests vanishes as the dark matter measure approaches infinity. Moreover, under the worst cases
of local instability of the DGP, models with larger dark matter measures have a higher expected
degree of overfitting, i.e., a larger gap between the expected in-sample and out-of-sample model
fit based on the Sargan-Hansen J statistic. This model property is not captured fully by the
traditional measures of overfitting that depend on the number of free model parameters (e.g.,
AIC, BIC, among many others). In contrast, our measure focuses on the sensitivity of the model
fit to perturbations in the parameters of the DGP.
In practice, sensitivity analysis is a popular method to examine model fragility. A model
is considered fragile if its key implications are excessively sensitive to small perturbations of
the DGP. However, to formalize this notion of model fragility, one needs to specify the relevant
magnitude of “small perturbations” and define what constitutes “excessive sensitivity.” To assess
the full scope of model fragility in multivariate settings, one must further consider perturbations
in the DGP that simultaneously affect multiple model parameters.
1Cheng, Dou, and Liao (2021) show that dark matter in asset pricing models is inherently connected but not
limited to weak identification of model parameters. Similarly, as explicitly stressed by Stock, Wright, and Yogo
(2002), weak identification as a model property is not a small-sample problem either.
2Kocherlakota (2007) similarly cautions about the “fallacy of fit” in structural economic models.
3We need a general semiparametric framework for three main reasons: (i) it provides a formal general
description of local perturbations in the space of DGPs; (ii) it allows us to justify the information-matrix
interpretationofourdarkmattermeasureusingsemiparametricefficiencybounds; and(iii)itclarifiestherelation
between a structural economic model and its representation through moment restrictions.
3