NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE SURROGATE INDEX:
COMBINING SHORT-TERM PROXIES TO ESTIMATE
LONG-TERM TREATMENT EFFECTS MORE RAPIDLY AND PRECISELY
Susan Athey
Raj Chetty
Guido W. Imbens
Hyunseung Kang
Working Paper 26463
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26463
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2019, Revised August 2024
We are grateful for discussions with James Dailey, Lawrence Katz, David Ritzwoller, Dylan Small,
Scott Stern, and Liang Xu and for comments from numerous seminar participants. We thank Kevin
Chen, Yechan Park, Emanuel Schertz and James Stratton for outstanding research assistance. We
are particularly grateful to Kevin Chen and David Ritzwoller for pointing out a mistake in the
previous version of this paper. This research was funded through National Science Foundation
Grant DMS-1502437, the Chan-Zuckerberg Initiative, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, the
Overdeck Foundation, ONR grants N00014-17-1-2131 and N00014-19-1-2468 and the Sloan
Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26463
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Susan Athey, Raj Chetty, Guido W. Imbens, and Hyunseung Kang. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Surrogate Index: Combining Short-Term Proxies to Estimate Long-Term Treatment Effects
More Rapidly and Precisely
Susan Athey, Raj Chetty, Guido W. Imbens, and Hyunseung Kang
NBER Working Paper No. 26463
November 2019, Revised August 2024
JEL No. C01, J0
ABSTRACT
A common challenge in estimating the impact of interventions (e.g., job training programs,
educational programs) is that many outcomes of interest (e.g., lifetime earnings or other labor
market outcomes) are observed with a long delay. In biomedical settings this is often addressed by
using short-term outcomes as so-called “surrogates” for the outcome of interest, e.g., tumor size as
a surrogate for mortality in cancer studies. We build on this literature by combining multiple,
possibly qualitatively distinct, short-term outcomes (e.g., short-run earnings and employment
indicators) systematically into a “surrogate index.” Under the Prentice surrogacy assumption,
which requires that the primary outcome is independent of the treatment conditional on the
surrogates, we show that the average treatment effect on the surrogate index equals the treatment
effect on the long-term outcome. We also relate the surrogacy assumption to a set of structural,
causal assumptions. We then characterize the bias that arises from violations of each of the key
assumptions, and we provide simple methods to validate these assumptions using additional
observed outcomes. We apply our method to analyze the long-term impacts of a multi-site job
training experiment in California. Rather than waiting a full nine years to directly observe the long-
term impact, we show that it is possible to use short-term (the first six quarters) outcomes as
surrogates. One could have estimated the program’s long-term impacts on mean employment rates
using the employment rates observed in the first six quarters, with a 35% reduction in standard
errors.
Susan Athey Guido W. Imbens
Graduate School of Business Graduate School of Business
Stanford University Stanford University
655 Knight Way 655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305 Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER and NBER
athey@stanford.edu Imbens@stanford.edu
Raj Chetty Hyunseung Kang
Department of Economics Department of Statistics
Harvard University University of Wisconsin-Madison
Littauer 321 1300 University Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138 Madison, WI 53706
and NBER hyunseung@stat.wisc.edu
chetty79@gmail.com
Replication Code is available at https://opportunityinsights.org/data/

1 Introduction
A fundamental challenge for evaluating interventions is that the primary outcomes of interest
are often hard to measure. For example, researchers are often interested in the effect of the
policy on some long-term outcome but do not observe that in their study. Instead, they observe
a number of short-term outcomes that are all related to this primary outcome of interest.
Onesettingwherethistypeofproblemarisesinvolvesaneducationalpolicymakerevaluating
a policy that would change class size. The ultimate goal may be to improve long-term labor
market outcomes for the students. However, the decision regarding the class size policy needs
to be made at a time when only short-term outcomes such as test scores or other educational
achievement measures are available. Another setting involves policy makers considering labor
market interventions such as job search assistance or human capital acquisition programs, where
they may be primarily interested in the long-term labor market attachment of the participants,
but in the short run they may only have access to outcomes such as employment records or
earnings over a short period of time. In randomized experiments for medical interventions, the
ultimate outcome of interest is often survival or quality-adjusted years of life. Survival rates
may be high in the short run, and so typically such trials are evaluated in terms of surrogate
measures, such as including tumor size or other measures of the progression of the disease, which
can be measured earlier. In all of these types of setting, to make a timely decision, the policy
makerneedstoassesstheprogramsbasedonshort-termoutcomes. Thesechallengesalsoarisein
businesssettings. Inthecontextofexperimentationindigitaltechnologycompanies,adiscussion
of the most important challenges ranks as the top concern that “While most experiments in the
industry run for 2 weeks or less, we are really interested in detecting the long-term effect of
a change. How do long-term effects differ from short-term outcomes? How can we accurately
measure those long- term factors without having to wait a long time in every case?” (Gupta
et al. (2019), p. 21).
In these and many other examples, the researcher is faced with making recommendations
regarding the future implementation of the intervention on the basis of measurements of its
[1]

effect on a variety of sometimes disparate and possibly conflicting outcome measures. A key
question is how to balance these different outcomes when making an overall assessment. In prac-
tice, researchers often deemphasize short-term outcomes for which they do not find statistically
significant effects, instead making perhaps somewhat ad hoc qualitative assessments regarding
the relative importance of the remaining short-term outcomes.
In this paper we lay out a framework for analyzing these issues. We consider the scenario in
which researchers do not measure the primary outcome in the context of data containing infor-
mation on the intervention. Instead, we assume that the researcher has a second, observational,
dataset where the researcher observes the surrogates and the primary outcome but does not
observe the treatment. In both samples the researcher may also observe variables not affected
by the treatment, such as pre-treatment characteristics of the participants.
We make four main contributions. First, we articulate three key assumptions under which
the average effect of the treatment on the primary outcome is identified from the combination of
the experimental and observational samples: (i) a standard assumption that the assignment in
the experimental sample is Unconfounded; (ii) a Surrogacy assumption which requires that the
causal path from the treatment to the primary outcome goes through the surrogates (Prentice,
1989; Day and Duffy, 1996; Begg and Leung, 2000; Frangakis and Rubin, 2002); and (iii)
a Comparability or external validity assumption, which requires that the observational and
experimental samples are comparable in the sense that the outcome distributions conditional
on surrogates and pre-treatment variables are identical.
Under these three assumptions, the average effect of the treatment on the primary outcome
can be estimated as the average effect of the treatment on an aggregate of the surrogates,
which we label the surrogate index. This index combines the individual surrogates through
their predicted value of the primary outcome. For example, when studying the impact of class
size, the primary outcome might be high school graduation, while the two surrogates might be
mathematics and reading scores. For the special case of linear models, the proposal boils down
to multiplying the causal effects of the intervention on the two scores (which can be estimated
[2]