NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DOES STOCK MARKET LISTING IMPACT INVESTMENT IN JAPAN?
Joseph J. French
Ryosuke Fujitani
Yukihiro Yasuda
Working Paper 26495
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26495
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2019
A previous version of this paper is titled as “Stock Market Listing, Investment, and Business
Groups: How Firm Structure Impacts Investment?” We appreciate Kaoru Hosono (discussant at
TRIO conference), Demir Bekti a (discussant), Shin-ichi Fukuda, Takeo Hoshi , Hiromichi Iwaki,
William Megginson, Jun-yu Saito, Ken-ichi Ueda, Yishay Yafeh, and Wenrui Zhang (discussant).
We are also grateful for the insightful comments by workshop participants at Hitotsubashi
University and Monfort College of Business, and participants in Multinational Finance Society
and Global Finance Association. Ryosuke Fujitani greatly appreciates financial support from a
Grant-in-Aid for JSPS Research Fellow (No. JP17J03278) provided by Japan’s Ministry of
Education, Science, Sports, and Culture. Yukihiro Yasuda greatly appreciates the financial
support from Mizuho Securities and from a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (C) (No.
JP17K03798) provided by Japan’s Ministry of Education, Science, Sports, and Culture. Joseph
French acknowledges financial support from the Tointon Research Fund. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Joseph J. French, Ryosuke Fujitani, and Yukihiro Yasuda. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Does Stock Market Listing Impact Investment in Japan?
Joseph J. French, Ryosuke Fujitani, and Yukihiro Yasuda
NBER Working Paper No. 26495
November 2019
JEL No. F3,G20,G31,G39
ABSTRACT
We provide the first large sample comparison of investment by Japanese listed and unlisted
public firms. We show that listed firms invest more and have greater sensitivity to investment
opportunities than comparable unlisted companies. Our findings suggest that the role of listing in
alleviating financial constraints is more important than potential underinvestment due to myopic
behavior. However, the positive relationship between listing and investment is primarily driven
by standalone firms. Further analysis confirms that as the number of subsidiaries in a business
group increases the positive impact of listing on investment declines. Additionally, when a firm
faces financial constraints listing more positively impacts investment. We also document a
positive association between stock liquidity and investment for listed firms. Taken together, our
results suggest that stock markets play an important role in easing financial constraints and
preventing managerial shirking both of which increase investment. Finally, we show that higher
levels of owner-ship by financial institutions, board members, and foreign investors increases
corporate investment.
Joseph J. French Yukihiro Yasuda
University of Northern Colorado Hitotsubashi University
joseph.french@unco.edu Tokyo, Japan
y.yasuda@r.hit-u.ac.jp
Ryosuke Fujitani
Hitotsubashi University
fujitani.ryosuke.hk@gmail.com

1. Introduction
Does being listed on a stock exchange influence long-term investment? Existent literature
suggests it does. On one hand, listing may reduce long-term investment. It is often argued that
listing induces short-term pressures on management which leads to short-termism which may re-
duce long-term investment (Stein, 1989). On the other hand, listing reduces the cost of capital as
firms have access to public equity markets, which should increase investment of listed firms rela-
tive to unlisted ones. Recent empirical literature is mixed. Asker et al. (2015) show that short-term
market pressures cause lower investment levels for listed firms relative to unlisted firms. However,
Bakke, Jens, and Whited (2012) find that stock market listing increases investment. The authors
argue that the liquidity benefit for public companies induces them to invest more than private
companies. Gilje and Taillard (2016) show that private firms are less responsive to investment
opportunities compared to public firms. They suggest that access to capital is important in explain-
ing differences between investment of public and private firms.
Building on this literature, we conduct a large sample comparison of investment behavior
by large Japanese listed and unlisted companies from 2001-2017. Existing research primarily fo-
cuses on differences between public and private firms. However, these comparisons are susceptible
to confounding effects due to different disclosure requirements. While listed firms are required to
comply with the listing criteria of the stock exchange and regulatory agencies, generally private
firms are required to disclose at a much lower level.
We overcome this problem by taking advantage of institutional characteristics of the Fi-
nancial Instruments Exchange Act (J-FIEA, hereafter) of Japan. J-FIEA mandates all firms whose
equity satisfies several criteria to file financial statements that are the Japanese counterpart of 10-
2

K filing (J 10-K, hereafter).1 Interestingly, the firms that are required to file financial statements
include not only public listed firms but also many unlisted firms. This unique institutional feature
allows us to understand the role of short-termism and capital constraints on the investment levels
between listed and unlisted firms without confounding effects due to different disclosure require-
ments. Additionally, since our sample of unlisted firms are required to report consolidated finan-
cial statements and full format of J 10-K, we can collect the data on governance and ownership
structure that are at the same level as listed firms.
We find that listed firms invest more and are more sensitive to investment opportunities
than their unlisted counterparts. This result suggests that listing status alleviates financial con-
straints and increases investment in Japan. Our findings contrast with the hypothesis that market
pressure exerted on listed firms induces myopic behavior by management and reduces investment
relative to unlisted firms (Asker et al., 2015). Thus, our results indicate that a simple comparison
between public and private firms might be misleading when examining the effects of listing status
on firm investment behavior. Further analysis reveals that the positive relationship between list-
ing and investment is not due to overinvestment by listed firms, but rather underinvestment by
unlisted firms.
Next, we investigate how firm structure impacts investment behavior of listed and un-
listed firms. We divide our sample into two sub-samples: 1) Firms that are members of business
groups, and 2) standalone firms. Our results show that the positive relationship between listing and
investment is primarily driven by standalone firms. Additional analysis confirms that as the num-
ber of subsidiaries in a business group increases the positive impact of listing on investment de-
clines. In a series of additional tests, we show that the positive role of listing on investment is
1 We describe the institutional details of the requirements in A1.
3