NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DOES THE LACK OF FINANCIAL STABILITY IMPAIR THE TRANSMISSION
OF MONETARY POLICY?
Viral V. Acharya
Björn Imbierowicz
Sascha Steffen
Daniel Teichmann
Working Paper 26479
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26479
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2019
The views expressed are those of the authors and do not represent the views of the Deutsche
Bundesbank, the Eurosystem, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. We thank Tobias Berg,
the Eurosystem, or the National Bureau
Martin Brown, Matteo Crosignani, John Driscoll, Falko Fecht, André Güttler, Ralph de Haas,
Matteo Crosignani, John Hendrik Hakenes, Florian Heider, Neeltje van Horen, Stephan Jank, Martin Kanz, David Lando,
David Marques-Ibanez, David Martinez-Miera, Emanuel Mönch, Steven Ongena, Andrea Polo, Lasse
Heje Pedersen, Adriano Rampini, Asani Sarkar, Morton Sørensen, Daniel Streitz, Harald Uhlig, and
participants in the 2014 European Summer Symposium in Financial Markets, the 2014 ECB workshop
on “Non-standard monetary policy measures,” the 2014 Bank Workshop in Münster, the 2015 FIRS
meetings, the 2015 Bocconi/Carefin Conference, the 2015 Summer Research Conference in Finance
at ISB, the 2015 FED conference on “Monetary Policy Implementation and Transmission in the
Post-Crisis Period,” the 2015 Financial Management Association, the Bundesbank/CEPR
Conference “One year after the European Banking Union take-off,” the China International
Conference in Finance, the 1st IWH-FIN-FIRE Workshop on “Challenges to Financial Stability,”
the 2nd Conference on “Bank performance, financial stability and the real economy,” the 4th
MoFiR workshop on banking, and seminar participants at the Bank of England, Copenhagen Business
School, Erasmus University Rotterdam, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, Frankfurt
School of Finance and Management, Tilburg University, the University of Mannheim and University
of Ulm for valuable comments and suggestions. Imbierowicz gratefully acknowledges support from
the Center for Financial Frictions (FRIC), grant no. DNRF102.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2019 by Viral V. Acharya, Björn Imbierowicz, Sascha Steffen, and Daniel Teichmann. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Does the Lack of Financial Stability Impair the Transmission of Monetary Policy?
Viral V. Acharya, Björn Imbierowicz, Sascha Steffen, and Daniel Teichmann
NBER Working Paper No. 26479
November 2019
JEL No. E43,E58,G01,G21
ABSTRACT
We investigate the transmission of central bank liquidity to bank deposits and loan spreads in
Europe over the period from January 2006 to June 2010. We find evidence consistent with an
impaired transmission channel due to bank risk. Central bank liquidity does not translate into
lower loan spreads for high-risk banks for maturities beyond one year, even as it lowers deposit
spreads for both high-risk and low-risk banks. This adversely affects the balance sheets of high-
risk bank borrowers, leading to lower payouts, capital expenditures and employment. Overall, our
results suggest that banks’ capital constraints at the time of an easing of monetary policy pose a
challenge to the effectiveness of the bank-lending channel and the central bank's lender-of-last-
resort function.
Viral V. Acharya Sascha Steffen
Stern School of Business Frankfurt School of Finance & Management
New York University Germany
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-65 s.steffen@fs.de
New York, NY 10012
and CEPR Daniel Teichmann
and also NBER Goethe University Frankfurt
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu House of Finance
Theodor-W.-Adorno-Platz 3
Björn Imbierowicz Frankfurt 60323
Deutsche Bundesbank Germany
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14 Daniel.teichmann@hotmail.com
Germany
bjorn.imbierowicz@gmail.com

[…] it is nonetheless useful to recall again the limits of monetary policy. Monetary
policy transmission may be hampered at times where banks, in particular, but also
non-financial sectors need to repair their balance sheets. At times of uncertainty
and lack of confidence, liquidity may be hoarded rather than be put to use for
investment. These are cases where standard monetary policy may be “pushing on
a string” (in the words of John Maynard Keynes). These are also impediments that
need to be fundamentally addressed by regulators and government entities, via the
strengthening of financial balance sheets […]
(Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the ECB, May 2013)
1. Introduction
Monetary policy impacts the supply of bank credit, implying a bank-lending or risk-taking
channel of monetary policy.1 The key mechanism behind the bank-lending channel is agency
costs between banks and their financiers. The empirical approach in this literature, however,
usually ignores that banks fund their lending activities to a large extent with short-term
wholesale deposits and that monetary policy also affects deposit rates.2 However, the
connection between monetary policy and deposit rates is important as an impaired transmission
channel might originate in the funding market, for example, because some banks are
undercapitalized and face regulatory and economic constraints, even if monetary policy is
expansive. However, we know very little about how monetary policy affects the market for
corporate deposits. For example, does monetary policy transmit equally to deposit and loan
rates? Can the transmission of monetary policy still be impaired even if central banks provide
unlimited short-term liquidity to banks, effectively guaranteeing also (uninsured) wholesale
deposits? And, what are the implications for customers of banks, both lenders (i.e. depositors)
and borrowers? These are the main questions we try to address in this paper, thereby providing
evidence on the effectiveness of the bank-lending channel and on central banks as lenders of
last resort.
1 Researchers argue that (1) monetary policy affects loan supply by banks (Bernanke and Gertler, 1989, 1995;
Kashyap and Stein, 2000); (2) the reduction in loan supply is due to weak bank balance-sheet strength (Bernanke
and Blinder, 1988; Bernanke, 2007; Jiménez et al., 2012); and (3) a low monetary policy rate increases risk-taking
by banks (Jiménez et al., 2014; Ioannidou et al., 2015; Dell’Ariccia et al., 2017).
2 An important exception is Drechsler et al. (2017) who argue that the deposit channel of monetary policy can
explain a large part of the bank balance-sheet channel.
2

Our setting is the introduction of the full allotment of liquidity by the ECB in October
2008 as a response to the deepening of the global financial crisis. Prior to that date, the ECB
issued liquidity to banks in a competitive tender to meet an aggregate liquidity target. Liquidity
was allocated to the banking sector such that each bank could meet its reserve requirements.
After the default of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, the interbank markets became
severely stressed (Afonso, Kovner and Schoar, 2011) preventing an efficient allocation of
liquidity among banks. On October 8, 2008, the ECB began to fulfill all liquidity requests by
individual banks at the prevailing main refinancing (MRO) rate in exchange for collateral via
its main refinancing operations, which eventually provided substantial excess liquidity to the
banking system.
We construct a novel data set of deposit and loan transactions of the same banks during
the January 2, 2006 to June 30, 2010 period and investigate the impact of “aggregate” central
bank liquidity (i.e., the total liquidity in the banking system provided by the ECB) on spreads
of newly issued deposits and loans before and after the introduction of the full-allotment
liquidity concept, exploiting cross-sectional differences in the health of these European banks.
As the introductory quote suggests, during financial crises, the transmission of monetary policy
might be impaired due to the weak balance sheets of some banks. To the best of our knowledge,
we are the first to analyze where the transmission channel is impaired—the funding or the loan
market. This is important for understanding the role of central banks in addressing liquidity
versus solvency problems during crises, as well as for the design of crisis-time monetary policy
interventions.
We focus on deposit contracts in the first part of the paper and analyze how central bank
liquidity affects corporate deposit spreads for high- versus low-risk banks. There are two main
identification challenges: central bank liquidity might be endogenous and driven by current
market conditions; in addition, deposit spreads, as well as amounts, might be driven by demand
and supply effects in the market for corporate deposits. We address this in two ways. First, we
3