NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHY DO FIRMS BORROW DIRECTLY FROM NONBANKS?
Sergey Chernenko
Isil Erel
Robert Prilmeier
Working Paper 26458
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26458
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2019, Revised August 2020
We thank especially Rene Stulz for his valuable suggestions and also Gus De Franco, Daniel
Green, Rustom Irani, Ivan Ivanov, Jessica Jeffers, Candace Jens, Elena Loutskina, Ben
McCartney, Don Morgan, Philipp Schnabl, Jeremy Stein, Amir Sufi, Adi Sunderam, Mike
Weisbach, and seminar participants at 2019 AFA Meetings and Cavalcade, 2018 EFA Meetings,
2018 FDIC-JFSR Banking Research Conference, Boston College, Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland, HEC Paris, Koc University, NBER Corporate Finance Meeting, Peking University
GSM, Tsinghua PBCSF, Tulane University, and UMass Amherst for helpful comments. This
research has been funded in part by the National Center for the Middle Market. Emily
Braverman, Daniel Brennan, Alex Denman-Still, Yifeng Gu, Farrah Kharche, Yimeng Li,
Kateryna Parke, Bianca Pelletti, Mutian Rui, and Shiyao Zhang provided excellent research
assistance. An older version of this paper was distributed with the title “Nonbank Lending.”
Internet Appendix is available at
https://www.dropbox.com/s/jxy8iuzsy1fmxn5/NonbankLendingInternetAppendix.docx?dl=0.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Sergey Chernenko, Isil Erel, and Robert Prilmeier. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Why Do Firms Borrow Directly from Nonbanks?
Sergey Chernenko, Isil Erel, and Robert Prilmeier
NBER Working Paper No. 26458
November 2019
JEL No. G21,G23,G30,G32
ABSTRACT
Analyzing hand-collected credit agreements data for a random sample of middle-market firms
during 2010-2015, we find that a third of all loans is extended directly by nonbank financial
intermediaries. Nonbanks lend to less profitable and more levered firms that undergo larger
changes in size around loan origination. The probability of borrowing from a nonbank jumps by
34% as EBITDA falls below zero, an effect that is largely due to bank regulation. Controlling for
firm and loan characteristics, nonbank loans carry 190 basis points higher interest rates,
suggesting that access to funding, rather than prices, is why firms borrow from nonbanks.
Sergey Chernenko Robert Prilmeier
Krannert School of Management Tulane University
Purdue University A.B. Freeman School of Business
403 W. State Street 7 McAlister Drive
West Lafayette, IN 47907 New Orleans, LA 70118
schernen@purdue.edu rprilmei@tulane.edu
Isil Erel
Fisher College of Business
Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
erel@fisher.osu.edu
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26458

1. Introduction
Direct commercial and industrial (C&I) lending by nonbank financial intermediaries has
grown dramatically over the last ten years, generating popular press headlines such as “Who Needs
a Bank? Why Direct Lending is Surging”1 and “Bank Said No? Hedge Funds Fill a Void in
Lending”2. According to Preqin, over the 2009-2017 period, assets under management of direct
lending funds quadrupled from $39 to $181 billion.3 The growth in nonbank lending has generated
significant interest among industry participants, regulators, and academics in understanding the
causes of this growth as well as the costs and benefits of nonbank lending. Nevertheless, we still
know little about why firms borrow directly from nonbank lenders. Do nonbanks provide funding
to firms in market segments less served by banks? Are nonbanks able to offer more favorable
terms? Answers to these questions are important in light of the literature arguing that bank loans
have various advantages for borrowers due to banks’ expertise in screening and monitoring
informationally-opaque borrowers (e.g., Diamond 1984 and Fama 1985), as well as their efficiency
in dealing with borrowers in distress (Berlin and Loyes 1988 and Chemmanur and Fulghieri 1994).
In this paper, we examine a novel hand-collected data set of loans to middle-market firms
during the period of 2010-2015 to provide some of the first systematic evidence on firms’ decision
to borrow directly from nonbanks. Defined as firms with sales between $10 million and $1 billion,
middle-market firms make up the middle 50% of firm revenues in Compustat and account for
about one third of all U.S. jobs and of private sector GDP.4 Being subject to significant information
and moral hazard problems, these firms generally lack access to public debt markets (Faulkender
and Petersen 2005) and rely on privately placed debt with lenders who engage in significant
screening and monitoring (Diamond 1991a). At the same time, because they are listed on a stock
exchange, these firms are required to disclose their financial statements and credit agreements,
which we use in hand collecting the data.
1https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/why-direct-lending-is-a-booming-part-of-private-
debt/2019/12/18/db88e0ae-21cc-11ea-b034-de7dc2b5199b_story.html
2 https://dealbook.nytimes.com/2011/06/08/bank-said-no-hedge-funds-fill-a-void-in-lending/
3 https://docs.preqin.com/newsletters/pd/Preqin-Private-Debt-Spotlight-August-2018.pdf
4http://www.middlemarketcenter.org/Media/Documents/NCMM_InfoSheet_2017_web_updated.pdf
2

We start by documenting the prevalence of direct nonbank lending, cases where a nonbank
financial intermediary, referred to as a nonbank for brevity, negotiates directly with a borrower
rather than participating in a syndicate led by a commercial bank. Such nonbank lending is
widespread: about one third of all loans in our data were extended by nonbanks. These lenders
represent a variety of financial intermediaries including finance companies (FCOs), private
equity/venture capital (PE/VC) firms, hedge funds, bank-affiliated finance companies (bank
FCOs), investment banks, insurance companies, business development companies (BDCs), and
investment managers. Strikingly, we find that even for publicly-traded firms, standard databases
such as DealScan cover only about half of the bank and almost none of the direct nonbank loans.
We then ask who borrows from nonbanks and why. Compared to bank borrowers, nonbank
borrowers are less profitable, have higher leverage, higher stock return volatility, lower stock
returns prior to loan origination and experience larger changes in their book assets (either positive
or negative) around loan origination. Having negative EBITDA is a particularly important
determinant of borrowing from a nonbank. Concentrating on firms with EBITDA between -$5 and
+$5 million, firms with small negative EBITDA are 34% more likely to borrow from a nonbank
than are firms with small positive EBITDA. We argue that this result is likely driven by bank
regulation that makes it costly for banks to lend to negative EBITDA firms, as the Comptroller of
the Currency (OCC) Handbook classifies loans to unprofitable firms as “substandard” and these
substandard loans may result in larger loan loss allowances and lower CAMELS ratings.5 One
exception to the emphasis on profitability and cash flow coverage are asset-based loans, for which
the primary source of repayment is liquidation of accounts receivables and inventory. Consistent
with the distinction drawn by regulators, we also find that the effect of negative EBITDA on the
decision to borrow from a nonbank lender is concentrated among cash-flow loans.
To provide more direct evidence on the effects of bank regulation, we take advantage of
the variation in leniency across bank regulators documented by Agarwal et al (2014). They show
that federal regulators (e.g., the OCC) are significantly stricter in their examinations and assign
5 CAMELS are a rating system used by bank supervisors to evaluate banks on their capital adequacy, asset quality,
management, earnings, liquidity, and sensitivity. The OCC Handbook can be accessed at
https://www.occ.treas.gov/publications-and-resources/publications/comptrollers-handbook/index-comptrollers-
handbook.html. The FDIC examination manual can be accessed at
https://www.fdic.gov/regulations/safety/manual/manual_examinations_full.pdf
3