NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RULES AND COMMITMENT IN COMMUNICATION:
AN EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS
Guillaume R. Fréchette
Alessandro Lizzeri
Jacopo Perego
Working Paper 26404
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26404
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2019, Revised August 2021
We thank Andreas Blume, Elliot Lipnowski, Salvatore Nunnari, Santiago Oliveros, Sara
Shahanaghi, and Emmanuel Vespa for useful comments. We also thank the co-editor and three
referees for very helpful comments. Fréchette and Lizzeri gratefully acknowledge financial
support from the National Science Foundation via grant SES-1558857. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Guillaume R. Fréchette, Alessandro Lizzeri, and Jacopo Perego. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Rules and Commitment in Communication: an Experimental Analysis
Guillaume R. Fréchette, Alessandro Lizzeri, and Jacopo Perego
NBER Working Paper No. 26404
October 2019, Revised August 2021
JEL No. C92,D7,D8,D9
ABSTRACT
We study the role of commitment in communication and its interactions with rules, which
determine whether information is verifiable. Our framework nests models of cheap talk,
information disclosure, and Bayesian persuasion. It predicts that commitment has opposite effects
on information transmission under the two alternative rules. We leverage these contrasting forces
to experimentally establish that subjects react to commitment in line with the main qualitative
implications of the theory. Quantitatively, not all subjects behave as predicted. We show that a
form of commitment blindness leads some senders to overcommunicate when information is
verifiable and undercommunicate when it is not. This generates an unpredicted gap in
information transmission across the two rules, suggesting a novel role for verifiable information
in practice.
Guillaume R. Fréchette Jacopo Perego
New York University Columbia University
Department of Economics 3022 Broadway Uris 616
19 West 4th Street New York, NY 10027
New York, NY 10012 jp3754@columbia.edu
guillaume.frechette@nyu.edu
Alessandro Lizzeri
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
lizzeri@princeton.edu

1 Introduction
The goal of this paper is to experimentally study the effects of rules and commitment in com-
munication. Inouranalysis,rulesarerestrictionsonlanguagethatdeterminewhetheranagent
canfreelymisreportwhatsheknowsorwhethershecanonlyuseverifiableinformation. Com-
mitment captures the extent to which the agent can communicate according to predetermined
protocols. Any communication environment potentially can be affected by the degree of com-
mitment and by the nature of the rules governing communication. For instance, models of
cheaptalk,informationdisclosure,andBayesianpersuasiondifferfromeachotherinwaysthat
lead back to differences in rules and commitment. In many concrete applications, it is difficult
to measure the exact degree of commitment available to an agent or the extent to which rules
are enforced. Yet, rules and commitment do vary significantly in practice depending on the
context and observables such as the frequency of communication. Thus, studying their effects
oncommunicationisanaturalquestion.
We present a simple model of communication under partial commitment and consider two
alternative rules: verifiable and unverifiable information. The focus on partial commitment
is a key feature of our analysis: it allows us to nest many existing communication models
under the same umbrella and experimentally test key qualitative predictions about the role of
commitment in communication. The contrast between verifiable and unverifiable information
further enriches our analysis, as the main comparative statics have opposite signs under these
two alternative rules. Our main results indicate clear treatment effects in line with the main
qualitative predictions of the theory. We also uncover important quantitative deviations from
thetheory. Specifically,wefindthatrulesmatterinunpredictedways;weproposeasystematic
rationalizationforthesedepartures.
Weconsiderasender-receivermodelwithbinarystatesandactions. Thesenderwantsthere-
ceiver to choose a high action, whereas the receiver wishes to match the state. There are three
stages. In the commitment stage, the sender publicly commits to an information structure,
which is a map between states and messages. Under unverifiable information, the sender can
freelymisreportherprivateinformation. Underverifiableinformation,shecanonlyconcealit.
Intherevisionstage,thesenderlearnsthestateandcanprivatelyrevisethechoseninformation
structure. In the guessing stage, the receiver observes a message and chooses an action. The
message is generated with probability ρ from the commitment stage and with the remaining
probability from the revision stage. We view the probability ρ as capturing the sender’s com-
mitment power: the higher ρ is, the higher the probability that the sender will not be able to
1

revise her strategy after learning the state and thus, the higher the extent to which she is com-
mittedtoherinitialcommunication. Anobservablepredictionofthemodelisthatvariationsin
commitmentpowergenerateoutcomesthatarequalitativelydifferentdependingonthecommu-
nication rule. For example, an increase in the sender’s commitment power should increase the
amount of information conveyed under unverifiable information, whereas it should decrease it
under verifiable information. When the sender can fully commit, these two scenarios coincide
and the information conveyed in equilibrium is independent of the communication rule. We
exploitthesepredictionstoexperimentallytesttheroleofcommitmentincommunication.
Thisframeworkcapturestheflavorsofawidevarietyofmodelsofcommunication,including
modelsofcheaptalk(CrawfordandSobel,1982;GreenandStokey,2007),disclosure(Gross-
man,1981;Milgrom,1981;Jovanovic,1982;Okuno-Fujiwaraetal.,1990),andBayesianper-
suasion(KamenicaandGentzkow,2011). Ithelpsorganizeouranalysisintwoways. First,the
comparison across models generates contrasting predictions that go to the heart of the strate-
gictensionofcommunicationundercommitment. Asweillustrateinthepaper,thesecontrasts
discipline which explanations can be used to rationalize potential departures from the theory.
Second, the framework itself informs a parsimonious experimental design. In our treatments,
we change two variables—the degree of commitment ρ and the verifiability of information—
whileleavingtheunderlyingstructureofthegameunchanged.
We begin by establishing several patterns in the data that are consistent with the key quali-
tative predictions of the theory. Specifically, we present two main sets of findings. First, we
showthat,onaverage,bothsendersandreceiversreacttocommitment. Forsenders,weexploit
within-treatment variation to show that between the commitment and the revision stages, their
average behavior changes in the direction predicted by the theory. When information is un-
verifiable,sendersrevealmoreinformationinthecommitmentstagethanintherevisionstage.
When information is verifiable, this ranking is reversed, as predicted by the theory. For re-
ceivers, we exploit across-treatment variation to show that, as commitment increases, they be-
come more responsive to information from the commitment stage. These reactions are consis-
tentwiththefactthatinformationconveyedinthecommitmentstageismoremeaningfulwhen
the level of commitment is higher. For our second main finding, we test how increasing com-
mitment power changes the amount of information conveyed by the senders. In line with the
theory,wefindthatthisamountincreaseswithcommitmentintreatmentswithunverifiablein-
formation and decreases with commitment in treatments with verifiable information. Further-
more,wefindthatverifiabilityhasthepredictedeffectofincreasingtheamountofinformation
conveyed by senders. Overall, these strong treatment effects validate the qualitative implica-
2