NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
COMMONALITY IN CREDIT SPREAD CHANGES:
DEALER INVENTORY AND INTERMEDIARY DISTRESS
Zhiguo He
Paymon Khorrami
Zhaogang Song
Working Paper 26494
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26494
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2019
We are grateful to Yu An, Jennie Bai, Jack Bao, Florian Nagler, Yi Li, Arvind Krishnamurthy,
Fabrice Tourre, and Alex Zhou, as well as seminar participants at Deakin University, Fordham
University, Georgetown University, Johns Hopkins University, Monash University, University of
Maryland, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, and University of Melbourne for helpful
discussions. Zhiguo He acknowledges financial support from the Fama-Miller Center at the
University of Chicago, Booth School of Business. Zhaogang Song is grateful to the Supplemental
Research Support Fund of the Johns Hopkins Carey Business School. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Zhiguo He, Paymon Khorrami, and Zhaogang Song. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Commonality in Credit Spread Changes: Dealer Inventory and Intermediary Distress
Zhiguo He, Paymon Khorrami, and Zhaogang Song
NBER Working Paper No. 26494
November 2019
JEL No. G12,G22,G23
ABSTRACT
Two intermediary-based factors - a broad financial distress measure and a dealer corporate bond
inventory measure - explain about 50% of the puzzling common variation of credit spread
changes beyond canonical structural factors. A simple model, in which intermediaries facing
margin constraints absorb supply of assets from customers, accounts for the documented
explanatory power and delivers further implications with empirical support.
First, whereas bond sorts on margin-related variables (credit rating and leverage) produce
monotonic patterns in loadings on intermediary factors, non-margin-related sorts produce no
pattern. Second, dealer inventory co-moves with corporate-credit assets only, whereas
intermediary distress co-moves even with non-corporate-credit assets. Third, dealers' inventory
increases, and bond prices decline, in response to instrumented bond sales by institutional
investors, using severe downgrades ("fallen angels'') and disaster-related insurance losses as IVs.
Zhiguo He Zhaogang Song
University of Chicago The Johns Hopkins Carey
Booth School of Business Business School
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue 100 International Drive
Chicago, IL 60637 Baltimore, MD 21202
and NBER zsong8@jhu.edu
zhiguo.he@chicagobooth.edu
Paymon Khorrami
Imperial College Business School
South Kensington Campus
London, SW7 2AZ, UK
p.khorrami@imperial.ac.uk

1 Introduction
The commonality in excess variation of credit spread changes beyond credit risk factors,
as documented in Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Martin (2001) (hereafter CGM), is one
of the canonical puzzles in asset pricing of credit risk. A key feature of U.S. corporate
bond market is that broker-dealers serve as intermediaries of almost all transactions and
use their balance sheets to take inventory and absorb bond supply from clients. Meanwhile,
the recent intermediary asset pricing literature has argued that intermediary constraints are
important determinants of asset prices (see He and Krishnamurthy (2018) for a survey). In
this paper, we provide novel evidence that two intermediary factors account for about half
of the puzzling common variation in credit spread changes. These factors are (1) a distress
measure that captures constraints of the entire intermediary sector and (2) an inventory
factor that captures the inventory held by dealers specializing in corporate bonds.
To construct the dealer inventory factor, we use the enhanced TRACE database of cor-
porate bond transactions with untruncated trade size and anonymous dealer codes. Our
measure of dealer inventory is computed using cumulative order flows (in par value) of
transactions between customers and dealers. Using transaction records to construct inven-
tory poses several practical difficulties, such as the unobservable level of dealers’ bond inven-
tory at the beginning of our sample period (2005:Q1), changes of dealer inventory unrelated
to transactions (such as bond expiration), and missing primary market transactions from
issuing firms to underwriting dealers. We address these issues carefully and then construct
a quarterly measure of inventory by aggregating cumulative order flows of all dealers.
Our measure of intermediary distress combines two existing measures that have be shown
to capture the severity of broad intermediation frictions. The first is a balance sheet leverage
measureproposedbyHe,Kelly,andManela(2017)(hereafterHKM)forbankholdingcompa-
nies of primary dealers recognized by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY); and
the second is market-price-based “noise” measure proposed by Hu, Pan, and Wang (2013)
(hereafter HPW), i.e., the root mean squared distance between the market yields of Treasury
securities and the hypothetical yields implied from yield curve models. Our measure of inter-
mediary distress is computed as the first principal component of these two measures, meant
to parsimoniously capture the capital constraints on the aggregate intermediary sector.
Following CGM, our analysis starts by extracting residuals of individual-bond time series
regressions of credit spread changes on seven structural factors. We assign each of the
residual series into one of 15 cohorts based on time-to-maturity and rating, compute an
average residual for each cohort, and extract the principal components of these 15 cohort-
level residuals. Similar to CGM, but with a comprehensive data set of corporate bond
1

transactions in recent years, we find that about 80 percent of the variation can be explained
by the first PC, indicating a large systematic component that is not captured by structural
credit factors.
As one of the main contributions of this paper, we link our two intermediary factors –
the intermediary distress and dealer inventory factors – to this common variation of credit
spread changes. We find that the two intermediary factors explain 53% of the variation of
the first PC. More broadly, intermediary distress and dealer inventory explain 48% of the
total variation of credit spread residuals. About 2/3 of this explanatory power attributable
to intermediary distress and 1/3 to dealer inventory. Economically, one-standard-deviation
increases of dealer inventory and intermediary distress are associated with quarterly credit
spread increases of about 3-30 and 5-60 basis points, respectively. We further show that the
effectismonotonicallydecreasinginbondratingsforbothintermediaryfactors, animportant
empirical pattern that is relevant to our later theoretical modeling.
This strong explanatory power is robust to many alternative specifications.1 Given
widespread interpretations of common non-structural credit spread movements as liquidity-
related, we are particularly interested in robustness to including transaction-cost-based liq-
uidity factors studied in Dick-Nielsen, Feldhu¨tter, and Lando (2012) and Bao, Pan, and
Wang (2011). For instance, in Section 3.2, we show that the change of illiquidity measure
in Dick-Nielsen, Feldhu¨tter, and Lando (2012) exhibit non-significant correlations with our
two intermediary factors, and can only explain about 0.6%-3% of common variation of CGM
residuals.
Given the low correlation between distress and inventory, our empirical results indicate a
two-factor structure of the common unexplained credit spread variation. We hence present a
simple two-agent equilibrium model with hedgers and intermediaries trading multiple assets.
Hedgersshouldbethoughtofasanagglomerationofinstitutionalinvestorsthatfaceliquidity
shocks, e.g., insurance companies and pension funds. Intermediaries absorb supply of bonds
coming from hedgers, but are limited in their liquidity provision by a balance sheet con-
straint due to margin or capital requirements. This model features a single dominant factor,
the Lagrange multiplier on the balance sheet constraint, that governs all non-fundamental
movements in asset prices, consistent with our empirical evidence and that of CGM.
This single factor is endogenously driven by two types of shocks – hedger liquidity shocks
1Ourresultsarealsorobusttousingcohortsbasedonmaturityandleverage;excludingthe2008financial
crisisperiod; measuringdealerinventorybymarketvalue; usingonlylargedealers’inventory; doingallanal-
ysisatthemonthlyfrequency;matchingthehorizonofcreditspreadchangesandinnovationsofintermediary
factors; and controlling for the Adrian, Etula, and Muir (2014) measure, TED spread (difference between
three-month Libor and T-bill rates), and P´astor and Stambaugh (2003) stock liquidity factor.
2