NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DON’T TAKE THEIR WORD FOR IT:
THE MISCLASSIFICATION OF BOND MUTUAL FUNDS
Huaizhi Chen
Lauren Cohen
Umit Gurun
Working Paper 26423
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26423
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2019, Revised August 2020
We would like to thank Robert Battalio, Nick Bollen, Robert Burn, Geoffrey Booth, John
Campbell, Bruce Carlin, Tom Chang, Christine Cuny, Alex Dontoh, Mark Egan, Ilan Guttman,
Yael Hochberg, Samuel Hartzmark, Alan Isenberg, Robert Jackson, Christian Julliard, Oguzhan
Karakas, Craig Lewis, Dong Lou, Tim Loughran, Chris Malloy, Bill McDonald, Rabih
Moussawi, Bugra Ozel, Jeff Pontiff, Joshua Ronen, Nick Roussanov, Stephen Ryan, David
Solomon, Tarik Umar, Ingrid Werner, Bob Whaley, Paul Wildermuth, Paul Zarowin and seminar
participants at Drexel University, the London School of Economics, New York University, the
University of Notre Dame, Rice University, Vanderbilt University, the 2020 Conference on the
Experimental and Behavioral Aspects of Financial Markets, the 2020 Consortium for Asset
Management Conference, and the 2020 Review of Asset Pricing Studies Winter Conference for
helpful comments and suggestions. We also thank James Ng for providing valuable research
assistance. We are grateful for funding from the National Science Foundation, SciSIP 1535813.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Huaizhi Chen, Lauren Cohen, and Umit Gurun. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Don’t Take Their Word For It: The Misclassification of Bond Mutual Funds
Huaizhi Chen, Lauren Cohen, and Umit Gurun
NBER Working Paper No. 26423
November 2019, Revised August 2020
JEL No. G11,G12,G23,G24,G4,K0
ABSTRACT
We provide evidence that bond fund managers misclassify their holdings, and that these
misclassifications have a real and significant impact on investor capital flows. In particular, many
funds report more investment grade assets than are actually held in their portfolios to important
information intermediaries, making these funds appear significantly less risky. This results in
pervasive misclassification across the universe of US fixed income mutual funds. The problem is
widespread - resulting in up to 31.4%of funds being misclassified with safer profiles, when
compared against their true, publicly reported holdings. “Misclassified funds” – i.e., those that
hold risky bonds, but claim to hold safer bonds –appear to on-average outperform the low-risk
funds in their peer groups. Within category groups, “Misclassified funds” moreover receive
higher Morningstar Ratings (significantly more Morningstar Stars) and higher investor flows due
to this perceived on-average outperformance. However, when we correctly classify them based
on their actual risk, these funds are mediocre performers. These Misclassified funds also
significantly underperform precisely when junk-bonds crash in returns. Misreporting is stronger
following several quarters of large negative returns.
Huaizhi Chen Umit Gurun
University of Notre Dame University of Texas at Dallas
238 Mendoza College of Business School of Management
hchen11@nd.edu 800 W Campbell Rd. SM41
75080 Richardson, TX
Lauren Cohen umit.gurun@utdallas.edu
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 273
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
lcohen@hbs.edu

I. Introduction
Information acquisition is costly. However, the exact cost of collecting any piece
of information depends on timing, location, a person’s private information set, etc. This
is in addition to the idiosyncratic characteristics and complexities of the information signal
and of the asset itself. External agents – both public and private - have emerged to fill
this role and reduce the cost of information acquisition. However, the value of these
agents depends on how much additional information provision is needed. To this end,
delegated portfolio management is the predominant way in which investors are being
exposed to both equity and fixed income assets. With over 16 trillion dollars invested,
the US mutual fund market, for instance, is made up of over 5,000 delegated funds and
growing. While the SEC has mandated disclosure of many aspects of mutual fund pricing
and attributes, different asset classes are better (and worse) served by this current
disclosure level. Investors have thus turned to private information intermediaries to help
fill these gaps.
In this paper, we show that for one of the largest markets in the world, US fixed
income debt securities, this has led to large information gaps that have been filled by
strategic-response information provision by funds. In particular, we show that the reliance
on (and by) the information intermediary has resulted in systematic misreporting by
funds. This misreporting has been persistent, widespread, and appears strategic – casting
misreporting funds in a significantly more positive position than is actually the case.
Moreover, the misreporting has a real impact on investor behavior and mutual fund
success.
Specifically, we focus on the fixed income mutual fund market. The entirety of the
fixed income market is similarly sized to equites (e.g., 40 trillion dollars compared with
1

30 trillion dollars in equity assets worldwide). However, bonds are both fundamentally
different as an asset cash-flow claim, along with having different attributes in delegated
portfolios. While equity funds hold predominantly the same security type (e.g., the
common stock of IBM, Apple, Tesla, etc.), each of a fixed income funds’ issues differ in
yield, duration, covenants, etc. – even across issues of the same underlying firm - making
them more bespoke and unique. Moreover, the average active equity fund holds roughly
100 positions, while the average active fixed income fund holds over 600 issues. For
example, in Figure 1, we include an excerpt from the AZL Enhanced Bond Index Fund’s
N-Q Schedule of Investments from September 30, 2018.1 The fund held over 700 issues,
including 7 different bonds of McDonald’s Corp – each with differing yields, durations,
and callable features. Thus, while the SEC mandates equivalent disclosure of portfolio
constituents for equity and bond mutual funds, this data is more complex in both
processing and aggregating to fund-level measures for fixed income.
This has led information intermediaries to bridge this gap, providing a level of
aggregation and summary on the general riskiness, duration, etc. of fixed income funds
upon which investors rely. We focus on the largest of such intermediaries that provides
data on categorization and riskiness at the fund level – Morningstar, Inc. In particular,
we compare fund profiles provided by the intermediary (Morningstar) to investors against
the funds’ actual portfolio holdings. We find significant misclassification across the
universe of all bond funds. This results in up to 31.4% of all funds in recent years, and
is pervasive across the funds being reported as overly safe by Morningstar.
1 The full filing, including all eleven pages of holdings, is available here:
https:www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1091439/000119312518338086/d615188dnq.htm.
2