NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LISTING ADVANTAGES AROUND THE WORLD
Kenichi Ueda
Somnath Sharma
Working Paper 26446
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26446
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2019
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and should not be attributed to any
institutions that the authors have been affiliated with, nor of the National Bureau of Economic
Research. This work is supported by the GraSPP Research Grant EGRM-20160 and the CARF at
the University of Tokyo. This paper is also conducted as a part of the project “Study on Corporate
Finance and Firm Dynamics” undertaken at the Research Institute of Economy, Trade and
Industry (RIETI). We are grateful for helpful comments from Yishay Yafeh and participants of
the NBER-TCER-CEPR (TRIO) Conference at the University of Tokyo.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Kenichi Ueda and Somnath Sharma. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Listing Advantages Around the World
Kenichi Ueda and Somnath Sharma
NBER Working Paper No. 26446
November 2019
JEL No. E22,G32
ABSTRACT
Using the firm-level data of 33 countries over 10 years (from 2008-2017), we find that the listed
firms, on average, have lower marginal products of capital (measured by return on assets) than
the unlisted firms in many countries. This implies that the listed firms face less financial
constraints. Moreover, we investigate the institutional factors that exacerbate or mitigate the
listing advantages across the countries. The listing advantages seem enlarged with better
corporate governance and narrowed with stronger creditor's rights.
Kenichi Ueda
The University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo Bunkyo-ku
Tokyo 113-0033
Japan
ueda.econ@gmail.com
Somnath Sharma
University of Tokyo

1 Introduction
Using the firm-level data of 33 countries of 10 years (from 2008–2017) for both listed and
unlisted firms, we find that the listed firms, on average, have lower marginal products of
capital than the unlisted firms in many countries. We call it listing advantages.
For each country, we estimate the listing advantages by the average treatment effect on
the return on asset (ROA) using the propensity score matching technique. We find that, for
the majority of the countries in our study, listing lowers ROA, which is proportional to the
marginal products of capital under typical assumptions on production functions. In other
words, the marginal product of capital of the listed firms are lower than those of the unlisted
firms that have similar characteristics.
This finding supports a simple theory, which says that the listing firms should be less
financially constrained. As long as diminishing marginal returns prevail, any financial con-
straints limiting investments raise the marginal product of capital of a firm more than its
unconstrained level. Indeed, in many countries, listing is negatively correlated with debt-to-
asset ratio, implying that equity finance works as a source of financing. And, firms maintain
lower leverage, which makes listed firms less likely to hit the prohibitive borrowing con-
straints.1
Next, we investigate the institutional factors behind different levels of listing advantages
across countries. We find that better corporate governance tends to improve the listing ad-
vantages, while stronger creditor’s rights, and perhaps easiness of starting up business, seem
to narrow them.
Although cross-country studies are rare, several country-specific studies, so far, identify
1Ueda et al. (2019) more robustly find these results in a detailed study focusing on Japanese firms.
1

the advantages of listing. Ueda et al. (2019), using Japanese firm-level data over the period
1995–2014, find that listing can mitigate the financial constraints of firms. Compared to
a similar unlisted firm, a listed firm has a lower marginal product of capital, especially in
recessions. Schoubben and Van Hulle (2011), using the Belgian firm-level data (from 1992
to 2005) with consolidated financial statements, find that listing provides more flexibility in
financing and reduces the financial constraints. Gilje and Taillard (2016), based on panel
regressions, show that listed natural gas firms in the U.S. have a higher sensitivity to gas
price movements (i.e., growth opportunities) than the unlisted rivals in the same industry.
The difference is more pronounced in shale gas investments, which are more capital inten-
sive. For British firms, Saunders and Steffen (2011) find that the listed firms enjoy lower
bank loan rates. In their European cross-country study, Mortal and Reisel (2013) report
that the listed firms have higher investment sensitivity on growth opportunities (proxied by
salesgrowth)andsuchtendenciesarehigherforcountrieswithmoredevelopedstockmarkets.
Other authors find that listing results in tightening of financial constraints. Stein (1989),
argue that it may be possible theoretically as a result of the worsening of agency problems
under sparse ownership. For the U.S. firms, Asker et al. (2014), show that U.S.-listed firms
are more short-termist in nature, that is, they are less sensitive to growth opportunities
(proxied by sales growth). Sheen (2016), also shows that the U.S. listing firms in chemical
industries have a lower sensitivity of capacity investment on demand shocks.
Mixed evidences are sometimes reported by several authors. For British firms, Brav
(2009), shows that listed firms have lower leverage, but with lower fluctuations in the capital
structure. In their European cross country study, Goyal et al. (2011) also report that listed
firms have lower leverage, but with more active management on leverage. They find that this
difference between the listed and the unlisted firms are more pronounced in countries with
stronger creditor’s rights. For Japanese firms, Orihara (2014) presents univariate pictures
2