NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EFFECTS OF MANDATORY ENERGY EFFICIENCY DISCLOSURE IN HOUSING
MARKETS
Erica Myers
Steven L. Puller
Jeremy D. West
Working Paper 26436
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26436
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2019
We thank Austin Energy and the Austin/Central Texas Realty Information Services for sharing
data. We also thank Filia Arga for providing excellent research assistance. This work benefited
from helpful comments from Hunt Allcott, Matthew Backus, Joshua Blonz, Judd Boomhower,
Richard Carson, Lucas Davis, Tatyana Deryugina, Meredith Fowlie, Joshua Graff Zivin, Matthew
Harding, Koichiro Ito, Mark Jacobsen, Ryan Kellogg, David Rapson, Jan Rouwendal, James
Sallee, and seminar participants at the Midwest Energy Fest, Resources for the Future, UC-
Berkeley, UC-Davis, UC-San Diego, UC-Santa Cruz, University of Chicago, University of
Maryland, and the Urban Economics Association. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Erica Myers, Steven L. Puller, and Jeremy D. West. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Effects of Mandatory Energy Efficiency Disclosure in Housing Markets
Erica Myers, Steven L. Puller, and Jeremy D. West
NBER Working Paper No. 26436
November 2019
JEL No. D83,K32,L15,Q48,R31
ABSTRACT
Mandatory disclosure policies are increasingly prevalent despite sparse evidence that they
improve market outcomes. We study the effects of requiring home sellers to provide buyers with
certified audits of residential energy efficiency. Using similar nearby homes as a comparison
group, we find this requirement increases price capitalization of energy efficiency and encourages
energy-saving residential investments. We present additional evidence characterizing the market
failure as symmetrically incomplete information, which is ameliorated by government
intervention. More generally, we formalize and provide empirical support for seller ignorance as
a motivation for disclosure policies in markets with bilaterally incomplete information about
quality.
Erica Myers Jeremy D. West
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Department of Economics
and E2e University of California at Santa Cruz
ecmyers@illinois.edu 1156 High Street
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
Steven L. Puller westj@ucsc.edu
Department of Economics
Texas A&M University
3046 Allen
College Station, TX 77843-4228
and NBER
puller@econmail.tamu.edu

Disclaimer
This report was prepared as an account of work with the City of Austin
and Austin Energy. Austin Energy provided the authors access to the data
used in the study in consideration for research that may improve efficiency,
reduce cost, support adoption of new technologies, launch new products and
servicesandinstitutebestpracticestobetterserveAustinEnergycustomers.
The study was conducted independently of Austin Energy. Austin Energy
had no involvement in the design, analysis, and interpretation of the data;
in writing of the report; or in the decision to submit for publication. Neither
the City of Austin nor Austin Energy, nor any of their employees, make any
warranty, express or implied, or assumes any legal liability or responsibility
for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of any information, apparatus,
product, or process disclosed, or represents that its use would not infringe
privately owned rights. Reference in this report to any specific commercial
product, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or
otherwise does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recom-
mendation, or favoring by the City of Austin or Austin Energy. The views
and opinions of authors expressed herein do not necessarily state or reflect
those of the City of Austin, the Austin/Central Texas Realty Information
Services (ACTRIS), or Austin Energy. The authors have no material finan-
cial interests related to this study.

1 Introduction
Government-mandated information disclosure is increasingly used as a policy intended to
improve the ability of consumers to make optimal decisions in the face of imperfect informa-
tion about product quality. Policymakers view disclosure requirements as a lower-cost and
less-intrusive means of improving market efficiency compared to alternative forms of regu-
lation. As a result, such requirements are a significant policy component in many economic
sectors including health care, education, and finance, among others (Hastings and Weinstein,
2008; Bollinger et al., 2011; Seira et al., 2017).1 In theory, mandatory disclosure should im-
prove the quality of goods and services by correcting for information-related market failures.
In practice, the literature finds minimal evidence supporting the efficacy of disclosure pro-
grams at improving market outcomes (see Winston, 2008; Loewenstein et al., 2014; Ho et al.,
2019). Reconciling the theoretical guidance with the empirical evidence necessitates an im-
proved characterization of which information frictions are effectively corrected by disclosure
mandates, so that policies can be better-targeted to address market failures.
This paper focuses on one setting where mandated disclosure may play a crucial role:
investment in energy efficiency in housing markets. Prominent analyses such as McKinsey
& Company (2009) point to substantial unexploited investment opportunities that would
pay for themselves through energy savings within a short period, encouraging global cli-
mate mitigation plans to depend on energy efficiency to deliver more than forty percent
of targeted emissions reductions (International Energy Agency, 2015). Towards this end,
numerous jurisdictions have enacted mandatory residential energy efficiency audit and dis-
closure requirements in recent years, including many European countries, at least ten states
in the U.S., and dozens of municipalities.2
The success of these programs in combating climate change ultimately depends on their
ability to exploit cost-effective opportunities to improve energy efficiency, which in turn
depends on the underlying market failure. If the “Energy Efficiency Gap” in residential in-
vestmentsisprimarilyattributabletobehavioralorinformation-drivenmarketfrictions, then
1SeveralUnitedStatespolicieswithmandatorydisclosurerequirementsincludethe(1)PatientProtection
and Affordable Care Act, (2) No Children Left Behind initiative, (3) Credit Card Accountability Responsi-
bility and Disclosure Act, (4) Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform, and (5) Consumer Protection Act.
2Forexample,theOregonian(January,5,2018)statesthatPortland’spolicy“...isintendedtogivebuyers
a better idea of maintenance costs in the long run.” Programs in Massachusetts and Austin, Texas are
alsomotivatedbyadesiretoincreaseresidentialenergyefficiencyinvestments. TheBostonGlobe(April23,
2018)wrotethatMassachusetts’program“couldspurconsumerstoreplacetheirwindowsorsealtheirdoors,
for example, reducing energy consumption.” And, Austin Energy’s website states that, “ECAD promotes
energy efficiency by identifying potential energy savings in homes, businesses and multifamily properties.”
1