NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RULES WITHOUT COMMITMENT:
REPUTATION AND INCENTIVES
Alessandro Dovis
Rishabh Kirpalani
Working Paper 26451
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26451
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2019
We thank Mark Aguiar, Gadi Barlevy, John Geanakoplos, Ben Hébert, Juanpa Nicolini, Erik
Madsen, Ramon Marimon, Giuseppe Moscarini, Guillermo Ordonez, Chris Phelan, Facundo
Piguillem, Aleh Tsyvinski, and Fabrizio Zilibotti for valuable comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Alessandro Dovis and Rishabh Kirpalani. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Rules without Commitment: Reputation and Incentives
Alessandro Dovis and Rishabh Kirpalani
NBER Working Paper No. 26451
November 2019
JEL No. E6
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the optimal design of rules in a dynamic model when there is a time
inconsistency problem and uncertainty about whether the policy maker can commit to follow the
rule ex post. The policy maker can either be a commitment type, which can always commit to
follow rules, or an optimizing type, which sequentially decides whether to follow rules or not.
This type is unobservable to private agents, who learn about it through the actions of the policy
maker. Higher beliefs that the policy maker is the commitment type (the policy maker's
reputation) help promote good behavior by private agents. We show that in a large class of
economies, preserving uncertainty about the policy maker's type is preferable from an ex-ante
perspective. If the initial reputation is not too high, the optimal rule is the strictest one that is
incentive compatible for the optimizing type. We show that reputational considerations imply that
the optimal rule is more lenient than the one that would arise in a static environment. Moreover,
opaque rules are preferable to transparent ones if reputation is high enough.
Alessandro Dovis
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
The Ronald O. Perelman Center
for Political Science and Economics
133 South 36th Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
adovis@upenn.edu
Rishabh Kirpalani
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI 53706
rishabh.kirpalani@wisc.edu

1 Introduction
Since Kydland and Prescott (1977), a large literature in macroeconomics has grappled
withtheproblemofdesigningpolicieswhentherearetimeinconsistencyproblems. Rules
areoftenproposedasasolutiontothetimeinconsistencyproblem. Theimplicitassump-
tion is that society can credibly impose rules on policy makers and that policy makers
can commit to follow these rules. However, at the time when rules and regulations are
formulated, there is often substantial uncertainty about whether policy makers can resist
the temptation to deviate ex-post from the stated rules if it is optimal for them to do so.
This uncertainty is only resolved over time as the actions of policy makers are observed.
Thecombinationofuncertaintyandlearninggeneratesreputationalincentivesforpolicy
makers.
The key question motivating this paper is how should rules be designed taking into
account both the uncertainty about the policy makers’ ability to follow the rules ex-post
and their reputational building incentives. To do this we study the optimal design of
policy rules in a dynamic game between policy makers and private agents in which the
policymaker’sabilitytocommitisprivateinformation. Wedefinethepublicbeliefsabout
the ability of the policy maker to commit as the policy maker’s reputation. The main re-
sultofourpaperisthatiftheinitialreputationislowenough,theoptimalruleshouldbe
designed to preserve uncertainty in future periods. This is implemented by introducing
leniency in policy. In contrast, if the initial reputation is high, the optimal rule should
promote learning about this type. We also show that designing opaque rules can be ben-
eficial when reputation is high since they help preserve uncertainty without the need to
introduceleniencyinrules.
Theinsightsfromourtheorycanbeappliedtomanyrelevantpolicydesignquestions
including the design of central bank mandates, fiscal rules in federal governments, and
financialregulation. Consider,forinstance,theoptimaldesignoffinancialregulation. As
is well understood, in a large class of economies, if regulators can commit, a no-bailout
policyisoptimalinordertopreventexcessiverisktakingbyfinancialinstitutionsex-ante.
In particular, creditors should be forced to take losses in the event of default (bail-in). If
the reputation of regulators is not sufficiently high, our analysis suggests that allowing
for partial bailouts in equilibrium is optimal. We show that, contrary to conventional
wisdom,bailoutsalongtheequilibriumpatharenecessarytodisciplinefuturerisk-taking
offinancialfirmsastheypreserveuncertaintyaboutthetypeofthepolicymaker.
Weconsideradynamicmodelwiththreetypesofagents: aruledesigner,policymak-
ers,andprivateagents. Theruledesignerchoosesarule,whichconsistsofapolicyrecom-
mendation to policy makers, in order to maximize the expected social welfare. After the
rule is chosen, the private agents take their actions and, finally, the policy maker chooses
2

a policy. As in Barro (1986), the policy maker can be one of two types: a commitment
type, which always follows the recommendation, or an optimizing type, which follows
the recommendation only if it is sequentially optimal to do so. This type is unobservable
to both the rule designer and private agents. We define the beliefs that the policy maker
isthecommitmenttypeasitsreputation.
We present two leading examples of our framework. The first is a model similar to
Barro and Gordon (1983b) in which the rule designer must choose the optimal inflation
target. The second is a banking model in the spirit of Kareken and Wallace (1978) where
there is a trade-off between providing incentives to bankers for taking appropriate levels
ofriskex-anteandbailingthemoutex-posttoavoidacostlydefault. Inthiscasetherule
designerchoosesanoptimalbailoutpolicy.
Wefirststudyastaticproblem. Sincethereisnowaytoincentivizetheoptimizingtype
tochooseanypolicyotherthantheex-postoptimalone,thebesttheruledesignercando
is get the commitment type to follow the Ramsey policy. We show that under certain
conditions, uncertainty is beneficial in that the expected social welfare is higher when the
private agents and the rule designer are uncertain about the type of the policy maker
relativetothecaseinwhichthistypeisrevealedrightbeforetheruledesignerchoosesthe
rule. Thatis,theruledesigner’sstaticvalueisconcaveinthepolicymaker’sreputation.1
This is because under our assumptions there are decreasing returns to reputation. In the
contextofthebailoutexample,anincreaseinreputationincentivizesbankstotakeonless
risk,andthediscipliningeffectofreputationisgreaterwhenreputationislowandbanks
aretakingonalotofrisk.
We then consider a repeated version of this policy game. Unlike in the static model,
the optimizing type now cares about its reputation in the following period as it affects
the actions of the private agents. Thus, it can be incentivized to choose policies other
than its static best response. We show that when reputation is low, the rule designer
wants to preserve uncertainty about the type of the policy maker. The optimal rule in
this case is the most stringent policy that is incentive compatible for the optimizing type.
This recommended policy is more lenient than the statically optimal one. Leniency in
the rule makes it easier for the optimizing type to follow the recommendation ex-post.
This has dynamic benefits because it prevents the private agents from learning the type
of the policy maker, and uncertainty is beneficial. When reputation is low, inducing the
optimizing type to follow the rule also has static benefits. This is because it promotes
better behavior by the private agents who anticipate that the optimizing type will follow
1Nosal and Ordoñez (2016) also consider an environment in which uncertainty can mitigate the time
inconsistencyproblem. Themechanismisverydifferent:herethereisuncertaintyaboutthepolicymaker’s
type, while in their paper there is uncertainty about the state of the economy, which restrains the policy
makerex-post.
3