NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BALANCE SHEET INSOLVENCY AND CONTRIBUTION REVENUE IN PUBLIC
CHARITIES
Tatiana Homonoff
Thomas L. Spreen
Travis St.Clair
Working Paper 26546
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26546
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2019
We gratefully acknowledge Thad Calabrese, Jacob Goldin, Ben Marx, Alex Rees-Jones, Dan
Tinkelman, and Job White as well as seminar and conference participants at New York
University, University of Maryland, NTA, APPAM, and ABFM for conversations and
suggestions that have greatly improved the quality of this project. All remaining errors are our
own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2019 by Tatiana Homonoff, Thomas L. Spreen, and Travis St.Clair. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Balance Sheet Insolvency and Contribution Revenue in Public Charities
Tatiana Homonoff, Thomas L. Spreen, and Travis St.Clair
NBER Working Paper No. 26546
December 2019, Revised May 2020
JEL No. H31,L31
ABSTRACT
Using Form 990 data reported by public charities, we document significant bunching of
nonprofits at near-zero net assets, the threshold for insolvency. Bunching occurs despite the fact
that creditors cannot force insolvent nonprofits into involuntary bankruptcy. We show that the
extent of bunching is greater among organizations that rely more heavily on contribution revenue,
and that by inflating their net assets, bunching organizations are able to increase their contribution
revenue relative to firms that report negative net assets. Charitable donors appear to use the net
assets threshold as a heuristic for a charity's financial health; nonprofit managers, in turn, respond
to the preferences of their donors.
Tatiana Homonoff Travis St.Clair
New York University New York University
Robert F. Wagner School of Public Service Robert F. Wagner
295 Lafayette Street, 2nd Floor School of Public Service
New York, NY 10012 295 Lafayette St, 2nd Fl
and NBER New York, NY 10012
tatiana.homonoff@nyu.edu travis.stclair@nyu.edu
Thomas L. Spreen
University of Maryland School of Public Policy
4139B Van Munching Hall
7699 Mowatt Lane
College Park, MD 20742
tlspreen@umd.edu

I. Introduction
One of the key features that distinguishes for-pro(cid:28)t and nonpro(cid:28)t entities in the United
States is how federal law treats them in insolvency. The bankruptcy code permits creditors
of for-pro(cid:28)t corporations to (cid:28)le involuntary bankruptcy petitions, and consequently the
typical outcome for corporations that are unable to service their debts is either liquidation
or restructuring. This is not the case for nonpro(cid:28)t (cid:28)rms, whose creditors cannot initiate
involuntary bankruptcy proceedings. Instead, the decision to liquidate or re-structure lies
with a nonpro(cid:28)t organization’s board of directors (Peterman and Morissette, 2004).
As such, insolvency may be less immediately consequential for nonpro(cid:28)t organizations.
This is especially the case with balance sheet insolvency, in which an organization’s liabilities
exceed its assets. Balance sheet insolvency di(cid:27)ers from cash-(cid:29)ow insolvency insofar as an
organization may be (cid:16)insolvent on the books(cid:17) but still able to meet its near-term obligations.
Nevertheless, nonpro(cid:28)t organizations that are balance sheet insolvent may face incentives to
report otherwise if doing so helps to preserve their reputation with important stakeholders.
In the case of nonpro(cid:28)ts, the most important stakeholders are typically donors. Donor
contributions are the primary source of revenue for the average public charity; Internal Rev-
enue Service Form 990 data show the median nonpro(cid:28)t receives 52 percent of its revenue
from contributions. Consequently, how donors allocate their charitable contributions has
signi(cid:28)cant implications for the strategic decisions of nonpro(cid:28)t (cid:28)rms. If donors use balance
sheet solvency as a heuristic for assessing the (cid:28)nancial health and viability of organizations
(rather than the underlying value of net assets) when deciding where to allocate their char-
itable dollars, insolvent organizations may have an incentive to report (cid:28)nancials that place
them just above the insolvency threshold.
We investigate thisquestionusingdatafrom theNationalCenterforCharitable Statistics
Core Financial Files, which include all 501c(3) public charities in the United States - a panel
of nearly half a million public charities spanning 2005 to 2015. Using (cid:28)nancial information
reportedintheInternalRevenueService’sForm990or990-EZ,weexaminewhethercharities
2

manipulate their income to avoid insolvency, and explore the consequences of this behavior.
We start by documenting two features of the distribution of nonpro(cid:28)ts. First, a considerable
number of charities are balance sheet insolvent. Approximately seven percent of charities
report negative net assets, or more than 22,000 charities in 2015 alone. Second, we document
signi(cid:28)cant bunching at zero net assets. We examine several explanations for this result
and (cid:28)nd that the bunching is not solely a product of organization age, transfers between
organizations, or a desire to spend down resources. Instead, a substantial portion of the
bunching we observe appears to be due to income manipulation rather than any quirk of
nonpro(cid:28)t (cid:28)nancial reporting.
To quantify the magnitude of the behavioral response, we estimate the size of the excess
massjustabovetheinsolvencythresholdusingmethodsfromthebunchingliterature(Chetty
et al., 2011; Dee et al., 2019; Diamond and Persson, 2016; Kleven and Waseem, 2013). The
size of the excess mass suggests that 0.2 percent of all public charities engage in income
manipulation at the threshold. For context, this estimate is roughly twice the size of the
observed behavioral response to the requirement that nonpro(cid:28)ts (cid:28)le the Form 990 (Marx,
2018). This corresponds to an 8 percent probability that charities falling just below the
threshold in(cid:29)ate their net assets so as to appear solvent.
Next, we explore the characteristics of bunching organizations using methods described
in Diamond and Persson (2016). We (cid:28)nd that bunching is most common among smaller
organizations that receive a large proportion of their revenues from charitable contributions
rather than from program fees. We (cid:28)nd that our bunching estimates increase monotonically
with the percent of revenues from contributions and that the extent of bunching is approx-
imately (cid:28)ve times greater for organizations in the highest quartile of contribution revenue
than for (cid:28)rms in the lowest quartile. These (cid:28)ndings are consistent with a model in which
nonpro(cid:28)ts are motivated to manipulate their (cid:28)nancial reporting in order to appear balance
sheet solvent so as to appeal to their donor base.
Finally, we exploit the panel structure of our data to examine the consequences of bunch-
3