NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FINANCIAL RISK CAPACITY
Saki Bigio
Adrien d'Avernas
Working Paper 26561
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26561
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2019
We would like to thank Viral Acharya, Andy Atkeson, Gadi Barlevy, Marco Bassetto, Alberto
Bisin, Jeff Campbell, Varadarajan V. Chari, Ross Doppelt, Douglas Gale, Manolis Galenianos,
Mark Gertler, Veronica Guerrieri, Urban Jermann, Larry Jones, Jennifer La'O, Guido Lorenzoni,
Alessandro Lizzeri, Kinimori Matsuyama, Matteo Maggiori, Cecilia Parlatore, Thomas
Phillippon, Tano Santos and Philipp Schnabl as well as seminar participants during seminars at
U. Penn, Northwestern, Wharton, Kellogg, U. Chicago, Princeton, Duke, Fuqua, UCLA,
Columbia Business School, UMN, Einaudi Institute, the Bank of Portugal Conference on
Monetary Economics, the Di Tella International Finance Workshop, The Money and Payments
Workshop at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and the ITAM summer workshop for useful
comments. Larry Christiano, Bob Hall, Todd Keister, Sergei Kovbasyuk, and Alberto Martin
provided excellent discussions of this paper. Adrien d'Avernas gratefully acknowledges financial
support from the Nasdaq Nordic Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Saki Bigio and Adrien d'Avernas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Financial Risk Capacity
Saki Bigio and Adrien d'Avernas
NBER Working Paper No. 26561
December 2019
JEL No. E32,E44,G01,G21
ABSTRACT
Financial crises are particularly severe and lengthy when banks fail to recapitalize after bearing
large losses. We present a model that explains the slow recovery of bank capital and economic
activity. Banks provide intermediation in markets with information asymmetries. Large equity
losses force banks to tighten intermediation, which exacerbates adverse selection. Adverse
selection lowers bank profit margins which slows both the internal growth of equity and equity
injections. This mechanism generates financial crises characterized by persistent low growth. The
lack of equity injections during crises is a coordination failure that is solved when the decision to
recapitalize banks is centralized.
Saki Bigio
Department of Economics
University of California at Los Angeles
8283 Bunche Hall
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
sbigio@econ.ucla.edu
Adrien d'Avernas
Stockholm School of Economics
adrien.davernas@gmail.com

1 Introduction
Financial crises that originate from extreme bank losses are severe in depth and
duration.1 These episodes suggest that the recapitalization of banks is critical for
the recovery of overall economic activity. After the recent financial crisis, the slow
recovery of bank equity has been a major concern for policy makers, academics, and
practitioners.2 When the then Chairman of the Federal Reserve, Ben Bernanke, was
asked when the crisis would be over, he answered, “When banks start raising capital
on their own.”3 But why do banks struggle to recapitalize after a financial crisis?
To answer this question, macroeconomic theory introduces frictions that prevent
banks from raising equity or barriers to entry that deter the creation of new banks.
This explains why banks don’t recapitalize, but does not rationalize why banking
crises last so long. To explain slow recoveries, any theory must also rely on low profit
margins from intermediation after banks suffer equity losses. Otherwise, high profit
margins translate into rapid revenue retentions that accelerate the recovery of inside
equity. Recent macroeconomic theories of financial intermediation cannot explain
declines in bank profit margins, because frictions only limit the ability to raise debt
and equity.4 A simple supply-demand analysis suggests that financial intermediation
profitsshouldrise, notfall, whenequitycapitalislimited. Thus, thosemodelspredict
an accelerated recovery of bank equity and, in turn, of economic activity. A theory
of low profit margins during crises is required.
In this paper, we present a model that explains the slow recovery of bank capital
and economic activity. We show that asymmetric information can explain persistent
low economic growth after financial crises, even though bankers have the funds to
recapitalize their banks.
A natural role for banks is to deal with asymmetric information between borrowers
1See Cerra and Saxena (2008); Reinhart and Rogoff (2009).
2The slow recovery of intermediary capital is the subject of Darrell Duffie’s 2010 Presidential
Address to the American Finance Association (Duffie, 2010) and a centerpiece of Bagehot (1873).
3“The Chairman,” 60 Minutes, CBS News, March 15, 2009.
4In most macroeconomic models of intermediation developed after the crisis, banks cannot
raise equity because bankers are fully invested specialists who face agency frictions. See below for
a review of the literature.
2

andlenders. Bankscandiversifytransactionriskscausedbyasymmetricinformation,
because they can exploit their scale to pool assets.5 Yet, banks are not immune to
largelosses. Whenbankslosetheirfinancial risk capacity, theymustscaledowntheir
operations. This decline in intermediation volumes exacerbates adverse selection. In
turn, heightened adverse selection lowers profit margins for banks and incentives to
recapitalize. Eventually, the financial system recovers—but this only comes through
retained earnings, an essentially lethargic process when volumes and profit margins
are low. This mechanism delivers financial crises characterized by persistent low
economic growth.
An outcome of our theory is that the depth and length of financial crises can be
mitigated if bankers coordinate their equity injections. When an individual banker
observes low net worth in the banking sector, he takes as given that adverse selection
is strong, and therefore profit margins are low. Thus, the crisis persists even when
capital is readily available to recapitalize banks. If bankers would coordinate to
recapitalize banks, they would factor in that their equity injections could moderate
adverse selection and improve profits for the industry, alleviating the severity of the
crisis.
Wedonotprovideanultimatetheoryoffinancialcrises, butratherpresentamech-
anism that delivers long-lasting recessions after a banking crisis with a minimal set
of ingredients: (i) reallocation of capital across sectors fuels growth to link financial
and real activity; (ii) banks face a limited liability constraint to tie financial activity
to bank equity; (iii) intermediation is risky such, that bank equity can suffer losses;
and (iv) financial intermediation is subject to asymmetric information, which lowers
profitability when bank financial risk capacity is low. Thus, our theory attributes
the lack of entry to the decline in profitability. We argue that low profit margins
would exacerbate other explanations of slow-moving equity. For example, low profits
reduce the value for outside investors, worsen debt-overhang problems (Myers, 1977),
and add stress to agency frictions that limit the ability to raise equity. These include
moral hazard (Holmstrom and Tirole, 1997), limited enforcement (Hart and Moore,
5This view is rooted in classic banking theory: for example, Freixas and Rochet (2008), Leland
and Pyle (1977), Diamond (1984), or Boyd and Prescott (1986).
3