NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FINTECH PLATFORMS AND MUTUAL FUND DISTRIBUTION
Claire Yurong Hong
Xiaomeng Lu
Jun Pan
Working Paper 26576
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26576
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2019, Revised May 2022
This paper was previously entitled “The Economic Impact of Distributing Financial Products on
Third-Party Online Platforms.” We are grateful to Brad Barber, Ben Charoenwong (discussant),
Robin Döttling (discussant), Darrell Duffie, Hao Jiang, Andrew Karolyi, Jennifer Huang, Xing
Huang, Yi Huang (discussant), Xin Liu (discussant), Wenlan Qian, Hongxun Ruan (discussant),
Yu Shan (discussant), Clemens Sialm, Laura Stark, Baolian Wang, Joakim Westerholm
(discussant), Shangjin Wei, Yizhou Xiao (discussant), Wei Xiong, Bernard Yeung, Xiaoyun Yu,
Yao Zeng (discussant), Lu Zheng, and Haoxiang Zhu for valuable discussions and comments. We
thank seminar and conference participants at Tsinghua University PBC School of Finance,
Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen), Lingnan University, Shanghai Advanced Institute
of Finance, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, National University of Singapore,
FISF at Fudan University, the 2021 American Finance Association, the 2019 China FinTech
Research Conference, the 2020 Finance Down Under Conference, the 2020 ABFER Specialty
Conference on FinTech, the 2021 European Retail Investment Conference, 2021 World Finance
Conference, FMA2021, the 2022 NBER Chinese Economy Workshop and the behavioral
finance online seminar organized by Wei Xiong. We are grateful to the Howbuy platform for data
provision. We thank Linchen Liu, Shiwen Tian, and Heming Zhang for research assistance. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Claire Yurong Hong, Xiaomeng Lu, and Jun Pan. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

FinTech Platforms and Mutual Fund Distribution
Claire Yurong Hong, Xiaomeng Lu, and Jun Pan
NBER Working Paper No. 26576
December 2019, Revised May 2022
JEL No. G0,G10,G15,G2,G20,G23,G4,G40,G5
ABSTRACT
We document a novel platform effect caused by the emergence of FinTech platforms in financial
intermediation. In China, platform distributions of mutual funds emerged in 2012 and grew
quickly into a formidable presence. Utilizing the staggered entrance of funds onto platforms, we
find a marked increase of performance-chasing, driven by the centralized information flow
unique to FinTech platforms. This pattern is further confirmed using proprietary data from a top
platform. Examining the platform impact on fund managers, we find that, incentivized by the
amplified performance-chasing, fund managers increase risk taking to enhance their probability
of getting onto the top ranking.
Claire Yurong Hong Jun Pan
Shanghai Advanced Institute of Finance Shanghai Advanced Institute of Finance
Shanghai Jiao Tong University Shanghai Jiao Tong University
211 West Huaihai Road, Shanghai Shanghai, China
P.R.China, 200030 junpan@saif.sjtu.edu.cn
yrhong@saif.sjtu.edu.cn
Xiaomeng Lu
FISF, Fudan University
Shanghai
P.R.China, 200030
xiaomenglu@fudan.edu.cn

1 Introduction
The rise of the platform economy over the past decade is transforming the way we live.
Empowered by technological innovations, platforms are like intermediaries on steroids, cre-
ating social and business connectivity on a previously unimaginable scale. Widely adopted
platforms, such as Google for information, Amazon for retail, Facebook for social network-
ing, and Uber for taxi rides, have profoundly reshaped how information is aggregated and
disseminated, altering consumer behavior and disrupting the respective industries.
In this paper, we focus on the emergence of FinTech platforms in the asset manage-
ment industry, taking advantage a 2012 policy change in China, which allows tech firms to
distribute mutual funds via e-commerce platforms.1 Created by tech-driven firms, such Fin-
Tech platforms distribute financial products directly to individual investors, bypassing and
replacing the traditional channels of mutual-fund distributions organized by fund families,
banks and brokers. Akin to what Amazon did for books and retail goods, FinTech platforms
break down the market segmentation, distributing to their giant user bases not only financial
products but also information, which, given the platform structure, is highly centralized in
nature. As consumer behavior is influenced by the information fed to them – a fact made
abundantly clear by the emergence of social-media platforms in disseminating information
to the public,2 this highly centralized market structure leads to highly synchronized investor
behavior. On the production side, fund managers, no matter how small or invisible, have the
potential to reach the entire user base of these platforms. As their reliance on platform dis-
tribution increases, the platform-induced investor behavior can in turn affect fund managers’
incentives.
Focusing first on the impact of the platforms on investor behavior, our empirical results
documentastrongplatform-inducedamplificationofperformancechasing. Wefindastriking
increase in performance sensitivity, driven by flows chasing the top-ranked funds much more
aggressively after the emergence of the platforms. Upon ranking actively managed equity
funds by their past 12-month returns into deciles, the average net flow to the funds in the
top decile increases from 3.03% pre-platform (2008–2012) to 20.84% post-platform (2013–
1Though technological developments over the past quarter century have greatly facilitated the distri-
bution of mutual funds (Barber and Odean (2001, 2002) and Choi et al. (2002)), the recent emergence of
FinTech platforms is an entirely new phenomenon. In February 2012, China Securities Regulatory Commis-
sion (CSRC) announced that tech firms, independent from fund families, banks, and brokers, are allowed to
distribute mutual funds. Since then, FinTech platforms have grown into a formidable presence. By 2014,
top platforms like Tiantian and Ant Financial have covered almost the entire universe of mutual funds in
China. By end of 2018, about one-third of the non-family sales of funds took place on FinTech platforms.
2ExamplesinfinancialmarketsincludeBarberetal.(2021)onRobinhoodinvestorsandHuetal.(2021)
on the Reddit users involved in the GameStop trading.
1

2017).3 We further take advantage of the fact that our data include the exact dates on
which each mutual fund signs up for the platforms. Using this information on staggered
entrance, we find the increase in flow-performance sensitivity occurs exactly on and after
a fund enters platforms. In particular, controlling for fund-level characteristics and time
and fund fixed effects, we find that the post-platform performance sensitivity is over three
times the pre-platform level for both equity and mixed funds. Moreover, we do not observe
such a marked increase in flow-performance sensitivity under placebo tests, estimated by
randomly assigning funds to be on- or off-platforms. In particular, our actual estimates on
platform-induced performance chasing exceed 94.1% and 99.8% of the placebo estimates for
equity and mixed funds respectively.
To further provide evidence on the platform-induced performance chasing, we directly
examine investors’ behaviors on a FinTech platform – Howbuy, one of the top platforms
in China. With the proprietary dataset obtained from Howbuy, we find that performance
chasing is indeed stronger on the FinTech platforms. From 2015 through 2018, the top-decile
equity funds account for an average of 49.37% of the quarterly purchases on Howbuy, signif-
icantly larger than the average of 37.61% for the entire market, which aggregates purchases
over all distribution channels, both on- and off-platform. Pre-platform, only 23.79% of the
quarterly purchases goes to the top-decile equity funds.
The emergence of FinTech platforms results in a striking increase in flow-performance
sensitivity. Understanding the mechanisms behind this amplified performance chasing is
therefore important. We hypothesize that the highly centralized and uniform information
display on these FinTech platform apps may generate a pattern of coordinated or syn-
chronized performance chasing. Off-platform, information signal is dispersed with funds
distributed via various segmented channels. On-platform, investors are essentially fed the
same information. In particular, as platforms invariably list mutual funds by their past
performance, the top-performing funds are displayed prominently at the front page of every
investor’s mobile device, causing an otherwise diverse set of investors to chase the same set of
front-page funds. Consequently, performance chasing behavior at an individual level might
be synchronized and lead to amplified performance-chasing at the aggregate level.
To demonstrate the importance of this centralized information display channel, we ex-
amine the platform effect on the front-page funds. Across all platforms, mutual funds are
displayed by past 12-months returns in a descending order via mobile apps in a performance
rank list.4 Depending on the size of their cell-phone screen, investors normally see 8 to 12
3As a benchmark, the average net flow to the top-decile equity funds in the US is very stable, with a
magnitude of around 6% in both time periods.
4Platforms group mutual funds by style into tabs for equity, bond, mixed, index funds, etc. Within each
tab, the default page displays the funds in the descending order of their past n-months returns, with n=12
2