NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
OPTIMAL BANK REGULATION IN THE PRESENCE OF CREDIT AND RUN-RISK
Anil K. Kashyap
Dimitrios P. Tsomocos
Alexandros P. Vardoulakis
Working Paper 26689
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26689
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2020, Revised February 2023
This paper supersedes “How does macroprudential regulation change bank credit supply?" NBER
Working Paper No. 20165. We are grateful to Gadi Barlevy, Saki Bigio, Dong Beom Choi, Dean
Corbae, John Geanakoplos, Emmanuel Farhi, Todd Keister, Stephen Morris, Enrico Perotti, Jean-
Charles Rochet, Hyun Shin, Frank Smets, Adi Sunderam, Sergio Vicente, Randy Wright, and
especially Harald Uhlig. We also thank the seminar participants at numerous institutions and
conferences. Kashyap has received research support from the Initiative on Global Markets at the
University of Chicago Booth School of Business, the Houblon Norman George Fellowship Fund,
a grant from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation to the Macro Financial Modeling (MFM) project at
the University of Chicago and the National Science Foundation for a grant administered by the
National Bureau of Economic Research. Kashyap’s disclosures of his outside compensated
activities are available on his web page. All errors herein are ours. The views expressed in this
paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of Federal Reserve Board of
Governors, anyone in the Federal Reserve System, any of the institutions with which we are
affiliated, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26689
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Anil K. Kashyap, Dimitrios P. Tsomocos, and Alexandros P. Vardoulakis. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Optimal Bank Regulation In the Presence of Credit and Run-Risk
Anil K. Kashyap, Dimitrios P. Tsomocos, and Alexandros P. Vardoulakis
NBER Working Paper No. 26689
January 2020, Revised February 2023
JEL No. E44,G01,G21,G28
ABSTRACT
We modify the Diamond and Dybvig (1983) model so that, besides offering liquidity services to
depositors, banks also raise equity funding, make loans that are risky, and can invest in safe,
liquid assets. The bank and its borrowers are subject to limited liability. When profitable, banks
monitor borrowers to ensure that they repay loans. Depositors may choose to run based on
conjectures about the available resources for people withdrawing early and beliefs about banks’
monitoring. We model the run decision by solving a novel global game. We find that banks opt
for a more deposit-intensive capital structure than a social planner would choose. The privately
chosen asset portfolio can be more or less lending-intensive, while the level of lending can also
be higher or lower depending on a planner’s preferences between liquidity provision and credit
extension. To correct these three distortions, a package of three regulations is warranted.
Anil K. Kashyap Alexandros P. Vardoulakis
Booth School of Business Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
University of Chicago Constitution Ave NW &, 20th St NW, Wash 20551
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue alexandros.vardoulakis@frb.gov
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
anil.kashyap@chicagobooth.edu
Dimitrios P. Tsomocos
Said Business School and St. Edmund Hall
University of Oxford
Dimitrios.Tsomocos@sbs.ox.ac.uk

1 Introduction
Itiswellunderstoodthatfinancialintermediaries, hereafterbanks, provideusefulservicesthrough
both the lending that they undertake and the deposits that they offer. Banks use both sides of their
balance sheet to perform these services, which exposes them to credit risk and funding (run) risk.
Theefficiencyoftheresultingallocations,fromasocialpointofview,dependsjointlyontheoverall
levelof lendingandthe mixof bankassetsand liabilities. Yet, most banking modelstend tofocus
on only one service or type of risk, often neglecting how bank fragility endogenously affects the
structureofbankbalancesheetsandviceversa. Weproposeanewmodelwherebankscreateeco-
nomicsurplusforbothborrowersanddepositorsbutchooseabalancesheetthatresultsinexcessive
run-risk and an inefficient level of lending. We use the model to study alternative regulations that
havebeenproposedsincetheGlobalFinancialCrisisandderivetheoptimalregulatorymix.
WestartwiththesetupdevelopedbyDiamondandDybvig(1983),henceforthDD,thatexplains
howabankcanprovideliquidityservicestodepositors(savers)withuncertainconsumption/funding
needs. WemodifyDDsothatthebankalsoraisesequity,makesloansthatarerisky,andcaninvest
in safe, liquid assets. We also assume that banks and borrowers are subject to limited liability so
that each of them has incentives to take risks that they do not fully bear the costs of. We suppose,
similarinspirittoDiamond(1984), thatbanksmonitortheloanstoguaranteethattheyarerepaid.
Monitoringiscostlyand, hence, mustbeprofitableforbanksto doso. Evenifsaverswereableto
monitor borrowers as efficiently as the bank, delegating this function to banks is optimal, because
banks can combine monitoring and deposit-granting, which is itself valuable. However, because
the loans are risky and have an uncertain liquidation value, depositors may opt to run on the bank
depending on the conjectured ability of the bank to serve early withdrawals and the bank’s incen-
tives to continue monitoring borrowers. Finally, the bank is managed by a banker who maximizes
the profits accruing to her rather than worrying about the utility of depositors or borrowers. The
banker internalizes how her choices affect run-risk, deposit supply, and loan demand. Depositors
and borrowers rationally expect the equilibrium level of run-risk when making these decisions but
areatomisticanddonotinternalizetheirmarginalimpactonthebank’sportfolioandrun-risk.
Wecharacterizetherundecisionbyintroducinganewspecificationofthetypeofglobalgame
developedbyGoldsteinandPauzner(2005)toanalyzeDDstylemodels. Inoursetup,depositorsget
signalsaboutthe(liquidation)valueofloansthatarecalledearlytohelppaydepositors. Depositors
useathresholdruleindecidingtorun,suchthat,iftheirsignalabouttheliquidationvalueisbelow
thethreshold,theydecidetowithdraweveniftheydonotneedtoconsumeimmediately. Conversely,
ifthesignalisabovethethreshold,onlydepositorswithurgentconsumptionneedswithdraw,while
therestkeeptheirdepositsinthebank. Thethresholddependsonthedepositcontract,thebalance
sheet,andtheprofitabilityofthebank,becausethedepositcontractspecifiesthereturnfromwaiting
instead of withdrawing early, the balance sheet determines the capacity of the bank to serve early
withdrawals,andtheprofitabilityofthebankgovernsitsincentivestomonitorborrowers.
Theprooftoestablishtheuniquenessofthethresholdisnovelandmaybeofindependentinter-
estforotherapplicationsofglobalgames. AsinGoldsteinandPauzner(2005),therearenoglobal
2

strategic complementarities for depositors, but in our setup, the property of state monotonicity is
also absent. This property relates to whether the incentive to take an action is monotonic with re-
specttotheunderlyingfundamentals(state)oftheeconomy–andistypicallyrequiredincanonical
global games (see Morris and Shin, 2003). In our model, state monotonicity would obtain if the
relative incentive to run becomes stronger as the liquidation value of loans becomes smaller. If
the bank has liquid resources to serve all depositors queuing to withdraw, then state monotonicity
holds. Butitfailstoholdoncethebankrunsoutofliquidresourcesand,thus,onlyapercentageof
withdrawalscanbemet. Intuitively,onceliquidassetsareexhausted,thepayofffromwithdrawing
ishigher whentheliquidationvalueofthebank’sassetsishigher,becausetheprobabilityofbeing
ataluckyspotinthequeueishigher. Hence,statemonotonicityisabsent.
We employ a new argument to prove uniqueness, which does not require state monotonicity
everywhere but only at threshold points. This property is easily satisfied in our framework and we
provideintuitionaboutgeneralizingittootherenvironmentswheresuchperversestatemonotonicity
obtains. Hence,theproofweproposecouldbeadaptedtootherapplicationsinwhichimprovements
infundamentalsreducetheincentivestoactinsomeregionsandincreasetheminothers.
The modifications to DD that we propose are all necessary to assess the differences between
theprivateandsocialoptima. First,micro-foundingtheprobabilityofaruniscrucialtounderstand
thedeterminantsofrun-risk. Inpartialequilibrium,oneexpectsthatraisingcapitalrequirementsor
liquidityrequirementswillreducetheprobabilityofarun. Weshowthisistrueinourmodel. But,
in general equilibrium, agents will adjust their behavior in response to regulation, and their new
choiceswillfeedbacktoalterrun-riskviaequilibriuminterestrates.
Second,itisimportanttoexplicitlymodeltheoptimizationbehaviorofbankers,depositors,and
borrowersinordertounderstandhowrun-riskaffectstheirchoicesandwelfare. Insteadofassuming
adhocwelfarecriteria,suchastheminimizationofrun-risk,wemodeltheeffectofthechoiceson
agents’ utilities. This allows us to compare privately and socially optimal choices. In general they
differ,thoughwealsodescribeaspecialcasewheretheprivateequilibriumisconstrainedefficient.
Third,introducingcostlymonitoringhighlightstheimportanceofthebank’sprofitabilityforits
stability(overandabovetherelativeliquidityofitsassetsandtherunabilityofitsliabilities). Mon-
itoring is unobservable and costly, so it only occurs if the banker finds it ex post profitable. Policy
interventions that crush bank profits can backfire if the banker loses the incentive to monitor. In
thiscase,depositorscanopttorunbecausetheyrealizebankcreditriskhasendogenouslyincreased
because of the lack of monitoring. Hence, we highlight a novel connection between moral hazard
andrun-risk,whichisimportantforstudyingregulationsthatcompressbankingprofits.1
Fourth, by modeling the utility impact of agents’ choices, it becomes clear that borrowers and
depositors care about the amount of lending and the level of deposits that are available. Thus, the
overallsizeofthebankingsectormattersbeyondjustthecompositionofassetsandliabilities. The
Modigliani-Miller theorem is violated in various ways in our model, but allowing for endogenous
1Thispossibilitymaybeofindependentinteresttoresearchersasithighlightsthatrunscanoccurevenforfinancial
institutionsthatareveryliquid,iftheylacktheincentivestomonitor.
3