NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MONETARY POLICY STRATEGIES FOR THE FEDERAL RESERVE
Lars E.O. Svensson
Working Paper 26657
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26657
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2020
A previous version of this paper was prepared for the conference Monetary Policy Strategy,
Tools, and Communication Practices, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, June 4–5, 2019. I am
grateful to Stefan Laséen, Edward Nelson, the conference discussant Sharon Kozicki, participants
in the conference, and the editor for comments and helpful suggestions. Support from the Knut
and Alice Wallenberg Research Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. Any views expressed
and any errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Lars E.O. Svensson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Monetary Policy Strategies for the Federal Reserve
Lars E.O. Svensson
NBER Working Paper No. 26657
January 2020
JEL No. E52,E58
ABSTRACT
The general monetary policy strategy of “forecast targeting” allows the Federal Reserve to
respond flexibly to all relevant information in achieving its dual mandate of maximum
employment and price stability. In contrast, a simple “instrument” rule such as a Taylor-type rule
restricts the Federal Reserve to only respond in a rigid way to the partial information of current
inflation and output. Forecast targeting can be used for any of the more specific strategies of
annual-inflation targeting, price-level targeting, temporary price-level targeting, average-inflation
targeting, and nominal-GDP targeting. These specific strategies are examined and evaluated
according to how well they may fulfill the dual mandate, considering the possibilities of a binding
effective lower bound for the federal funds rate and a flatter Phillips curve. Nominal-GPD
targeting means that GDP and the GDP deflator are considered perfect substitutes. It therefore
does not treat maximum employment and price stability as separate and independent targets. In
addition, data on GDP and the GDP deflator have longer reporting lags and are subject to
substantial ex post revisions. The latter will require both retrospective and prospective revisions
of the target path, with large communication difficulties. Average-inflation targeting has good
prospects of handling the problems of a binding effective lower bound and a flatter Phillips curve.
As a permanently applied strategy, it would also have good possibilities of becoming understood
by and credible with markets and the general public.
Lars E.O. Svensson
Department of Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
P.O. Box 6501
SE-11383 Stockholm
Sweden
and NBER
Leosven@gmail.com

Contents
1 Introduction 1
2 The Federal Reserve’s mandate 3
3 Fulfilling the mandate: Forecast targeting 5
3.1 Accountability and commitment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
3.2 The reaction function. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
3.3 Forecast targeting summarized . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
4 Alternativemonetarypolicystrategies, forecasttargeting, andsimpleinstrument
rules 10
5 Price-level targeting 13
6 Temporary price-level targeting when the ELB binds 20
7 Average-inflation targeting 23
8 Nominal-GDP targeting 27
8.1 Comparing NGDP targeting and (flexible) price-level targeting . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
8.2 Further issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
9 Conclusion 32
References 34
Appendix 41
A Endogenous or exogenous labor-market participation rate 41
B Forecast targeting: The intertemporal forecast loss function 41
C Temporary price-level targeting when the ELB binds 43
D An interest-rate rule with a lower intercept 44

1 Introduction
The Federal Reserve is undertaking a broad review of the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy frame-
work this year. As explained by Vice Chair Clarida (2019), the Federal Reserve will examine the
policy strategy, tools, and communication practices that it uses to pursue its dual-mandate goals of
maximum employment and price stability. The review is not provoked by any dissatisfaction with
the existing policy framework, but given the unprecedented events of the past decade, the Federal
Reserve believes it is a good time to step back and assess whether, and in what possible ways,
it can refine its strategy, tools, and communication practices to achieve and maintain these goals
as consistently and robustly as possible. By conducting the review, the Federal Reserve wants to
ensure that it is well positioned to continue to meet its statutory goals in coming years. The review
will also evaluate the new policy tools and communication practices that the Federal Reserve has
used in response to the financial crisis 2008–2009 and the Great Recession.
Asignificantbackgroundforthereviewisthatneutralinterestratesappeartohavefalleninboth
theUSandotheradvancedeconomies, andthisglobaldeclineiswidelyexpectedtopersistforyears.
All else being equal, a fall in neutral rates increases the likelihood that a central bank’s policy rate
will reach its effective lower bound (ELB) in future economic downturns (Kiley and Roberts, 2017).
That development, in turn, could make it more difficult during downturns for monetary policy to
support spending and employment and keep inflation from falling below the inflation target.
Another key development in recent decades is that inflation appears less responsive to resource
slack. The short-run Phillips curve appears to have flattened. A flatter Phillips curve reduces the
role of aggregate demand and increases the role of inflation expectations in controlling inflation and
keeping inflation close to its target.
The Federal Reserve has been charged by the US Congress with a dual mandate to achieve
maximum employment and price stability. Clarida (2019) notes that the review will take this
mandate as given. It will also take as given that a 2 percent rate of inflation in the price index for
personal consumption expenditures (PCE) is the operational goal most consistent with the Federal
Reserve’s price stability mandate. Furthermore, the review will focus on three broad questions,
highlighted by events of the past decade.
Thefirstquestionis,“CantheFederalReservebestmeetitsstatutoryobjectiveswithitsexisting
monetary policy strategy, or should it consider strategies that aim to reverse past misses of the
inflation objective?” The background for this is that the Federal Reserve’s current approach, as
that of other central banks conducting flexible inflation-targeting, treats past deviations of inflation
from the target—including the persistent shortfalls of inflation from the target that many advanced
economies have experienced over most of the past decade—as “bygones.” There is no attempt to
1