NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHO ARE THE HAND-TO-MOUTH?
Mark A. Aguiar
Mark Bils
Corina Boar
Working Paper 26643
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26643
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2020, Revised May 2023
We thank Nataliya Gimpelson, Stephan Gordeev, Man Chon Iao, Federico Kochen, and Paulo
Lins for excellent research assistance on this project. We also thank Martin Blomhoff Holm, Greg
Kaplan, Matthew Knowles, Gianluca Violante, and Ivan Werning for their helpful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Mark A. Aguiar, Mark Bils, and Corina Boar. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Who Are the Hand-to-Mouth?
Mark A. Aguiar, Mark Bils, and Corina Boar
NBER Working Paper No. 26643
January 2020, Revised May 2023
JEL No. E21
ABSTRACT
Many households hold little wealth. In standard precautionary savings models these households
should not only display higher marginal propensities to consume (MPCs), but also higher future
consumption growth. In contrast, we see from the PSID that such “hand-to-mouth” households do
not display higher growth in spending. They also exhibit greater volatility of spending and adjust
their spending to a greater extent through the number of categories consumed. Consistent with a
role for preference heterogeneity, the panel data show that it is persistent differences across
households, not current assets, that predict low consumption growth and other spending
differences for the hand-to-mouth households. To identify the extent of preference heterogeneity,
we consider the model of Kaplan and Violante (2014) with both liquid and illiquid assets, but
allow heterogeneity in preferences. To match the data, many poor hand-to-mouth must be
relatively impatient and have a high inter-temporal elasticity of substitution (IES). The model
shows that preferences predominantly explain the higher MPCs for low-asset households.
Preference heterogeneity notably increases the spending impact of fiscal transfers, but only if
targeted, while reducing that from interest rate cuts.
Mark A. Aguiar Corina Boar
Department of Economics Department of Economics
Princeton University New York University
Fisher Hall 19 West 4th Street
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021 New York, NY 10003
and NBER and NBER
maguiar@princeton.edu corina.boar@gmail.com
Mark Bils
Department of Economics
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
mark.bils@rochester.edu

1 Introduction
Many households hold little wealth. These ostensibly “hand-to-mouth” households are often
estimated to exhibit larger marginal propensities to consume (MPCs).1 For that reason,
these households feature prominently in discussions of tax and transfer schemes to boost
aggregate output.2 To the extent that macro-policy relies on “getting the micro foundations
right,” it is crucial to answer why households hold so few assets, especially since their implied
MPCs may hinge on that answer.
We document new facts on the spending behavior of hand-to-mouth (or H2M for short)
households from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). These facts contradict pre-
dictions of the standard savings model unless households differ in their long-run targeted
assets-to-income. They also point to a role of preference heterogeneity, rather than differ-
ences in income processes, to explain that heterogeneity in savings targets. Exploiting the
panel dimension of the PSID, we use household fixed effects to capture long-run heterogene-
ity. Adding fixed effects helps bridge the gap between the standard model and the data.
Motivated by these findings, we then calibrate a structural model so as to capture the extent
of preference heterogeneity suggestd by the data. While that calibrated preference hetero-
geneity is fairly modest, we find it markedly increases the spending impact of a fiscal transfer
targeted by wealth, while reducing that from a temporary interest rate cut.
The core paradigm of both the micro and macro literatures, and our starting point, is
the precautionary saving model in which consumers self-insure by saving in a non-contingent
asset subject to a borrowing constraint.3 This model predicts that: (i) the MPC is strictly
decreasing in wealth, and (ii) expected consumption growth is also decreasing in wealth, as
low-wealth agents are either constrained or in the process of building up their buffer stock
of savings. Guided by these predictions, we explore the spending behavior of households
in the PSID. Following Zeldes (1989), we treat households with little net worth relative to
labor earnings as empirical analogues to the model’s low-wealth agents that are potentially
“hand-to-mouth.” Higher net worth households with negligible liquid assets, referred to by
1Tothatpoint,HavranekandSokolova(2020)conductametaanalysisofmorethan100studiesestimating
household MPCs. They identify a higher MPC for households classified as lower wealth or liquidity as the
most robust finding across studies.
2Many papers model low-asset households as responding more to fiscal policies. Recent examples include
Kaplan and Violante (2014), Jappelli and Pistaferri (2014), Farhi and Werning (2017), McKay and Reis
(2016),Carroll,Slacalek,TokuokaandWhite(2017),Kaplan,MollandViolante(2018),andAuclert(2019).
Many of these authors also make clear that the hand-to-mouth will display less direct inter-temporal substi-
tution response to interest rates, though they may respond more via indirect channels, such as the income
and wealth effects, resulting from interest rate changes (e.g., Auclert, 2019, Kaplan et al., 2018).
3Just a few of the many papers in this vein are Schechtman and Escudero (1977), Imrohoroglu (1989),
Deaton (1991), Carroll (1992), Huggett (1993), Aiyagari (1994) and Krueger, Mitman and Perri (2016).
2

Kaplan, Violante and Weidner (2014) as the “wealthy hand-to-mouth,” are an alternative
group of interest. We label 40 percent of households as hand-to-mouth based on either low
net worth or low liquid wealth.
From the PSID we document four new facts on the behavior of H2M households. The
first is that some households tend to be persistently hand-to-mouth. As one example, those
households observed in year t to be hand-to-mouth based on net worth are more than ten
times as likely to have that status in year t+2 than are those households that are not hand-
to-mouth, based on wealth or liquidity, in t. Even by year t+4, these relative probabilities
differ by a factor of nearly ten. These patterns reflect that households differ considerably in
their tendency toward low wealth, possibly due to drawing specific sequences of shocks, but
also possibly due to targeting diffening amounts of assets.
OursecondfactisthatconsumptiongrowthisnothigherforH2M households. Thestan-
dard savings model exhibits a tight relationship between MPC and consumption growth. A
financially-constrained household exhibits a high MPC because marginal utility is high rel-
ative to its expected future value. But, absent preference heterogeneity, that requires such
households to expect higher future consumption. Our PSID panel follows households for
up to twenty-one years, allowing us to control for household fixed effects as well as current
H2M-status. Controlling for fixed effects, being currently H2M does predict consider-
ably higher consumption growth, 4% higher for the next two years for those H2M by net
wealth. But that effect is masked because households that are often hand-to-mouth average
lower spending growth. A natural interpretation is that, beyond shocks, households exhibit
heterogeneity in their targeted assets, with households targeting low assets displaying low
consumption growth while frequently observed H2M.
One reason that H2M households might target fewer assets is if they differ in their in-
come process. For instance, if their income profiles are steeper they will hold less life-cycle
savings, and if their income and consumption are more predictable they will hold less pre-
cautionary savings. But households that are often hand-to-mouth in the PSID display slower
income growth. Moreover, these households exhibit greater volatility in both income and
consumption – this is the third of the four new facts we highlight. So, absent preference
heterogeneity, they should display a greater demand for precautionary savings. This rein-
forces heterogeneity in preferences, rather than in income processes, as a candidate for lower
targeted savings by the hand-to-mouth.
Our fourth fact is that households observed hand-to-mouth spend differently than other
households. Controllingfortotalspending, theypurchasefewerexpenditurecategories. That
within-period differential behavior should not reflect a different income process or a different
rate of time discounting than other households. Furthermore, they adjust spending to a
3