NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CROSS-ASSET INFORMATION SYNERGY IN MUTUAL FUND FAMILIES
Jun Kyung Auh
Jennie Bai
Working Paper 26626
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26626
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2020
We thank Turan Bali, Tim Cohen, Amil Dasgupta, Darrell Duffie, Wayne Ferson, Wei Jiang, Hao
Jiang, Francis Longstaff, Massimo Massa, Veronika Pool, Lu Zheng for their insightful
comments, and William Birdthistle, John Morley, Mark Roe, Ann Lipton for legislative
consultation on mutual fund governance. We also appreciate feedback from seminar participants
at the Q-Group annual conference, the Rodney L. White Center annual conference on Financial
Decisions and Asset Markets at the Wharton School, WFA (2019), University of Maryland,
London School of Economics, American University, University of Cambridge Judge Business
School, University of Liverpool, Bloomberg, Georgetown University, Yonsei University, Utrecht
University, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Office of Financial Research, and ESMT
Asset Management Conference. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Jun Kyung Auh and Jennie Bai. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Cross-Asset Information Synergy in Mutual Fund Families
Jun Kyung Auh and Jennie Bai
NBER Working Paper No. 26626
January 2020
JEL No. G11,G23,G31
ABSTRACT
Despite common wisdom that equities and bonds are segmented, the organization structure of
fund families can offset frictions regarding cross-asset segmentation. We find that actively-
managed equity funds and corporate bond funds linked within a mutual fund family exhibit a
significant co-movement in holdings of commonly-held firms' equities and bonds. Such cross-
holdings facilitate information spillover, manifesting itself in the co-movement. Synthesizing
cross-asset information can predict future equity returns and create profits for fund families as
well as general investors. Our findings accentuate the importance of collaboration between equity
funds and bond funds within fund families.
Jun Kyung Auh
School of Business
Yonsei University
50 Yonsei-ro School of Business 504
Seodaemun-gu, Seoul
Korea
junkyung.auh@yonsei.ac.kr
Jennie Bai
McDonough School of Business
Georgetown University
3700 O Street, NW
Washington, DC 20057
and NBER
jennie.bai@georgetown.edu

Corporate bonds and equities issued by the same firm are different contingent claims on the same
cash flows, hence theoretically their values should be correlated (Merton, 1974). Empirical studies
howeversuggestthatbondsandequitiesaresegmentedduetoinstitutionalandinformationalfrictions.
For example, equity returns and bond returns have low correlations at the firm level (e.g., Collin-
Dufresne, Goldstein, and Martin, 2001; Kapadia and Pu, 2012), equity returns and bond returns are
driven by different risk factors (e.g., Choi and Kim, 2018; Chordia et al., 2017; Bai, Bali, and Quan,
2019), and equities and bonds have different investors (see the Flow of Funds report, 2018).1
Would investors under a well-integrated setup overcome such segmentation? In this paper, we
investigatetherelationshipofequitiesandbondsinauniqueenvironment: mutualfundfamilieswhose
equity funds and bond funds holding the same firm’s assets, which we designate as a cross-holding by
sister funds. Mutual funds are ideal for this question since they are the primary overlapping investors,
holding 33% of equities and 25% of corporate bonds of U.S. corporations. Also, in the $17-trillion
mutualfundmarketasofDecember2018,96.7%oftotalassetsarecontrolledbyfundfamiliesmanaging
both equity funds and corporate bond funds. If equity and bond funds are housed in the same fund
family, are their investment decisions on commonly-held firms correlated? Would common holdings
facilitate equity or bond funds learning from the other side on commonly-held firms? If so, can the
fund family as a whole derive profit from synthesizing information of creditors and shareholders?
The answer is not as certain as it seems to be. In academia, despite increasing studies of mutual
fund, the entire literature is dominated by studies on equity funds, only a few on bond funds, and
very little on the interaction of equity and bond funds. Second, equity and bond funds act for the
best value of shareholders and creditors respectively. Given that the objectives of shareholders and
creditors often diverge (Jensen and Meckling, 1976; Myers, 1977), the holdings of equity and bond
funds on the same firm may not co-move. Furthermore, equity and bond investors are significantly
different regarding risk appetites and investment objectives, and such investor segmentation may also
hinder co-movement. For example, Goldstein, Jiang, and Ng (2017) show that the flows of corporate
bond mutual funds behave differently from those of equity mutual funds. In Wall Street, anecdotes
1The Flow of Funds report released by the Federal Reserve Board shows the composition of investors for corporate
bonds (Table L.213) and equities (Table L.223) in the United States. Bonds are dominated by institutional investors,
in particular patient long-term investors such as insurance companies, whereas equities are mainly held by individual
investors(householdsector). Asoftheendofoursample,2018Q4,theprimaryholdersofcorporatebondsareinsurance
companies(36%),mutualfunds(25%),andpensionfunds(15%),whereastheprimaryholdersofequitiesarehouseholds
(43%), mutual funds (33%), and pension funds (15%).
1

further suggest a large cultural gap and operational heterogenity across equity funds and bond funds.2
In this paper, we provide the first systematic evidence that accentuates the importance of collab-
oration between equity funds and bond funds, which is largely understudied by academic researchers
and not explicitly aware of by market participants. Employing a unique dataset by matching the firms
held by actively-managed equity funds and bond funds in the survivor-bias-free mutual fund database,
we show that there is information spillover across the same management family’s equity funds and
bond funds. In particular, we find that the holdings of equity and bond funds on commonly-held firms
exhibit a significant co-movement relationship only when both funds belong to the same fund family
(sister funds), but not when they belong to different families (stand-alone funds). The co-movement
is not driven by common reaction to public information, neither by non-information channels such as
large capital flows or common skills.
More important, synthesizing information on cross-holdings of sister funds can help predict stock
returns and increase profit for fund families as well as general investors. This cross-asset information
synergy implies that combining the information of shareholders and creditors complements the whole
firm-level information, which is different from previously documented information channels such as
active cross-fund learning in the same asset class (equities), information sharing through side-by-
side management, or connections across fund managers. The organization structure of fund families
provides opportunities for cross-asset information spillover, even if the way of information sharing is
passive.3 Our findings provide the original evidence promoting the collaboration between equity funds
and bond funds in the fund families.
It is worth clarifying that our research does not focus on the relationship between the holdings of
equity funds and bond funds in response to fundamental shocks of commonly-held firms; rather, we
studywhethertherelationshipbetweenequityandbondfunds,measuredbytheirinvestmentdecisions
in commonly-held firms, could be different conditional on belonging to the same fund family. Given
a particular fundamental shock, shareholders and bondholders may response differently because they
2Weinterviewedfundmanagersfromseverallargestinvestmentcompanies, bothequitysideandbondside. Quoting
oneofthem,“AteveryfirmI’veworkedwith,thereisahugeculturalgapbetweenfixedincomeandequityandthetwo
often use completely different systems.”
3Weusetheterm‘sharing’inmoregeneralsense. Itdoesnotnecessarilyrefertoactivecommunicationorcollaboration.
Accordingtosomepractitioners,itcouldbesimplythatmanagersofequityfundandbondfundattendinternalmeetings
and get inspired from the perspective of the other asset side. We provide further discussion in Section V.
2