NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TRANSPARENCY IN STRUCTURAL RESEARCH
Isaiah Andrews
Matthew Gentzkow
Jesse M. Shapiro
Working Paper 26631
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26631
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2020
Prepared as a discussion paper for the Journal of Business and Economic Statistics. We
acknowledge funding from the National Science Foundation, the Brown University Population
Studies and Training Center, and the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research (SIEPR).
Patrick Kline, Emi Nakamura, participants in a 2020 ASSA session, discussants Stephane
Bonhomme, Christopher Taber, and Elie Tamer, editor Christian Hansen, and an anonymous
associate editor provided valuable comments. We thank our many dedicated research assistants
for their contributions to this project.The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26631.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2020 by Isaiah Andrews, Matthew Gentzkow, and Jesse M. Shapiro. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Transparency in Structural Research
Isaiah Andrews, Matthew Gentzkow, and Jesse M. Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 26631
January 2020, Revised July 2020
JEL No. C10
ABSTRACT
We propose a formal definition of transparency in empirical research and apply it to structural
estimation in economics. We discuss how some existing practices can be understood as attempts
to improve transparency, and we suggest ways to improve current practice, emphasizing
approaches that impose a minimal computational burden on the researcher. We illustrate with
examples.
Isaiah Andrews Jesse M. Shapiro
Department of Economics Economics Department
Harvard University Box B
Littauer M18 Brown University
Cambridge, MA 02138 Providence, RI 02912
and NBER and NBER
iandrews@fas.harvard.edu jesse_shapiro_1@brown.edu
Matthew Gentzkow
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Jane Stanford Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
gentzkow@stanford.edu

1 Introduction
Structural empirical research can sometimes look like a black box. Once upon a time, a structural
paper might begin with an elaborate model setup containing dozens of assumptions, present a
similarly complex recipe for estimation, and then jump immediately to reporting model estimates
and counterfactuals that answer the research question of interest. A reader who accepted the full
list of assumptions could walk away having learned a great deal. A reader who questioned even
one of the assumptions might learn very little, as they would find it hard or impossible to predict
howtheconclusionsmightchangeunderalternativeassumptions.
Modernresearcharticlestakingastructuralapproachoftenlookverydifferentfromthiscarica-
ture. Many devote significant attention to descriptive analysis of important facts and relationships
inthedata. Manyprovidedetaileddiscussionsofhowthesedescriptivestatisticsrelatetothestruc-
tural estimates, connecting specific data features to key parameter estimates or conclusions. Such
analysis has the potential to make structural estimates more transparent, helping skeptical readers
learnfromtheresultsevenwhentheydonotfullyacceptallthemodelassumptions.
Inthispaper,weconsiderthevalueoftransparencyinstructuralresearch. Weproposeaformal
definition of the transparency of a statistical report. We argue that our definition provides a ratio-
nale for many current practices, and suggests ways these practices can be improved. We discuss
these potential improvements, emphasizing those that impose a minimal computational burden on
theresearcher.
Our definition of transparency follows the one proposed in Andrews et al. (2017).1 We situate
it in a model of scientific communication based on Andrews and Shapiro (2020). In the model, a
researcher observes data informative about a quantity of interest c. The researcher reports an esti-
matecˆofcalongwithauxiliarystatisticstˆtoasetof readersindexedbyr. Undertheresearcher’s
maintainedassumptionsa ,cˆisvalid,forexampleinthesensethatitisasymptoticallynormaland
0
unbiased. Notallreadersaccepta ,however,anddifferentreadersmayentertaindifferentalterna-
0
tive assumptions a (cid:54)= a . After receiving the report (cˆ,tˆ), each reader updates their prior beliefs,
0
selectsanestimated ofc,andrealizesaquadraticloss(d −c)2 . Foragivenreader,wedefinethe
r r
transparencyofthereporttobethereductioninexpectedlossfromobserving(cˆ,tˆ),relativetothe
reduction from observing the full data. In other words, research is transparent to the extent that it
makes it easy for readers to reach the same inference about c that they would reach by analyzing
1SeealsothediscussionsoftransparencyinAngristandPischke(2010)andHeckman(2010).
2

thedatainfullundertheirpreferredassumptions. Weshowthattransparencyisdistinctfromother
econometricdesideratasuchasefficiencyandrobustness.
After describing our model and definition of transparency in section 2, we discuss several
practices that we believe can improve the transparency of structural estimation. We illustrate
throughout with stylized examples drawn from our model and real-world examples drawn from
theliterature.
Section3discussesdescriptiveanalysis,whichweinterpretasincludingintˆstatisticssˆthatare
either directly informative about the parameter of interest c, or informative about the plausibility
oftheassumptionsa . Wearguethatdescriptivestatisticsofbothkindscanaidtransparency.
0
Section 4 discusses the analysis of identification. Although transparency is a distinct property
frommodelidentification,wearguethatcleardiscussionofidentificationcanimprovetransparency
bysharpeningreaders’beliefsabouttheappropriatenessoftheresearcher’sassumptions.
Section 5 discusses ways to improve the transparency of the estimator. We argue that trans-
parency is improved when cˆdepends to a large degree on some interpretable statistics sˆand when
theformoftherelationshipbetweenthetwoismadecleartothereader. Wesuggestthisasaratio-
nale for targeting descriptive statistics directly in estimation. Building on work by Andrews et al.
(2017, forthcoming), we discuss how local approximations can be used to clarify the relationship
betweencˆandsˆ.
Section 6 discusses sensitivity analysis, which we take to encompass a range of approaches
for demonstrating the sensitivity of conclusions to alternative assumptions. When readers are
concerned about a small number of known alternative assumptions a, the researcher can improve
transparency by reporting estimates cˆ that are valid under these alternatives, as in a traditional
a
sensitivity analysis. When readers are concerned about a richer or unknown set of alternatives a,
then it is no longer practical to report an estimate corresponding to each of these. Building on
work by Conley et al. (2012) and Andrews et al. (2017), we discuss how including in tˆstatistics
basedonlocalapproximationscanhelpreadersassessalargersetofassumptions. Forcaseswhere
a qualitative conclusion (e.g., the direction of a causal effect or welfare change) is important, we
alsodiscussthevalueofreportingfeaturesofalternativerealizationsofthedatathatwouldleadto
aconclusiondifferentfromtheresearcher’s.
3