NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TARGET DATE FUNDS AND PORTFOLIO CHOICE IN 401(K) PLANS
Olivia S. Mitchell
Stephen Utkus
Working Paper 26684
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26684
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2020
This research is part of the NBER programs on Aging and Labor Studies and the Household
Finance Working Group, and it was undertaken pursuant to a grant from the US Social Security
Administration (SSA) to the Michigan Retirement Research Center (MRRC). This research
support is gratefully acknowledged along with that of the Pension Research Council and Boettner
Center at The Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, and Vanguard. The authors
would like to thank Gary Koenig, Alberto Rossi and Jean Young for helpful comments, and Yong
Yu for exceptional research assistance. They acknowledge Vanguard’s efforts in the provision of
anonymized recordkeeping data under restricted access conditions. All findings, interpretations,
and conclusions represent the views of the authors and not those of the Wharton School or the
Pension Research Council, the SSA, any agency of the Federal Government, Vanguard, the
MRRC, or any other institution with which the authors are affiliated. ©2020 Mitchell and Utkus.
All rights reserved. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26684.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Olivia S. Mitchell and Stephen Utkus. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Target Date Funds and Portfolio Choice in 401(k) Plans
Olivia S. Mitchell and Stephen Utkus
NBER Working Paper No. 26684
January 2020
JEL No. D12,D14,D91,G5,G51,J32
ABSTRACT
Target date funds in corporate retirement plans grew from $5B in 2000 to $734B in 2018, partly
because federal regulation sanctioned these as default investments in automatic enrollment plans.
We show that adopters delegated pension investment decisions to fund managers selected by plan
sponsors. Including these funds in retirement saving menus raised equity shares, boosted bond
exposures, curtailed cash/company stock holdings, and reduced idiosyncratic risk. The adoption
of low-cost target date funds may enhance retirement wealth by as much as 50 percent over a 30-
year horizon.
Olivia S. Mitchell
University of Pennsylvania
The Wharton School
3620 Locust Walk, St 3000 SH-DH
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
mitchelo@wharton.upenn.edu
Stephen Utkus
Vanguard
100 Vanguard Boulevard, G13
Malvern, PA 19355
steve_utkus@vanguard.com

1
Target Date Funds and Portfolio Choice in 401(k) Plans
Although U.S. employers are legally responsible for selecting and overseeing investment options
in the 401(k) plans offered to their workers, employees have traditionally been responsible for selecting
their own portfolios given the fund menus offered.1 A concern with this approach is that many participants
appear to be ill-equipped to make these portfolio decisions, potentially undermining old-age retirement
security, due to financial illiteracy or behavioral biases.2
This paper shows how the introduction of target date funds (TDFs) into 401(k) plans has
fundamentally altered the decision-making dynamic in U.S. defined contribution retirement saving plans.
A target date fund menu consists of a series of fund offerings with portfolio allocations described in terms
of an expected year of retirement; usually offered in five-year increments (e.g., a 2015, 2020, etc., fund), a
target date fund series may include up to a dozen funds. Participants in voluntary choice plans must actively
select among target date and other fund offerings; by contrast, a participant in an automatic enrollment plan
is initially defaulted into a single target date fund based on the employee’s current age and assumed
retirement date (usually age 65), with the option to move to other investments subsequently.
Target date fund assets in 401(k) plans have grown phenomenally over time, from $5B in 2000 to
$734B in 2018 (ICI, 2019). In part, this growth was spurred by a Department of Labor regulation issued
under the 2006 Pension Protection Act designating target date funds as an eligible default investment option
for automatic enrollment plans.3 By 2018, 80 percent of 401(k) plans offered these funds (ICI, 2019), and
1 Here we use the term 401(k) plans to refer broadly to private-sector defined contribution plans which can include
profit-sharing, money purchase, and 403(b) plans along with 401(k) plans.
2 Research on the role of financial illiteracy and behavioral biases in investing and savings decisions includes Bekaert,
Hoyem, Hu, and Ravina (2017), Benartzi and Thaler (2001. 2002), Beshears, Choi, Laibson and Madrian (2018),
Goda, Levy, Manchester, Sojourner and Tasoff (2019), Lusardi and Mitchell (2007, 2011, 2104), Mitchell and Lusardi
(2011), Mottola and Utkus (2008), Dimmock, Kouwenberg, Mitchell, and Peijnenberg (2016), and van Rooij, Lusardi,
and Alessie (2011).
3 The Department of Labor regulations were effective December 24, 2007. 72 Fed. Reg. 60451. Eligible “qualified
default investment alternatives” (QDIAs) include target date funds, traditional balanced funds, and managed account
advice services. QDIA regulations provide sponsors so-called 404(c) protection for participant portfolio choices,
meaning there is a presumption that employers are not liable for participant portfolio decisions when participants hold
QDIAs. The sponsor retains liability for selecting and monitoring the QDIA itself.

2
two-thirds of new 401(k) plan entrants were automatically enrolled, with target funds the dominant choice
for default investments (Vanguard, 2019). This rising reliance on automatic enrollment and default portfolio
choice in the U.S. conforms to a global move toward default portfolio choice in defined contribution
systems (OECD, 2015).
Compared to other multi-asset class portfolios such as traditional balanced and risk-based lifecycle
funds, a target date family offers retirement savers two unique advice-related features. First, each fund is
identified with an anticipated retirement year which serves as an implicit recommendation regarding which
types of investors should hold each fund. If investors must make their own portfolio choices, the date
labeling transforms a potentially complex decision about how to assemble a portfolio with the available
funds on the menu into a simpler decision heuristic, namely to simply select the fund associated with the
employee’s anticipated retirement date. 4 Second, target date risk levels are automatically rebalanced over
time by fund managers who follow an “equity glide path,” reducing risk as participants near their target
dates. 5
In what follows, we evaluate how the introduction of target date funds into 401(k) investment
menus has reshaped participants’ portfolio choice decisions, drawing on an anonymized, restricted-access
longitudinal dataset from Vanguard, a major 401(k) plan administrator and investment manager. The target
date funds we study are almost exclusively indexed portfolios, diversified across global equity and fixed
asset classes, with management fees under 20 basis points. As a result, our dataset represents a real-world
benchmark for the provision of low-cost, highly diversified professional portfolio advice to an important
group of nonprofessional investors.
To assess the impact of target date fund introduction, we examine participant adoption and portfolio
exposures one year after the first appearance of the funds in the 401(k) investment menus. We show that
4 Prior to the advent of target date funds, no investment funds provided age-related rebalancing in 401(k)
plans.
5 Here we take no stance on the desirability of a declining equity share with age. Some analysts favor it based on labor
income profiles with age (e,g., Campbell and Viceira, 2002; Cocco, Gomes and Maenhout, 2005), while others do not
(e.g., Basu, Byrne and Drew, 2011).