NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE CORPORATE FINANCE OF MULTINATIONAL FIRMS
Isil Erel
Yeejin Jang
Michael S. Weisbach
Working Paper 26762
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26762
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2020
We thank Fritz Foley, Jim Hines, David Wessel and participants in a presentation at Brookings
for very helpful suggestions. Greg Allen, Hyeik Kim, Rick Ogden provided excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Isil Erel, Yeejin Jang, and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Corporate Finance of Multinational Firms
Isil Erel, Yeejin Jang, and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 26762
February 2020
JEL No. G30,G31,G32
ABSTRACT
An increasing fraction of firms worldwide operate in multiple countries. We study the costs and
benefits of being multinational in firms’ corporate financial decisions and survey the related
academic evidence. We document that, among U.S. publicly traded firms, the prevalence of
multinationals is approximately the same as domestic firms, using classification schemes relying
on both income-based and a sales-based metrics. Outside the U.S., the fraction is lower but has
been growing. Multinational firms are exposed to additional risks beyond those facing domestic
firms coming from political factors and exchange rates. However, they are likely to benefit from
diversification of cash flows and flexibility in capital sources. We show that multinational firms,
indeed, have a better access to foreign capital markets and a lower cost of debt than otherwise
identical domestic firms, but the evidence on the cost of equity is mixed.
Isil Erel Michael S. Weisbach
Fisher College of Business Department of Finance
Ohio State University Fisher College of Business
2100 Neil Avenue Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210 2100 Neil Ave.
and NBER Columbus, OH 43210
erel@fisher.osu.edu and NBER
weisbach.2@osu.edu
Yeejin Jang
University of New South Wales
School of Banking & Finance
y.jang@unsw.edu.au

1. Introduction
As the world economy has become more integrated, there has been an increase in the
number of multinational firms. As of 2017, about half of the publicly-traded firms in the U.S. are
multinationals. For the average multinational firm, foreign income (sales) represent about 40% of
aggregate income (sales). The extent of international operations of multinational firms is similar
for international firms in MSCI World developed countries. As the global economy becomes more
integrated, the fraction of firms with foreign sales also rose rapidly in emerging markets. Given
that multinational firms are such significant players in the world economy, understanding their
financial policies is an important task.
Operating in more than one country can affect a firm’s financial decisions in a number of
ways. Most importantly, being multinational appears to affect both firms’ cost of finance and their
access to capital during poor economic times. An important reason for financing advantages of
multinational firms is that they have more flexibility in their potential sources of financing than
domestic firms.
In principle, any firm could borrow from any bank in the world or issue public equity or
debt in any country. However, for a number of reasons, it is usually much more cost-effective for
firms to raise capital in locations where they have operations (see Jang (2017)). Financing
international activities from local capital provides a natural hedge against currency risks.
Furthermore, additional choices of where to raise capital can allow a firm to better optimize over
rates, and also to diversify its sources of financing, which can be valuable when financing becomes
scarce in one part of the world.
In addition, being multinational diversifies a firm’s cash flows across countries and
minimizes the impact of country-specific shocks. Therefore, multinational firms have lower cash-
1

flow volatility than otherwise similar domestic firms. This lower cash-flow volatility is likely to
reduce a firm’s credit risk and cost of financing, and to increase its overall debt capacity. Consistent
with the choice of location of borrowing and diversification across countries lowering the cost of
debt, we document empirically that multinational firms pay lower spreads on their bank loans,
holding other factors constant. However, the results on the cost of equity are mixed, with some
studies finding that being multinational lowers the cost of equity while others find that it raises the
cost of equity.
While being a multinational incurs benefits through diversification of capital sources and
by allowing for tax arbitrage across countries, it also entails costs. Firms operating in multiple
countries face political risks that are likely to be larger than those faced by domestic companies.
A multinational company is a “foreign” company in at least one country, and foreign companies
are often discriminated against by regulatory authorities. Dinc and Erel (2013) provide empirical
evidence on how economic nationalism, which is defined as preference for the native and against
the foreigner, has both direct and indirect economic impact on acquisitions and impedes
international capital flows. The authors show that governments implement national policies against
foreign acquisition bids through a number of methods, including playing for time by delaying
approvals by regulatory agencies, using golden shares in previously privatized companies, moral
persuasion by publicly opposing the deals, and providing financing to the rival bidders from
national bank. Even if a multinational firm is operating in a country in which it is treated well by
the government, there is always risk of a policy shift, potentially occurring when the government
changes, that could affect the multinational firm. This political risk is an incremental cost faced
by multinational firms but not by domestic ones.
2