NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INFORMATION ACQUISITION, EFFICIENCY, AND NON-FUNDAMENTAL VOLATILITY
Benjamin M. Hébert
Jennifer La'O
Working Paper 26771
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26771
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2020, Revised April 2021
We thank John Leahy, Andrew Caplin, and Alessandro Pavan for their excellent discussions and
feedback on our paper. We also thank Marios Angeletos, Navin Kartik, Elliot Lipnowski, and
Mike Woodford for their insightful advice and comments. We would like to thank Harald Uhlig
(editor) and four anonymous referees for comments and suggestions that helped improve the
paper. All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Benjamin M. Hébert and Jennifer La'O. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Information Acquisition, Efficiency, and Non-Fundamental Volatility
Benjamin M. Hébert and Jennifer La'O
NBER Working Paper No. 26771
February 2020, Revised April 2021
JEL No. C72,D62,D83
ABSTRACT
We analyze non-fundamental volatility and efficiency in large games featuring strategic
interaction and endogenous information acquisition. We adopt the rational inattention approach to
information acquisition but generalize to a large class of information costs. Agents can learn
about exogenous states as well as endogenous aggregate actions. We study how properties of
information costs relate to properties of equilibria. We provide necessary and sufficient
conditions to guarantee zero non-fundamental volatility in equilibrium and another set of
necessary and sufficient conditions to guarantee constrained efficient equilibria. Mutual
information, the cost typically assumed in rational inattention models, precludes non-fundamental
volatility and imposes efficiency.
Benjamin M. Hébert
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
bhebert@stanford.edu
Jennifer La'O
Columbia University
Department of Economics
1105A International Affairs Building
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
jl4196@columbia.edu

Information Acquisition, Efficiency, and
Non-Fundamental Volatility∗
BenjaminHe´bert† JenniferLa’O‡
April26,2021
Abstract
We analyze non-fundamental volatility and efficiency in large games featuring strategic
interactionandendogenousinformationacquisition. Weadopttherationalinattentionap-
proachtoinformationacquisitionbutgeneralizetoalargeclassofinformationcosts.Agents
can learn about exogenous states as well as endogenous aggregate actions. We study how
propertiesofinformationcostsrelatetopropertiesofequilibria. Weprovidenecessaryand
sufficient conditions to guarantee zero non-fundamental volatility in equilibrium and an-
othersetofnecessaryandsufficientconditionstoguaranteeconstrainedefficientequilibria.
Mutual information, the cost typically assumed in rational inattention models, precludes
non-fundamentalvolatilityandimposesefficiency.
JELcodes:C72,D62,D83
Keywords:InformationAcquisition,LargeGames,BeautyContests,RationalInattention
∗We thank John Leahy, Andrew Caplin, and Alessandro Pavan for their excellent discussions and feedback on
ourpaper. WealsothankMariosAngeletos,NavinKartik,ElliotLipnowski,andMikeWoodfordfortheirinsightful
adviceandcomments.WewouldliketothankHaraldUhlig(editor)andfouranonymousrefereesforcommentsand
suggestionsthathelpedimprovethepaper.Allremainingerrorsareourown.
†StanfordUniversityandNBER,bhebert@stanford.edu.
‡ColumbiaUniversityandNBER,jenlao@columbia.edu.

1 Introduction
Inmanyeconomicenvironments,agentsmakechoicesunderincompleteinformationandhave
incentives to align their actions with both economic “fundamentals” and the actions of other
agents [Morris and Shin, 2002, Angeletos and Pavan, 2007]. These games of strategic interac-
tionformtheunderlyingbasisformanymicro-foundedmacroeconomicenvironments;exam-
plesincludefirms’nominalprice-settingdecisionsinNewKeynesianmodels[Woodford,2003],
firms’realquantitychoicesinbusinesscyclemodels[AngeletosandLa’O,2010,2013],aswellas
investors’assetpositionsinmodelsoffinancialtrade[GrossmanandStiglitz,1976,1980].
In these environments, agents’ beliefs over exogenous fundamentals and the endogenous
actions of others play a key role in determining equilibrium outcomes. But where do these
beliefscomefromandhowaretheyformed?
In this paper we investigate the endogenous acquisition of information within games of
strategic interaction. We ask two questions. First, what properties of the agents’ information
acquisition costs guarantee that an equilibrium of the game features or does not feature non-
fundamental volatility? Second, what properties of the agents’ information acquisition costs
guaranteethatanequilibriumexiststhatisconstrainedefficient?
Ourframework. Westudyaclassoflargegamesofstrategicinteraction. Acontinuumofex-
anteidenticalagentstakeactionsunderincompleteinformation.Eachagenthasanincentiveto
alignheractionwithanexogenous,payoff-relevantstateaswellaswiththeendogenousmean
action.
Agents acquire information endogenously. In particular, we adopt the rational inattention
approach to costly information acquisition proposed by Sims [2003]. However, relative to the
standardrationalinattentionframework,wemakethreesignificantdepartures.
First, we do not assume information costs are proportional to mutual information—the
typical cost function introduced by Sims [2003] and used widely throughout the rational inat-
tention literature. We instead consider a more general class of cost functions: costs that are
“posterior-separable”intheterminologyofCaplin,Dean,andLeahy[2021].Posterior-separable
costfunctionscanbedescribedastheexpecteddivergencefromtheagents’priortoposterior
beliefs. This class nests the standard mutual information cost function as a special case, but
alsoincludesmanyothercostfunctions,includingthelog-likelihoodratio(LLR)costfunctions
of Pomatto et al. [2020], the Tsallis entropy costs of Caplin, Dean, and Leahy [2021], and the
neighborhood-based cost functions of He´bert and Woodford [2021]. These alternative cost
functionshavebeenproposedinpartbecausetheyarebetterabletomatchobservedbehavior
inexperiments(see,e.g.,DeanandNeligh[2019]).
Second, we introduce exogenous noisy public signals. Noisy public signals are standard
components of exogenous information sets in beauty contest games [Morris and Shin, 2002,
1