NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CENTRAL BANK DIGITAL CURRENCY:
CENTRAL BANKING FOR ALL?
Jesús Fernández-Villaverde
Daniel Sanches
Linda Schilling
Harald Uhlig
Working Paper 26753
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26753
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2020
The contribution of Linda Schilling has been prepared under the Lamfalussy fellowship program
sponsored by the ECB. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the ECB, the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, or the Federal
Reserve System. The project was partially written during a research stay of Linda Schilling at the
Simons Institute at UC Berkeley. T The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26753.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Jesús Fernández-Villaverde, Daniel Sanches, Linda Schilling, and Harald Uhlig. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Central Bank Digital Currency: Central Banking For All?
Jesús Fernández-Villaverde, Daniel Sanches, Linda Schilling, and Harald Uhlig
NBER Working Paper No. 26753
February 2020
JEL No. E58,G21
ABSTRACT
The introduction of a central bank digital currency (CBDC) allows the central bank to engage in
large-scale intermediation by competing with private financial intermediaries for deposits. Yet,
since a central bank is not an investment expert, it cannot invest in long-term projects itself, but
relies on investment banks to do so. We derive an equivalence result that shows that absent a
banking panic, the set of allocations achieved with private financial intermediation will also be
achieved with a CBDC. During a panic, however, we show that the rigidity of the central bank's
contract with the investment banks has the capacity to deter runs. Thus, the central bank is more
stable than the commercial banking sector. Depositors internalize this feature ex-ante, and the
central bank arises as a deposit monopolist, attracting all deposits away from the commercial
banking sector. This monopoly might endangered maturity transformation.
Jesús Fernández-Villaverde Linda Schilling
Department of Economics Ecole Polytechnique CREST
University of Pennsylvania 5 Avenue le Chatelier
The Ronald O. Perelman Center Palaiseau, Fran 91120
for Political Science and Economics France
133 South 36th Street Suite 150 and CEPR
Philadelphia, PA 19104 lin.schilling@gmail.com
and CEPR
and also NBER Harald Uhlig
jesusfv@econ.upenn.edu Dept. of Economics
University of Chicago
Daniel Sanches 1126 E 59th Street
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Chicago, IL 60637
Ten Independence Mall and CEPR
Philadelphia, PA 19106-1574 and also NBER
Daniel.Sanches@phil.frb.org huhlig@uchicago.edu

1 Introduction
Recent advances in cryptographic and distributed ledger techniques (von zur Gathen,
2015;Narayananetal.,2016)haveopenedthedoortothewidespreaduseofdigitalcurrencies.
While the lead in the introduction of these currencies came from private initiatives such as
Bitcoin, Ethereum, and Libra, researchers and policymakers have explored the possibility
that central banks can also issue their own digital currencies, aptly called a central bank
digital currency (CBDC).1
The introduction of a CBDC can represent an important innovation in money and bank-
ing history. Besides its potential role in eliminating physical cash, a CBDC will allow the
central bank to engage in large-scale intermediation by competing with private financial in-
termediaries for deposits (and, likely, engaging in some form of lending of those deposits). In
other words, a CBDC amounts to giving consumers the possibility of holding a bank account
with the central bank directly.
Defenders of a CBDC have been rather explicit about this implication. For instance,
Barrdear and Kumhof (2016, p. 7) state: “By CBDC, we refer to a central bank granting
universal, electronic, 24x7, national-currency-denominated and interest-bearing access to its
balance sheet.” In this paper, we will use these authors’ definition as the working concept of
a CBDC.2
Similarly, Bordo and Levin (2017) propose that either a “an account-based CBDC could
be implemented via accounts held directly at the central bank” [p. 7], or “CBDC could be
provided to the public via specially designated accounts at supervised commercial banks,
which would hold the corresponding amount of funds in segregated reserve accounts at the
central bank” [p. 8], and which is now often referred to as a synthetic CBDC. In this formu-
lation, the differences between a CBDC held directly at the central bank or at a commercial
1See, as examples and without trying to be exhaustive, Adrian and Mancini-Griffoli (2019), Agur et al.
(2019), Barontini and Holden (2019), Berentsen and Schar (2018), Brunnermeier et al. (2019), Barrdear and
Kumhof(2016),BordoandLevin(2017),DanezisandMeiklejohn(2015),DysonandHodgson(2016),Ketterer
and Andrade (2016), Mancini-Griffoli et al. (2018), Rogoff (2014), and Wadsworth (2018). In terms of cen-
tral banks, the BIS has circulated numerous position papers on CBDCs, the Sveriges Riksbank has studied
this issue in detail with its E-krona project, and the Bank of Japan has reported on the legal issues re-
garding CBDCs. See https://www.bis.org/cpmi/publ/d174.pdf and https://www.riksbank.se/en-gb/
payments--cash/e-krona/ and http://www.boj.or.jp/en/research/wps_rev/lab/lab19e03.htm/.
2Notice, therefore, that the sense in which most economists have defined a CBDC as an account-based
currency goes well beyond a basic notion of central bank-issued electronic money (which may or may not
fully replace physical cash). To focus our investigation, we will avoid the discussion of the relative merits
of other forms of central bank-issued electronic money, such as a token-based central bank cryptocurrency
or traditional electronic reserves. Conversely, one could consider situations where the central bank opens its
account facilities to all citizens, even in the absence of a CBDC. As we will see in Section 2, this opening has
occurred often in history, and it was defended in the 1980s by Tobin (1987, p. 172) as “deposited currency.”
Nearly all of the analysis in our paper carries over to a “deposited currency” environment.
1

bank with segregated reserves are mostly inconsequential for our analysis, for they have the
same implications for financial intermediation.
We could be, thus, at a juncture where changes in technology –namely, the introduction
of digital currencies– may justify a fundamental shift in the architecture of a financial system,
a central bank “open to all.” As argued by Friedman and Schwartz (1986) in a classic paper,
external forces –in this case, technological innovations– might shape how we think about the
role of government in setting up monetary and financial institutions and make us opt for
alternative arrangements.
These considerations are already relevant to monetary policy. In June 2018, Swiss voters
turned down the sovereign-money (Vollgeld) initiative that would have given the central bank
a monopoly on issuing demand deposits, an idea motivated in part by the possibility of a
Swiss CBDC. Despite the Vollgeld initiative being soundly defeated at the ballot box, similar
designs are bound to be widely discussed during the coming years.
What effects will the introduction of a CBDC and the opening of central bank facilities
have on financial intermediation? Will a CBDC impair the role of the financial system in
allocating funds to productive projects? Or can we reorganize the financial system in such a
way that a CBDC will still allow the right flow of funds between savers and investors? Will
a CBDC make bank runs disappear and stabilize the financial system?
In this paper, we investigate the implications of a CBDC on financial intermediation by
building on the classic model by Diamond and Dybvig (1983), augmented by the presence
of a central bank. We select this model because it emphasizes the role of banks in maturity
transformation: banks finance long-term projects with demand deposits, which may be with-
drawn at a shorter horizon. We find that exploring how a CBDC will interact with maturity
transformation is a first-order consideration that has not been thoroughly examined by the
literature, often more interested in questions such as the consequences of a CBDC for interest
rates, tax evasion, or anonymity (for a review of that literature, see Beniak, 2019). Further-
more, the model by Diamond and Dybvig (1983) allows us to easily explore how bank runs
might change with the introduction of a CBDC and to compare those results with previous
findings in the literature.
More concretely, we consider a framework in which the CBDC takes the form of demand
deposit accounts of the public at the central bank. Like a commercial bank, the central bank
holds assets to fund these liabilities, but in contrast to commercial banks, we assume that the
central bank cannot invest in long-term projects itself. This might be due to the central bank
not having a good technology to screen, monitor, and liquidate productive projects. The
central bank can, instead, rely on investment banks to engage in wholesale loans. We derive
an interesting equivalence result that shows that the set of allocations achieved with private
2