NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
COUNTERCYCLICAL CAPITAL BUFFERS:
A CAUTIONARY TALE
Christoffer Koch
Gary Richardson
Patrick Van Horn
Working Paper 26710
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26710
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2020
We thank Geoffrey Gjerdes, Joseph Haubrich, and Gregor Matvos for comments that improved
all aspects of the paper. We thank participants at the NBER Summer Institute, ASSA AEA
Annual Meetings, and the Fed’s SCFIRM Conference for comments. We thank the UC Irvine
Program in Corporate Welfare for financial support. We thank Joseph Johnson, Ara Dermajian,
James Wong, and many UC Irvine undergraduates for research assistance. The views expressed
in this paper and website are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research. Any errors or omissions are the sole responsibility of the authors.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Christoffer Koch, Gary Richardson, and Patrick Van Horn. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Countercyclical Capital Buffers: A Cautionary Tale
Christoffer Koch, Gary Richardson, and Patrick Van Horn
NBER Working Paper No. 26710
January 2020
JEL No. E02,E42,G01,G2,G21,G3,N1
ABSTRACT
Countercyclical capital buffers (CCyBs) are an old idea recently resurrected. CCyBs compel
banks at the core of financial systems to accumulate capital during expansions so that they are
better able to sustain operations during downturns. To gauge the potential impact of modern
CCyBs, we compare the behavior of large and highly-connected commercial banks during booms
before the Great Depression and Great Recession. Before the former, core banks did not expect
bailouts and were subject to regulations that incentivized capital accumulation during booms.
Before the later, core banks expected bailouts and kept capital levels close to regulatory minima.
Our analysis indicates that the pre-Depression regulatory regime induced money-center banks to
build capital buffers between 3% and 5% of total assets during economic expansions, which is up
to double the maximum modern CCyB. These buffers enabled those banks to continue operations
without government assistance during severe crises. This historical analogy indicates that modern
countercyclical buffers may achieve their immediate goals of protecting core banks during crises
but raises questions about whether they will contribute to overall financial stability.
Christoffer Koch Patrick Van Horn
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Department of Economics and Business
2200 North Pearl Street Scripps College
Dallas, TX 75201 1030 Columbia Avenue
Christoffer.Koch@dal.frb.org Claremont, CA 91711
pvanhorn@scrippscollege.edu
Gary Richardson
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
3155 Social Sciences Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
and NBER
garyr@uci.edu

The purpose of making bank stock subject to assessment equal to the par value of the stock, in the event
of the bank’s failure, was to insure careful and prudent management. The idea worked rather well ...
Jesse Jones, Chairman of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation, in the section of
his memoirs describing bank regulation before the Great Depression (Jones 1975 p.
39).
Rep. StewartMcKinney(R-Conn.), wavinghisarmsinexasperation, interruptedtoexclaim: "Wehave
a new kind of bank, it’s called TBTF - too big to fail."
Description in the Los Angeles Times of the moment in a Congressional hearing
where U.S. Comptroller of the Currency C. T. Conover explained the federal gov-
ernment bailed out Continental-Illinois because the failure of such a large bank
threatened the stability of the financial system and that the federal government
would bail out other large banks in similar circumstances in the future (20 Septem-
ber 1984, p. H1). McKinney’s exclamation popularized the term “too big to fail.”
1 Introduction
The financial crisis of 2008 convinced observers that systemically-important commercial banks
held insufficient capital at peaks of economic cycles, particularly cycles accompanied by asset
price booms (Bernanke, 2013; Blinder, 2014; Jorda, Schularick, and Taylor, 2009; Schularick
and Taylor, 2012; Reinhart and Rogoff, 2009). The insufficiency occurred because governments
treated banks at the center of financial systems as too big to fail, reducing their incentive to
hold capital sufficient to survive adverse shocks using only their own resources (Admati and
Hellwig, 2013; Calomiris and Haber, 2014). Solutions to this problem include either (i) altering
banks’ incentives by requiring them to bear more of the consequences of their choices, which
would enhance internal and market discipline of decisions concerning capital; or (ii) stricter
regulation, such as requiring systemically-important banks to accumulate capital when the
economy expands so that they could survive crises that occur occasionally when the economy
contracts. A policy tool along these lines is the Federal Reserve’s countercyclical capital buffer
(CCyB). The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) recommends that all central
banks adopt similar policies. Dozens have done so.1 The efficacy of CCyBs stems from three
widely held beliefs. First, too-big-to-fail incentives dictate capital choices of systemically-
important commercial banks. Second, changing banks’ incentives can induce them to hold
1As of October 2019, 29 nations have adopted CCyBs including the nations with the worlds ten largest
economies. For up-to-date details, see the Bank of International Settlements CCyB information page at
https://www.bis.org/bcbs/ccyb/.
2

more capital. Third, increasing capital held by banks at the core of the financial system will
mitigate or minimize crises that might periodically occur during contractionary phases of
business cycles. The need for and potential impact of these reforms is the subject of recent
research.
The theoretical literature emphasizes how expectations of bailouts and limits on liability
alterbankers’behaviortowardsrisk(ChariandKehoe, 2016; Keister2016; Kashyap, Tsomocos,
and Vardoulakis, 2014; Farhi and Tirole, 2012).2 Bankers who face less downside risk invest
in more and riskier assets than they would if they were fully liable for the consequences of
their choices (Rochet, 2008, pp. 227-9). Early contributions along these lines include Koehn
and Santomero (1980), Diamond and Dybvig (1983), and Blum (1999). Models of the leverage
cycle, such as Geanakoplos (2010) and Nuno and Thomas (2017), yield similar results. Com-
mercial bank leverage rises during booms and falls during busts, because bankers receive the
upside when risky assets yield high returns, while depositors or the government bear some of
the losses when risky assets yield substantially less than book value. Regulations that induce
banks – particularly large institutions at the core of the financial system – to accumulate cap-
ital during booms may limit misallocation as the economy expands and protect the financial
system as the economy contracts (Gersbach and Rochet, 2017; Aikman, Haldane, and Nelson
2013). Optimal regulations may be, however, difficult to design. The first-best rule differs
across models (e.g. Chari and Kehoe, 2016 and Keister 2016), and rules regarding capital may
have unintended or pernicious impacts (Ennis and Keister, 2009; Diamond and Rajan 2000).
The recent empirical literature has made strides in identification strategies as well as
historical scope and breadth. Jimenez, Ongena, Peydro, and Saurina (2017) examine Spain’s
dynamic capital requirements from 2000 through 2013. They find increasing capital buffers
by one percent substantially increases bank lending and firm employment during subsequent
contractions. Other scholars have examined leverage patterns for financial institutions in re-
cent decades, typically finding that leverage rises before and falls after financial crises (Aik-
man, Haldane, and Nelson 2013; Nuno and Thomas, 2017; Adrian and Shin, 2010; Brunner-
meier and Pedersen, 2009). Haubrich (2018) observes the same over the last century and a
half in the United States. Several scholars examine banks at the center of the United States
2The theoretical literature stresses a wide range of institutions that give rise to the phenomenon known as
too big to fail. These institutions include bailouts, limited liability, regulatory forbearance, forgiving resolution
procedures,depositinsurance,lendersoflastresort,andpreferentialtreatmentoflargeversussmallbanks.
3