NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHAT DETERMINES CONSUMER FINANCIAL DISTRESS?
PLACE- AND PERSON-BASED FACTORS
Benjamin J. Keys
Neale Mahoney
Hanbin Yang
Working Paper 26808
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26808
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2020
The results in this paper were calculated (or derived) based on credit data provided by
TransUnion, a global information solutions company, through a relationship with the Kilts Center
for Marketing at The University of Chicago Booth School of Business. All views expressed and
any errors contained in this paper are solely those of the authors. We thank Bruno Escobar
Izquierdo and Xuyang Xia for excellent research assistance and seminar audiences at the Bank of
England, the Central Bank of Ireland, Dartmouth, Georgetown, Imperial College London, the J.P.
Morgan Chase Institute, Kellogg, NYU-Stern, Washington University, and the Wharton School
for helpful comments. Keys thanks the Research Sponsors Program of the Zell/Lurie Real Estate
Center. Mahoney acknowledges support from the Initiative on Global Markets at the University
of Chicago Booth School of Business. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Benjamin J. Keys, Neale Mahoney, and Hanbin Yang. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

What Determines Consumer Financial Distress? Place- and Person-Based Factors
Benjamin J. Keys, Neale Mahoney, and Hanbin Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 26808
February 2020
JEL No. G5,G51,K35
ABSTRACT
We use credit report data to study consumer financial distress in America. We show there are
large, persistent disparities in financial distress across regions. To understand these patterns, we
conduct a “movers” analysis. For collections and default, there is only weak convergence
following a move, suggesting these types of distress are not primarily caused by place-based
factors (e.g., local economic conditions and state laws) but instead reflect person-based
characteristics (e.g., financial literacy and risk preferences). In contrast, for personal bankruptcy,
we find a sizable place-based effect, which is consistent with anecdotal evidence on how local
legal factors influence personal bankruptcy.
Benjamin J. Keys Hanbin Yang
Department of Real Estate Harvard University
The Wharton School hanbin.v.yang@gmail.com
University of Pennsylvania
432 Vance Hall
3733 Spruce Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
benkeys@wharton.upenn.edu
Neale Mahoney
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Jane Stanford Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
nmahoney@stanford.edu

1 Introduction
ConsumerfinancialdistressintheUnitedStatesishighinbothabsoluteandrelativeterms.
In credit report data, one-third of individuals have at least one debt in collections and
nearly5%havedeclaredbankruptcyinthelast7years.1 Whilethereisnoperfectdatafor
relative comparisons, the available data indicate that financial distress is much higher in
theU.S.thaninEurope.2
In this paper, we aim to advance our understanding of consumer financial distress in
the U.S. by examining patterns of financial distress across geographic areas. We measure
financialdistressusinganationallyrepresentativepanelofTransUnioncreditreportdata
that tracks approximately 35 million individuals on a monthly basis over 2000–2016. We
focusouranalysisonthreecommonmetricsoffinancialdistress–debtincollections,credit
carddelinquency,andpersonalbankruptcy. Weemphasizethesemetricsbecauseouraim
istoobservefinancialdistressforthebroadestpossiblesegmentofthepopulation. Other
financial products – such as home loans and auto loans – are held by a smaller and less
representativesampleofthepopulation,andthusprovideuswithanarrowerwindowon
peopleatriskofdefault.
The first part of our paper documents large and persistent geographic disparities in
financialdistressbetweentheUpperMidwestandDeepSouthregionsofthecountry.3 In
theDeepSouth,44%ofpeoplewithacreditreporthaveunpaiddebtincollectionsversus
24%intheUpperMidwest. Similarly,measuresofcreditcarddelinquencyandbankruptcy
are40%to50%higherintheDeepSouththanintheUpperMidwest.
Themainpartofthepaperaimstobetterunderstandwhatdeterminesthesepersistent
geographic disparities. As we show in a variance decomposition, roughly three-quarters
ofthevariationinfinancialdistressover2000-2016occursacrossgeographicareas, asop-
1Authors’calculationsusingcreditbureaudatafromJune2015.SeeSection2formoredetails.
2For the sake of comparability, it is useful to rely on survey data from similar years. Ac-
cording to the 2007 Survey of Consumer Finances, 20.8% of U.S. households are late on their
debt payments (https://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/bulletin/2014/articles/scf/scf.htm). In contrast,
the EU-SILC (Statistics on Income and Living Conditions) 2008 ad hoc module indicates a median
rate of arrears across E.U. countries of 3.2% on mortgage loans and 1.2% on non-mortgage loans
(http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/income-and-living-conditions/data/ad-hoc-modules).
3We define the Upper Midwest as Iowa, Minnesota, North Dakota, South Dakota, Wisconsin, and the
Upper Peninsula of Michigan and the Deep South as Alabama, Arkansas, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi,
andSouthCarolina.
1

posedtowithingeographicareasovertime. Ourgoalistounderstandthesourcesofthese
cross-sectionaldifferences. Wedonotattempttouncoverthedriversofover-timevariation
infinancialdistressthatisoftenthefocusofmacroeconomicanalysis.
Much of the existing research on the sources of financial distress can be separated
into two categories. One category emphasizes local institutional and economic factors,
suchasstate-levelbankruptcylaws(e.g.,Fay,HurstandWhite,2002;Auclert,Dobbieand
Goldsmith-Pinkham, 2019) and local economic conditions (e.g., Agarwal and Liu, 2003).
A second category emphasizes individual characteristics, such as preference parameters
(e.g., discount rates, risk preference, default stigma, social capital) and behavioral factors
(e.g.,inattention,financialliteracy).4
Wequantifytherelativeimportanceofthesecategoriesusinga“movers”researchde-
sign that examines how financial distress evolves when individuals move to places with
different levels of financial distress. If local institutional and economic factors are impor-
tant,wewouldexpectoutcomestoconvergetothoseinthenewlocation. Iffinancialdis-
tress is determined by individual characteristics, we would not expect any convergence.
Inkeepingwiththemoversdesignliterature,wewillsometimesrefertolocalinstitutional
and economic factors as “place effects” and individual characteristics as “person effects”
(e.g.,Finkelstein,GentzkowandWilliams,2016).5
We operationalize this movers research design by estimating event-study regressions
of a given outcome on the “size of the move,” defined as the average difference in that
outcome between the origin and destination areas, controlling for individual and time
fixed effects. We show robustness to defining the size of the move using narrower and
broader levels of geographic aggregation and to estimating two-way fixed effects models
thatrelaxassumptionsimplicitintheevent-studydesign.
The identifying assumption for the movers research design is the standard parallel
4Seee.g. GrossandSouleles(2002)ondefaultstigma,Agarwal,ChomsisengphetandLiu(2011)on“indi-
vidualsocialcapital,”andGerardi,GoetteandMeier(2013)onfinancialliteracy.
5Asnotedinthepriorliterature, individualcharacteristicsmaybeshapedbythelocalenvironment, es-
peciallyatyoungages(e.g.,Bronnenberg, DubeandGentzkow,2012;Finkelstein, GentzkowandWilliams,
2016).Assuch,thepersoneffectsweestimatemaypartiallyembedtheplaceeffectsofwherepeoplegrewup.
Thatbeingsaid,wethinkitisappropriateinmostcontextstorefertothesecharacteristicsaspersoneffects,
sincetheyarepersistentfeaturesofindividualbehaviorthatarenotaffectedoverthemediumrunbylocal
institutionalorculturalfactors.
2