NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MARKET FRAGMENTATION
Daniel Chen
Darrell Duffie
Working Paper 26828
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26828
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2020
We are grateful for research assistance from David Yang and for conversations with Mohammad
Akbarpour, Bob Anderson, Anirudha Balusubramanian, Eric Budish, Ananth Madhavan, Albert
Menkveld, Michael Ostrovsky, Marcos Salgado, Yuliy Sannikov, Yazid Sharaiha, Andy
Skrzypacz, Bob Wilson, Milena Wittwer, and Haoxiang Zhu. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Daniel Chen and Darrell Duffie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Market Fragmentation
Daniel Chen and Darrell Duffie
NBER Working Paper No. 26828
March 2020
JEL No. D47,D82,G14
ABSTRACT
We model a simple market setting in which fragmentation of trade of the same asset across
multiple exchanges improves allocative efficiency. Fragmentation reduces the inhibiting effect of
price-impact avoidance on order submission. Although fragmentation reduces market depth on
each exchange, it also isolates cross-exchange price impacts, leading to more aggressive overall
order submission and better rebalancing of unwanted positions across traders. Fragmentation also
has implications for the extent to which prices reveal traders’ private information. While a given
exchange price is less informative in more fragmented markets, all exchange prices taken
together are more informative.
Daniel Chen
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-7298
dtchen@stanford.edu
Darrell Duffie
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-7298
and NBER
duffie@stanford.edu

1 Introduction
In modern financial markets, many financial instruments trade simultaneously on multiple
exchanges (Budish, Lee, and Shim, 2019; Gresse et al., 2012; Pagnotta and Philippon, 2018).
Market fragmentation raises concerns over market depth. One might therefore anticipate
that fragmentation worsens allocative efficiency through the strategic avoidance of price
impact, which inhibits beneficial gains from trade (Vayanos, 1999; Du and Zhu, 2017). Less
aggressive trade could in turn impair price informativeness, relative to a centralized market
in which all trade flows are consolidated. Perhaps surprisingly, we offer a simple model
of how fragmentation of trade across multiple exchanges, despite reducing market depth,
actually improves allocative efficiency and price informativeness.
In the equilibrium of our market setting, the option to split orders across different ex-
changes reduces the inhibiting effect of price-impact avoidance on total order submission.
Though market depth on each exchange decreases with fragmentation, the common practice
of order splitting allows traders to shield orders submitted to a given exchange from the
price impact of orders submitted to other exchanges. This effect is sufficiently strong that
fragmentation increases overall order aggressiveness. This in turn can result in a more effi-
cient redistribution of unwanted positions across traders and cause prices, collectively across
all exchanges, to better reflect traders’ private information. Once fragmentation is suffi-
ciently severe, however, any additional fragmentation causes trade to become too aggressive,
from a welfare perspective. However, in our model setting, any degree of fragmentation is
welfare-superior to a centralized market.
Oursimplemodelabstractsfromsomeimportantaspectsoffunctioningfinancialmarkets.
Wedonotconsidertheimpactoffragmentationonexchangecompetitionortransactionfees.1
Wealsoabstractfromtraderinferencesrelatedtocross-exchangecross-timeordersubmission
and the associated adverse impact of sniping by fast traders (Budish, Cramton, and Shim,
2015; Malinova and Park, 2019; Pagnotta and Philippon, 2018). Given these and other
limitations of our model, we avoid taking a normative or policy stance on fragmentation.
Our primary marginal contribution is to identify a potentially important new economic
channel for the welfare implications of market fragmentation.
We now briefly summarize our model and the main results. A single asset is traded in a
single period by N strategic traders participating on E exchanges. Prior to trade, strategic
trader i is endowed with a quantity X of the asset that is privately observed by trader
i
i. Each trader submits a package of limit orders (forming a demand function) to each of
the exchanges, simultaneously. As in common practice (Wittwer, 2020), orders to a given
1As shown by Budish, Lee, and Shim (2019), transaction fees are economically small.
1

exchange cannot be made contingent on clearing prices at other exchanges. The objective of
each strategic trader, given the conjectured order submission strategies of the other traders,
is to maximize the total expected cash compensation received for executed orders, net of
a holding cost that is quadratic in the trader’s final asset position, as in the one-exchange
model of Du and Zhu (2017).
At each exchange, “liquidity traders” submit non-discretionary market orders. The ag-
gregate quantities of market orders submitted by liquidity traders to the various exchanges
are exogenous random variables, independently and identically distributed across exchanges.
We also consider a version of the model with no liquidity traders, and a version in which
liquidity traders are replaced by a “competitive fringe” of traders that are strategic with
respect to order quantities. In any version of the model, because agents’ preferences are
quasilinear in cash and because total cash payments net to zero by market clearing, an un-
ambiguous measure of allocative efficiency is the expected sum of strategic traders’ quadratic
holding costs.
Price impact is increased by market fragmentation because of cross-exchange price in-
ference, by which traders choose order submissions in light of the positive equilibrium cor-
relation between exchange prices. For example, conditional on a clearing price on a given
exchange that is lower than expected, a buyer expects to be assigned higher quantities on
all exchanges. This effect dampens the aggressiveness of order submissions, which reduces
market depth and heightens market impact, relative to a single-exchange setting. Despite
this reduction in market depth, the ability to split orders across exchanges ensures that, in
equilibrium, the total order submission of each strategic trader is more aggressive. This nat-
ural implication of fragmentation is novel to this paper, as far as we know. As the number of
exchanges increases, the equilibrium allocation becomes more efficient until a point at which
trade becomes “too aggressive.” We find that the socially optimal number of exchanges de-
pends only on (a) the number of strategic traders and (b) the ratio of the variance of the
endowments of strategic traders to the variance of liquidity trade. We show that when there
are more exchanges, the price on any individual exchange is less informative of the aggregate
endowment of strategic traders, the key “state variable” of our model, yet the exchange
prices taken together are more informative.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides additional back-
ground on exchange market fragmentation and related research. Section 3 gives the setup of
the most basic version of our model. Section 4 characterizes properties of the equilibrium.
Section 5 presents the implications of fragmentation on price impact, allocative efficiency,
and price informativeness. Section 6 studies a formulation of the model in which traders
observe the aggregate asset endowment before order submission. Section 7 summarizes the
2