ISSUANCE OVERPRICING OF CHINA’S CORPORATE
DEBT SECURITIES
Yi Ding
Wei Xiong
Jinfan Zhang
WORKING PAPER 26815

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ISSUANCE OVERPRICING OF CHINA’S CORPORATE DEBT SECURITIES
Yi Ding
Wei Xiong
Jinfan Zhang
Working Paper 26815
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26815
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2020, Revised May 2021
We thank workshop participants at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, the Five
Star Conference in Beijing, and Tsinghua PBC School of Finance for helpful comments and
suggestions. We are grateful to constructive comments of two referees. The paper was previously
circulated under the title “Overpricing in China’s Corporate Bond Market.” The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Yi Ding, Wei Xiong, and Jinfan Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Issuance Overpricing of China’s Corporate Debt Securities
Yi Ding, Wei Xiong, and Jinfan Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 26815
March 2020, Revised May 2021
JEL No. G15,G23
ABSTRACT
We document issuance overpricing of corporate debt securities in China, which contrasts with
underpricing of equity and debt securities in Western countries. The phenomenon in China is
robust across subsamples of issuances with different credit ratings, maturities, issuer types, and
issuing history, reflecting the distinct institutional environment and issuance process in China’s
market for corporate debt securities. The average overpricing dropped from 7.44 basis points to
2.41 basis points after the government prohibited underwriters from using rebates in issuances in
October 2017. By analyzing overpricing before and after the rebate ban and across different
issuers and underwriters, we uncover two channels for underwriters, who compete for future
underwriting business, to drive up overpricing: rebates and self-purchases.
Yi Ding Jinfan Zhang
Chinese University of Hong Kong Chinese University of Hong Kong
Longxiang Ave. 2001 Longxiang Ave. 2001
Shenzhen City Shenzhen City
Guangdong Province Guangdong Province
P.R.China 518172 P.R.China 518172
yiding@cuhk.edu.cn zhangjinfan@cuhk.edu.cn
Wei Xiong
Princeton University
Department of Economics
Bendheim Center for Finance
Princeton, NJ 08450
and NBER
wxiong@princeton.edu

1. Introduction
Due to the Chinese government’s efforts to liberalize financial markets, China’s corporate
debt security market has grown rapidly in recent years. By the end of 2019, outstanding corporate
debt securities in China reached 4.3 trillion USD, making it the second-largest market of corporate
debt securities in the world, just behind the United States, with 10.6 trillion USD.1 China’s
corporate debt security market is different from the more developed U.S. market in several ways,
as reviewed by Amstad and He (2020). First, it directly grew out of China’s banking sector and
features banks as its major investors and underwriters. Consequently, issuance of debt securities
directly competes with bank loans for firms’ financing needs. Second, debt securities issued in this
market are mostly commercial paper and medium-term notes with an average maturity of 1.74
years, which is substantially shorter than maturities in the U.S. market. Third, debt securities in
China tend to be issued by large firms with credit ratings highly skewed to the upside and
artificially low default rates, which possibly reflect the government’s tight control on issuances
and implicit government guarantees to avoid public defaults.2 These differences make it
particularly interesting and important to study how pricing and market dynamics in China’s newly
developed and rapidly growing market of corporate debt securities may be different from that in
other countries.
In this paper, we focus on issuance pricing of debt securities in China’s interbank market,
which accounts for about 90% of debt securities issued in China in recent years.3 We collect a
1 According to SIFMA: https://www.sifma.org and the Asian Development Bank: https://asianbondsonline.adb.org.
The number for the United States includes both outstanding corporate bonds and commercial paper.
2 These differences are partly due to the gradualistic process of China’s economic and financial reforms and partly
reflect the different model used by the Chinese government to manage its financial system, e.g., Brunnermeier, Sockin,
and Xiong (2020).
3 China also has an exchange market for corporate debt securities. As banks are restricted from trading in the exchange
market, this market is substantially smaller than the interbank market.
1