NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RISING BANK CONCENTRATION
Dean Corbae
Pablo D'Erasmo
Working Paper 26838
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26838
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2020
The authors wish to thank the editors Bill Dupor and Miguel Faria-e-Castro, the discussant
Jochen Mankart, and Jean-Francois Houde for helpful comments. The views expressed in this
paper do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the Federal
Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Dean Corbae and Pablo D'Erasmo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Rising Bank Concentration
Dean Corbae and Pablo D'Erasmo
NBER Working Paper No. 26838
March 2020
JEL No. E44,G21,L11,L13
ABSTRACT
Concentration of insured deposit funding among the top four commercial banks in the U.S. has
risen from 15% in 1984 to 44% in 2018, a roughly three-fold increase. Regulation has often been
attributed as a factor in that increase. The Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching
Efficiency Act of 1994 removed many of the restrictions on opening bank branches across state
lines. We interpret the Riegle-Neal act as lowering the cost of expanding a bank's funding base.
In this paper, we build an industry equilibrium model in which banks endogenously climb a
funding base ladder. Rising concentration occurs along a transition path between two steady
states after branching costs decline.
Dean Corbae
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin, Madison
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
corbae@ssc.wisc.edu
Pablo D'Erasmo
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
Research Department
Ten Independence Mall, Philadelphia PA 19106
pabloderasmo@gmail.com

1 Introduction
Concentration of insured deposit funding in the U.S. has risen from 15% in 1984 to 44%
in 2018 (when measured as the fraction of deposits held at the top 4 banks relative to
deposits held at all U.S. bank holding companies), a roughly three-fold increase. Regulation
has often been attributed as a factor in that increase. The Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking
and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994 removed many of the restrictions on opening bank
branches across state lines imposed under the McFadden Act of 1927 and other laws that
attempted to address long-standing concerns about the concentration of financial activity.
We interpret the Riegle-Neal act as lowering the cost of expanding a bank’s funding base.
More generally, the methods in our paper can be applied to any government regulation that
loosens or restricts the size of banks.1
In this paper, we build an industry equilibrium model in which banks endogenously climb
a funding base ladder along the lines of Ericson and Pakes (1995).2 Specifically, a bank can
raise the mean size of its deposits at a cost. Idiosyncratic shocks to its deposits and to the
success of its loan portfolio lead to an endogenous size distribution of banks. The specific
method of (deposit) capacity accumulation we apply is due to Besanko and Doraszelski
(2004).3
Our paper is related to the delegated monitoring model of Diamond (1984). Diamond
provides a framework where large banks arise to economize on the fixed costs of monitoring
individual borrowers more efficiently than a large number of small depositors. Economies of
scale in monitoring (decreasing average costs) induce size. The problem of monitoring the
monitor is also solved by size; large diversified banks can offer non-contingent (and hence
incentive compatible) deposit contracts. There are numerous empirical papers documenting
the existence of scale economies in banking such as Berger and Hannan (1998) or Berger and
Mester (1997).4 A large pool of depositors is also consistent with geographic diversification
as described in Liang and Rhoades (1988).
Quantitative models of imperfect competition in the deposit market have been offered
by Aguirregabiria, Clark, and Wang (2016), Egan, Hortac¸su, and Matvos (2017), Drechsler,
Savov,andSchnabl(2017)andCorbaeandLevine(2019). Inthispaperwefocusonimperfect
competition in the loan market as in Corbae and D’Erasmo (2019).5 To solve the model, we
use the computational methods in Weintraub, Benkard, and Van Roy (2008). In particular,
1For instance, the proposal in Dodd-Frank to limit concentration is applicable. See
https://corpgov.law.harvard.edu/2014/06/11/proposed-dodd-frank-concentration-limit-on-financial-
institution-ma-transactions/
2In our earlier paper Corbae and D’Erasmo (2013) we exogenously change the cost structure so that
banks can branch across two regions and examine the impact on competition in the loan market.
3For an application of these methods to study the regulatory burden of the Dodd-Frank Act on small
banks see Liu (2019).
4For a more recent paper, see Wheelock and Wilson (2018).
5Thereisastrandofliteraturethatfocusesondynamicgeneralequilibriummodelswitharepresentative
bank under perfect competition in loan and deposit markets (e.g., Van den Heuvel (2008), Aliaga-D´ıaz
andOlivero(2012), andBegenau(2018)). Thereareseveralpaperswithacompetitivebankingsectorwhich
induceasizedistributionofbanks(e.g. Mankart,Michaelides,andPagratis(2015)andRiosRull,Takamura,
and Terajima).
1

the approximation methods allow for there to be strategically important (dominant) banks.
We think of rising concentration as occurring along a transition path between two steady
states following a decline in branching costs.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes some aspects of the data that mo-
tivate our paper. Section 3 describes our environment while Section 4 describes the Markov
Perfect Equilibrium of our model. Section 5 describes the parameterization of the model.
Section6describesequilibriumpropertiesofthemodel. Finally, Section7describesourmain
experiment; we lower the cost of expanding a regional bank’s funding base due, for exam-
ple, to a regulatory change like Riegle-Neal and quantify the change in bank concentration.
Section 8 provides directions for future research.
2 Data
As in Corbae and D’Erasmo (2019), we use data from the Consolidated Report of Condition
and Income (known as Call Reports) that insured banks in the U.S. submit to the Federal
Reserve each quarter.6
As Figure 1 makes clear, the number of commercial banks in the U.S. has fallen from over
11,000 in 1984 to under 5000 in 2018 while the deposit market share of the top 4 banks has
grown from 15% in 1984 to 44% in 2018, a roughly three-fold increase. Another clear fact
from Figure 1 is that there was relative stability in those shares in the decades 1984-1993
and 2009-2018.
Rising market shares of big banks motivates us to consider a model of the banking
industry that allows for imperfect competition. Furthermore, it allows us to understand
how regulatory policy may affect market structure as well as consider how market structure
influences risk taking behavior that regulators are attempting to mitigate.
6Balance Sheet and Income Statements items can be found at https://cdr.ffiec.gov/public/. We group
commercial banks to the Bank Holding Company Level.
2