NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MEASURING THE COST OF REGULATION:
A TEXT-BASED APPROACH
Charles W. Calomiris
Harry Mamaysky
Ruoke Yang
Working Paper 26856
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26856
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2020
We are grateful to the Data Science Institute at Columbia University for financial support, and S&P
Global Market Intelligence for providing us with the data for this study. We thank Glenn Blomquist
(discussant), and seminar participants at the American Enterprise Institute, Imperial College, Colorado
State, Utah State, University of Texas, and the 2020 Southern Economic Association Conference for
their comments. We thank Roya Arab Loodaricheh and Hongyu Wu for excellent research assistance.
The views expressed here are the authors’ and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Securities
and Exchange Commission. This paper was initially released prior to Ruoke Yang joining the Commission.
The Securities and Exchange Commission disclaims responsibility for any private publication or statement
of any SEC employee or Commissioner. This article expresses the authors’ views and does not necessarily
reflect those of the Commission, the Commissioners, members of the staff, or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2020 by Charles W. Calomiris, Harry Mamaysky, and Ruoke Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Measuring the Cost of Regulation: A Text-Based Approach
Charles W. Calomiris, Harry Mamaysky, and Ruoke Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 26856
March 2020, Revised July 2022
JEL No. G18,G38,K2,L51
ABSTRACT
We derive a measure of firm-level regulatory exposure from the text of corporate earnings calls.
We use this measure to study the effect of regulation on companies’ growth, leverage,
profitability, and equity returns. Higher regulatory exposure results in slower sales and asset
growth, lower leverage, reduced profitability, but higher post-call equity returns. These effects
are mitigated for larger firms. Our findings suggest that both compliance risk and physical
operational cost are consequences of increased regulation, but the magnitude of the effects of
compliance risk are larger. The topical context of regulation is important for future firm-level
outcomes.
Charles W. Calomiris Ruoke Yang
Columbia Business School Imperial College Business School
Kravis 1101 5.09A, 53 Prince's Gate
665 W 130th St. South Kensington Campus
New York, NY 10027 United Kingdom
and NBER ruoke.yang@imperial.ac.uk
cc374@columbia.edu
Harry Mamaysky
Columbia Business School
Kravis 1153
665 W 130th St.
New York, NY 10027
hm2646@columbia.edu
Data page is available at http://www.measuringregulation.com
An internet appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26856

I. INTRODUCTION
Regulation is often justified by the gains to the public that come from outcomes such as
cleaner water and air, safer travel, less dangerous products, and more honest advertising. The
costs of regulation are borne by the firms that must comply with them. Costs can be roughly
categorized into two sets: physical operational costs and compliance risks. In the former
category are the direct costs related to regulation’s mandated changes (relative to what firms
would otherwise do) in production, distribution, or sales practices. In the latter category are the
indirect costs of bearing the uncertainties related to the way regulation is created and enforced.
For example, since the 1970s, a broad trend in regulation has been for regulators to increasingly
rely on “guidance” rather than formal rulemaking in setting regulatory standards (DeMuth 2016,
Epstein 2016, Calomiris 2018), which observers believe has increased regulatory compliance
risk. Guidance is attractive to regulators because the absence of formal rules gives them greater
flexibility in implementing regulation, but of course, that same flexibility implies greater
uncertainties for firms about how regulation will evolve and precisely what they will be held
accountable for doing or not doing. Such uncertainty may in turn prevent firms from undertaking
attractive investments due to the fear of an unforeseen regulatory response. We believe that our
focus on understanding the impact of regulations as operating through one of these two channels
–operational costs versus compliance risk – is novel to the literature.
Although many observers often express the belief that regulation is costly to firms both
through its operational burdens and its compliance risks, research has not made much progress in
measuring these costs, or even demonstrating that, in general, regulations are costly to firms.1
1 Regulation sometimes serves special interests, and in particular, regulated firms, so it is not obvious that
discussions of regulation are indicative of costs to firms rather than benefits. For example, Benmelech and
Moskowtiz (2010) show that usury laws benefitted incumbent, low-risk firms by making it harder for entrants to
compete with them. See also Peltzman (1965, 1976), Stigler (1971) and Kroszner and Strahan (1999) on the private
1

For example, the Trump Administration claims that deregulation has been an important
contributor to the acceleration of growth in the years since Trump’s 2016 election, but there is no
hard evidence to quantify whether that is true, or if so, how much of that growth should be
attributed to deregulation. Furthermore, it is unclear whether whatever gains have come from
less regulation are a consequence of lower operational costs or of reduced compliance risks. The
distinction is important because, to the extent compliance risk is costly, important implications
for regulatory reform may follow – for example, the need to restore the importance of formal
rulemaking in the regulatory process.
Our goal in this paper is twofold. First, we address the regulation measurement issue by
proposing a novel text-based measure derived from corporate earnings calls. We discuss this
momentarily. Second, we investigate the channels via which regulatory exposure impacts
corporate performance. Towards this end, we develop two hypotheses that serve to distinguish
the empirical implications of regulatory exposure depending on whether it reflects increased
compliance risk or increased physical operational costs. Both kinds of regulatory exposure
discourage growth, but they have different implications for other variables. Hypothesis 1 states
that increased compliance risk should be reflected not only in lower growth but also in higher
future expected stock returns and lower leverage (defined as the ratio of debt to the market value
of assets). Ceteris paribus, higher risk causes firms: to reduce investment, resulting in lower
growth; to reduce leverage as the likelihood of distress makes the tax advantage of debt less
attractive; and to compensate equity investors more for bearing more risk. Hypothesis 2 states
interests served by regulation. It is also important to recognize in some contexts that the regulation of one firm may
benefit a firm in a different industry. For example, as we discuss further below with respect to utilities regulation,
firms that use energy may benefit from greater regulation of utilities. Furthermore, regulation can be beneficial to
both society and regulated firms, for example, if it positively affects the demand for their products by creating a
more credible commitment to greater product quality. In general, however, to the extent that regulation constrains
firms’ actions rather than improves interfirm coordination, Le Chatelier’s principle should hold: adding a constraint
to the firm should be a source of cost. Our results confirm that, as a rule, regulatory exposure is costly to firms.
2