NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHICH BANKS ARE (OVER) LEVERED? INSIGHTS FROM SHADOW BANKS
AND UNINSURED LEVERAGE
Erica Jiang
Gregor Matvos
Tomasz Piskorski
Amit Seru
Working Paper 26903
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26903
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2020, Revised June 2024
We thank Viral Acharya, Sumit Agarwal, Anat Admati, Jason Allen, Andy Atkeson, Jonathan
Berk, Markus Brunnermeier, Robert Clark, John Cochrane, Dean Corbae, Peter DeMarzo, Andrea
Eisfeldt, Kilian Huber, Sasha Indarte, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Stephan Luck, Stefan Nagel,
Raghuram Rajan, Hyun Shin, Jeremy Stein, Amir Sufi, Adi Sunderam, Anjan Thakor, Emil
Verner, Luigi Zingales and seminar and conference participants at Berkeley, Chicago, Columbia,
Colorado, Dartmouth, ECB, Harvard Business School, Imperial College London, Kellogg School
of Management, Michigan, Minnesota, Olin, Stanford, UCLA, USC, London Business School,
University of Wisconsin, NBER Corporate Finance meeting, Stanford Institute of Theoretical
Economics Financial Regulation, and Western Finance Association for helpful comments. We
also thank Monica Clodius, Cache Ellsworth, and Yilan Zheng for outstanding research
assistance. First Version: September 2019. This paper was previously titled “Banking without
Deposits: Evidence from Shadow Bank Call Reports.” The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Erica Jiang, Gregor Matvos, Tomasz Piskorski, and Amit Seru. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Which Banks are (Over) Levered? Insights from Shadow Banks and Uninsured Leverage
Erica Jiang, Gregor Matvos, Tomasz Piskorski, and Amit Seru
NBER Working Paper No. 26903
March 2020, Revised June 2024
JEL No. G2,L5
ABSTRACT
We examine why banks maintain such high financial leverage, with debt financing accounting for
about 90% of banks’ assets. To answer this question, we use uniquely assembled data on capital
structure decisions of shadow banks that on the asset side conduct very similar business to banks.
The shadow bank data provides us with a window into “free market” financing choices of
financial intermediaries that unlike banks are lightly regulated and do not have access to insured
deposit funding. We demonstrate that shadow banks employ twice the amount of equity capital
compared to equivalent banks, with the most significant disparity observed between smaller and
mid-size banks. Uninsured leverage, defined as uninsured debt funding to assets, increases with
size for both banks and shadow banks while cost of debt declines with size. We rationalize these
facts within a calibrated quantitative equilibrium model of intermediation. Our analysis reveals
that the primary driver of high leverage among smaller and mid-size banks is their access to
insured deposit funding. In the absence of deposit insurance, these banks would maintain a
capitalization level at least 25% higher in relative terms than observed in the data. Conversely,
deposit insurance plays a comparatively minor role in influencing the financial leverage of the
largest banks, where the predominant factor is their capacity to generate money-like deposits.
These results suggest a significant scope for the increase of capitalization of smaller and mid-size
banks to align their capital structures with their private market counterparts. The aggregate
consequences of such increase would be limited, because of reallocation of lending activity from
smaller to large banks and to shadow banks.
Erica Jiang Tomasz Piskorski
Marshall School of Business Columbia Business School
University of Southern California 3022 Broadway
Los Angeles, CA 90089 Uris Hall 810
erica.jiang@marshall.usc.edu New York, NY 10027
and NBER
Gregor Matvos tp2252@columbia.edu
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University Amit Seru
2211 Campus Drive Stanford Graduate School of Business
Global Hub 4361 Stanford University
Evanston IL, 60208 655 Knight Way
and NBER and NBER
gregor.matvos@kellogg.northwestern.edu aseru@stanford.edu

1. Introduction
The extensive overhaul of financial regulation in the U.S. and around the world was supposed to reduce the
fragility of the banking system following the Great Financial Crisis. Less than 15 years later, the U.S. has
experienced some of the largest bank failures in its history starting with the “run” Silicon Valley Bank and
First Republic Bank, two large regional banks. The 2023 bank failures underscore the fundamental issue of
banking vulnerability rooted in the high financial leverage employed by banks (Jiang et al. 2023). These
failures have renewed interest in the regulation of banks’ capital structure—capital regulation—and more
broadly the role of safety nets such as deposit insurance.
The central idea of regulating bank leverage is that safety nets for debtholders cause banks to borrow
excessively.1 Because deposits are short-term and only partially insured, this further contributes to bank
fragility (see Davilla and Goldstein, 2023). On the other hand, if banks take on leverage to provide
intermediation services, then restricting banks’ leverage likely results in fewer intermediary services. These
services can be on the asset side, such as extending loans or other financial services to households or firms,
and on the liability side though the creation of safe and liquid debt, or more broadly, through maturity and
liquidity transformation.2 Under this regulatory view, capital requirements aim to undo the effect of safety
nets on bank leverage but not extend beyond that level. They should thus broadly replicate the capital
structure that banks would have chosen if they had no access to safety nets provided by deposit funding.3
A notable feature of bank regulation is that it frequently imposes different capital requirements across the
size distribution of banks. For example, the “Basel III endgame,” regulatory proposal would increase capital
requirements on the largest U.S. banks rather than on the much more numerous small banks, which have
been historically more likely to default. In other words, apart from recognizing the potential systematic
significance of large banks, the regulation implicitly suggests that larger banks, when deciding on leverage,
either rely more extensively on safety nets or offer reduced intermediation services for equivalent leverage,
particularly at the margin.
Motivated by this debate we investigate how much of banks’ high financial leverage and the cost of their
debt financing across the size distribution is driven by their access to deposit funding and the associated
safety nets. We proceed in three steps. First, we assemble data on capital structure decisions of shadow
banks, which conduct bank-like activities on the asset side. These financial intermediaries offer a
representation of how banks would be financed if they lacked access to insured deposits and were not bound
by capital requirements—essentially if their lenders internalized default risk. Through a comparative
analysis of the capital structure decisions and the cost of debt funding of shadow banks, we uncover five
primary facts that shed light on this issue.
In the second step, we provide a model of banks and shadow banks to quantify banks’ provision of services
on the liability and asset side across the size distribution. Prior literature of intermediary sector uses bank
data or very aggregate data on shadow banks capital structure to discipline models. Instead, we use
disaggregated data on shadow bank capital structure decisions and interest rates to do so. Observing choices
of intermediaries and the cost of their liabilities in the absence of access to insured deposits allows us to
1 See for instance, Dwyer (1981), Pyle (1984), Admati et al. (2013), Admati and Hellwig (2014), Calomiris and
Jaremski (2016), Egan et al. (2017), Corbae and D’Erasmo (2019), and Davilla and Goldstein (2023).
2 See for instance, Diamond and Rajan (2001), DeAngelo and Stulz (2015), Gorton and Pennacchi (1990), Deng et al.
(2017) and Davilla and Goldstein (2023).
3 If bank default generated large externalities, then such capital structure would provide a lower bound on capital
requirements.
2

directly identify key driving forces in the model while sidestepping other indirect approaches such as taking
a stance on correlation structure of shocks impacting intermediaries used in existing structural models.
Third, we use the calibrated model to ask how much leverage banks would choose if they were able to
perform the same function on the asset and liability side, but its debtholders (depositors) would fully
internalize default cost. This allows us to study the implications of insured deposit funding for aggregate
provision of lending and money-like liabilities as well as distribution of these effects across the bank size.
Data: We start by empirically comparing shadow banks to banks. These financial intermediaries provide
banking services but cannot fund themselves with insured deposits and are not subject to capital
requirements. We construct, for the first time, shadow bank “call reports” from 2011 onwards using
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests from state regulators. We observe detailed balance sheet
information on the structure of liabilities and asset, as well as interest rates paid on shadow bank debt
funding. We also match the balance sheet information to the individual loans (mortgages) originated by
shadow banks providing detailed insight into asset side activities. We cover more than four hundred largest
shadow banks, accounting for about 80% of shadow bank loans originated during this period and originating
over quarter of all household debt in the U.S. over almost a decade.
Shadow banks in our call reports are primarily in the mortgage origination business and sell most of the
loans they originate. Our rich data allows us to find banks, which follow a very similar business model to
shadow banks: they are primarily in the mortgage origination business and sell a similar share of their
loans.4 At the individual loan level, these banks specialize in originating and selling conforming residential
loans that need to satisfy a tight set of guidelines issued by the Government Sponsored Enterprises (GSEs)
and lend to customers of very similar creditworthiness.5 In sum, this institutional feature allows us to
achieve a tight comparisons between banks and shadow banks that follow a very similar business model,
including the type of loans they originate. Even though we find an appropriate bank comparison group for
shadow banks, our results barely change if we choose different comparison groups or use all banks as
comparison. If anything, a better comparison group increases the differences between banks and shadow
banks, suggesting that asset side differences between banks and shadow banks are not driving our results.
Using this shadow bank data and bank call reports we document the following five facts.
Fact 1: Shadow banks have substantially more equity capital—lower leverage—than banks (but
substantially less than non-financial firms).
The average equity to asset ratio for banks is approximately 11% and is even lower at 10.5% for banks most
comparable to shadow banks. Shadow banks’ capitalization is more than twice as high at 25%, despite no
capital requirement for shadow banks. These differences are very robust whether we adjust for differences
in lending composition or assets, across bank control groups, and adjusting for risk weights. While shadow
banks have substantially more capital than banks, their leverage is still substantially higher than that of non-
financial firms, rejecting the idea that banks’ capital structure choices would resemble that of non-financial
firms in the absence of deposits. For comparison, the median shadow bank equity capitalization matches
well with that of banks in the pre-deposit-insurance era suggesting that the capitalization models we observe
are not specific to the narrow business model of modern shadow banks (e.g., Admati and Hellwig 2013,
Hanson et al. 2015, Aldunate et al. 2019, Blickle et al. 2019).
4 See Buchak et al. (2018) for the similarity in customers of banks and shadow banks in the mortgage market. For
increase in propensity of banks to sell loans, see Buchak et al. (2018 and 2023) and Irani et al. (2021).
5 The average FICO credit score difference between banks’ and shadow banks’ GSE backed loans is 4 points on the
scale ranging from 300 to 850 and the average difference in interest rate is two basis points.
3