NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANKING CRISES WITHOUT PANICS
Matthew Baron
Emil Verner
Wei Xiong
Working Paper 26908
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26908
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2020
The authors would like to thank Daniel Dieckelmann, Md Azharul Islam, and Jamil Rahman for
their extraordinary research assistance. Isha Agarwal, Isaac Green, William Shao, Sylvia Lu,
The authors would like to
Felipe Silva, Bryan Tam, Yevhenii Usenko, and the librarians at the Harvard Business
School Historical Collections also provided valuable assistance. The authors would also like
to thank Jason Donaldson, Sam Hanson, Mikael Juselius, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Randy
Kroszner, Solomos Solomou, Moritz Schularick, Andrei Shleifer, Eugene White, and seminar
participants at the Bank for International Settlements, Boston Fed, Boston University,
Cambridge University, Columbia University, Cornell University, Danmarks Nationalbank,
EDHEC, Erasmus University Rotterdam, Federal Reserve Board, Georgetown University,
Harvard University, Imperial College London, London Business School, MIT, OCC, Oxford
University, Richmond Fed, Rutgers University, University of Bonn, University of British
Columbia, University of Maryland, University of Rochester, University of Toronto, Yale
University, Chicago Booth financial crises conference, fall 2018 NBER Corporate Finance
meeting, Becker-Friedman Institute junior finance/macro conference, 2018 AEA meeting, 2019
AFA meeting, Kentucky Finance Conference, Columbia SIPA / BPI financial regulation
conference, and the New York Fed/NYU Conference of Financial Intermediation for their
comments and feedback. We thank Mika Vaihekoski and Frans Buelens for sharing data. A
previous version of this paper was circulated with the title “Salient Crises, Quiet Crises.” The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Matthew Baron, Emil Verner, and Wei Xiong. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Banking Crises without Panics
Matthew Baron, Emil Verner, and Wei Xiong
NBER Working Paper No. 26908
March 2020
JEL No. G01,G21
ABSTRACT
We examine historical banking crises through the lens of bank equity declines, which cover a
broad sample of episodes of banking distress both with and without banking panics. To do this,
we construct a new dataset on bank equity returns and narrative information on banking panics
for 46 countries over the period 1870-2016. We find that even in the absence of panics, large
bank equity declines are associated with substantial credit contractions and output gaps. While
panics can be an important amplification mechanism, our results indicate that panics are not
necessary for banking crises to have severe economic consequences. Furthermore, panics tend to
be preceded by large bank equity declines, suggesting that panics are the result, rather than the
cause, of earlier bank losses. We also use bank equity returns to uncover a number of forgotten
historical banking crises and to create a banking crisis chronology that distinguishes between
bank equity losses and panics.
Matthew Baron Wei Xiong
Johnson Graduate School of Management Princeton University
Cornell University Department of Economics
401J Sage Hall Bendheim Center for Finance
Ithaca, NY 14853-6201 Princeton, NJ 08450
baron@cornell.edu and NBER
wxiong@princeton.edu
Emil Verner
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-635
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
everner@mit.edu

The severe economic distress faced by the world economy following the 2008 financial
crisis has renewed interest in understanding the causes and consequences of banking crises.
Academics and policy makers often emphasize panics among bank creditors as a key driver of
banking crises. For example, Friedman and Schwartz (1963) argue that depositor panics played a
central role in the severity of the Great Depression, and Bernanke (2018) attributes the unusual
severity of the Great Recession primarily to the panics in funding and securitization markets after
the collapse of Lehman Brothers. As highlighted by the classic theory of Diamond and Dybvig
(1983), using short-term debt to finance long-term illiquid investments exposes even solvent banks
to self-fulfilling panics. As a reflection of the influence of the panic-based view of banking crises,
some have gone as far as essentially defining banking crises as banking panics (Schwartz 1987,
Gorton 2014).
However, there remains a debate about whether panics are so essential to banking crises.
Another strand of research on banking crises argues that policy makers should be concerned
primarily by bank capital crunches driven by asset losses, rather than panics per se (e.g., Calomiris
and Mason 2003, Greenlaw et al. 2008, Admati and Hellwig 2014). This alternative view is
motivated by an extensive literature that emphasizes bank equity as a key state variable that
determines banks’ capacity to intermediate funds from savers to firms and households, e.g.,
Holmstrom and Tirole (1997) and Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010). As large declines in bank equity
tend to impair banks’ intermediation capacity, an important question is whether large bank losses
even without panics can also translate into severe recessions. If so, large bank equity losses should
be viewed as the central feature of banking crises.
We address this debate by asking—are panics necessary for banking crises to have severe
economic consequences? Our conceptual definition of a banking crisis is an episode in which the
banking sector’s ability to intermediate funds is severely impaired. By panics, we mean episodes
of severe and sudden withdrawals of funding by bank creditors from a significant part of the
banking system. If the answer to this question is no, then a bank capital crunch caused by large
loan losses or other impairment of the banking sector can lead to a sharp contraction in credit
supply that depresses macroeconomic output, even without a panic.
We use bank equity returns to systemically examine this question, as large bank equity
declines capture a sample of episodes in which banks suffer large losses from the viewpoint of
1

equity investors, and thus likely capture times of bank distress. Since equity holders are the first
to suffer losses from the occurrence of a banking crisis that damages banks’ intermediation
capacity, we assume that conceptually a large bank equity decline is necessary for a banking crisis.
Large bank equity declines offer several advantages as measures of aggregate banking sector
distress relative to existing approaches to identifying historical banking crises (e.g., Reinhart and
Rogoff 2009, Laeven and Valencia 2013). First, large declines in bank equity cover a broad sample
of episodes of banking distress both with and without panics, as episodes without panics may be
otherwise hard to detect due to the “quiet” nature of some such episodes of bank distress. Second,
in contrast to the information insensitivity of credit-market instruments prior to panics, bank equity
returns tend to be gradual and cumulative and thus may capture early signs of banking crises for
real-time policy making. Third, the broad availability of bank equity returns across many countries
going far back in time makes bank equity returns particularly appealing for studies of historical
crises.
We construct a new historical dataset of bank equity index returns for 46 advanced and
emerging economies going back to 1870, built in large part from hand-collected individual bank
stock price and dividend data from historical newspapers. We control for broader stock market
conditions by also constructing new indexes for nonfinancial stocks over the same sample. Our
dataset thus provides nearly 2,500 country-years of information on bank equities, nonfinancial
equities, and macroeconomic variables. We also collect new information on the occurrence of
events such as banking panics and widespread bank failures, backed by several hundred pages of
narrative documentation.
As many other factors beyond banking crises may also cause large fluctuations in bank
equity returns, one cannot take for granted the empirical performance of bank equity declines in
identifying crises and predicting subsequent economic outcomes. We first confirm that bank equity
declines contain useful information about banking sector distress and the economy by testing at
the country level whether bank equity index returns have predictive content for future
macroeconomic dynamics, beyond the information contained in nonfinancial equities. We find that
bank equity declines predict large and persistent declines in future real GDP and bank credit to the
private sector. For example, a decline in bank equity of at least 30% predicts 3.4% lower real GDP
and 5.7 percentage points lower bank credit-to-GDP after three years. The relation between bank
equity returns and future output and credit growth is highly nonlinear: declines in bank equity
2