NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RELIEF RALLY: SENATORS AS FECKLESS AS THE REST OF US AT STOCK
PICKING
William Belmont
Bruce Sacerdote
Ranjan Sehgal
Ian Van Hoek
Working Paper 26975
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26975
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2020
We thank Ranjan Sehgal for superb research assistance. Belmont and Van Hoek are at Dartmouth
College. Sacerdote is at Dartmouth and National Bureau of Economic Research and the Jameel Poverty
Action Lab. Corresponding author: bruce.sacerdote@dartmouth.edu, 6106 Rockefeller, Hanover NH
03755. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2020 by William Belmont, Bruce Sacerdote, Ranjan Sehgal, and Ian Van Hoek. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Relief Rally: Senators As Feckless As the Rest of Us at Stock Picking
William Belmont, Bruce Sacerdote, Ranjan Sehgal, and Ian Van Hoek
NBER Working Paper No. 26975
April 2020
JEL No. G0,G12,G18
ABSTRACT
We examine the stock trading behavior and returns of U.S. senators from 2012-March 2020. Stocks
purchased by senators on average slightly underperform stocks in the same industry and size (market
cap) categories by 11 basis points, 28 basis points and 17 basis points at the 1, 3, and 6-month time
horizons. Stocks sold by senators underperform slightly for the first three months and then outperform
slightly (a statistically insignificant 14 basis points) at the one year mark. We find no evidence that
senators have industry specific stock picking ability related to their committee assignments. Neither
Republican nor Democratic senators are skilled at picking stocks to buy, while stocks sold by Republican
senators underperform by 50 basis points over three months. Stocks sold following the January 24th
COVID-19 briefing do underperform the market by a statistically significant 9 percent while stocks
purchased during this period underperform by 3 percent. Our findings contrast somewhat with recent
news reports and studies of pre-STOCK Act (2012) returns, though are consistent with Eggers and
Hainmueller (2013).
William Belmont Ranjan Sehgal
6106 Rockefeller 6106 Rockefeller
Dartmouth College Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755 Hanover, NH 03755
William.A.Belmont.20@dartmouth.edu ranjan.s.sehgal.22@dartmouth.edu
Bruce Sacerdote Ian Van Hoek
6106 Rockefeller Hall 6106 Rockefeller
Department of Economics Dartmouth College
Dartmouth College Hanover, NH 03755
Hanover, NH 03755-3514 Ian.J.Van.Hoek.20@dartmouth.edu
and NBER
Bruce.I.Sacerdote@dartmouth.edu

In April of 2012, the United States Congress passed the Stop Trading on Congressional
Knowledge Act (STOCK Act, “the Act”) which prohibits members of Congress and their staff
from leveraging non-public information to make investment decisions. The Act also requires the
President, Vice President, and all members of their staff to report any trades that exceed $1,000
within 45 days of the transaction. The Act made it clear for the first time that the laws against
insider trading also apply to members of Congress and their staff. This prevents them from
leveraging information gleaned from their official capacities as market regulators. The Act also
established additional public disclosure requirements for security trading activities of members
of Congress in order to help monitor their compliance with the new insider trading laws. The Act
was celebrated with great fanfare during its signing ceremony and was seen as a pivotal step in
addressing public skepticism about an unequal system. As President Obama put it, the STOCK
Act was meant to address a “deficit of trust” between the American people and their lawmakers.
A year after the STOCK Act was passed, the bill was quietly amended, reversing major
pieces of the law. Fast-tracked using a process known as unanimous consent, the amendment
repealed the mandate for congressional aides and staffers to disclose their trading activities
online (Lowder and Cowan 2013). Senators and congressmen/congresswomen now have the
option to disclose their trades through an electronic system or through paper filings. For
members of Congress, these trades are now available on two websites (one for the House and
one for the Senate).1 Disclosures by congressional staffers are not made available by website.
Recently, the STOCK Act again made headlines when at least four senators avoided large
losses by selling ahead of the COVID-19 stock market crash.2 The selling took place after a
1 http://clerk.house.gov/public_disc/financial-search.aspx and https://efdsearch.senate.gov/search/
2 https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2020/03/25/senators-dumped-stocks-amid-coronavirus-crisis-
heres-what-we-know-about-congress-financial-self-interest/
2

January 24 briefing of the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee on the
severity of the coming COVID-19 related health crisis3. Commentators have suggested that
senators frequently use their private information both to aid in stock selection and market timing.
We do not find evidence that senators are successful stock pickers. Our tests for market timing
(not reported here) are not particularly well powered, but we do not find evidence of market
timing either; upweighting (downweighting) stock holdings in months when senators are buying
(selling) leads to lower returns than a simple buy and hold strategy.
Existing research has demonstrated that prior to the passage of the STOCK Act,
portfolios that mimic senators outperform the market by approximately 12 percent annually,
(Ziobrowski, Cheng, Boyd, and Ziobrowski 2004) and investments by members of the U.S.
House of Representatives outperform the market by approximately 6 percent annually
(Ziobrowski, Boyd, Cheng, and Ziobrowski 2011). The literature supports the hypothesis that
prior to the passage of the STOCK Act, members of Congress were leveraging their privileged
positions in order to achieve superior financial returns. Other research finds that senators achieve
positive abnormal returns by avoiding annualized losses from sold stocks of 5.4 percent (Cherry,
Heitz, and Jens 2017). Analyzing the executive branch, Acemoglu et. al finds that companies
with a prior connection to Timothy Geithner experienced abnormal returns of 6 and 12 percent
after 1 and 12 full days of trading, which may be due to the perceived benefit of personal
connections in times of financial crisis.
However, more recent literature finds no evidence of a congressional trading advantage
in the years 2004-2008 (Eggers and Hainmueller, 2013). By reconstructing actual portfolios of
congressmen, Eggers and Hainmueller find that the average portfolio underperformed a passive
portfolio by 2-3 percent per year. It is possible that the publication of Ziobrowski, Boyd, Cheng,
3 There were numerous other related Senate briefings in Feburary.
3