NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FIRM-LEVEL EXPOSURE TO EPIDEMIC DISEASES:
COVID-19, SARS, AND H1N1
Tarek Alexander Hassan
Stephan Hollander
Laurence van Lent
Markus Schwedeler
Ahmed Tahoun
Working Paper 26971
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26971
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2020, Revised September 2022
We thank participants at the 2021 American Economic Association Annual Meeting, the EAA
Virtual Accounting Research Seminar, 2021 European Economic Association Congress, NBER
SI 2020 Asset Pricing, INQUIRE, Virtual Law & Economics Workshop (University of Florida,
University of Michigan, and University of Virginia), and Case Western Reserve. We thank Steve
Davis, Ralph Koijen (discussant), Ken Kotz, and Tom Ferguson for helpful comments. Aakash
Kalyani and Luke Melas-Kyriazi provided excellent research assistance. Tahoun sincerely
appreciates support and funding from the Wheeler Institute for Business and Development.
Tahoun and Van Lent sincerely appreciate the support from the Institute for New Economic
Thinking (INET). Van Lent gratefully acknowledges funding from the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft Project ID 403041268 - TRR 266. The dataset developed in this paper is
available on www.firmlevelrisk.com. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Tarek Alexander Hassan, Stephan Hollander, Laurence van Lent, Markus Schwedeler,
and Ahmed Tahoun. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Firm-Level Exposure to Epidemic Diseases: COVID-19, SARS, and H1N1
Tarek Alexander Hassan, Stephan Hollander, Laurence van Lent, Markus Schwedeler, and
Ahmed Tahoun
NBER Working Paper No. 26971
April 2020, Revised September 2022
JEL No. E0,E6,F0,G12,I0
ABSTRACT
We construct text-based measures of the primary concerns listed firms associated with the spread
of COVID-19 and other epidemic diseases. We identify which firms perceive to lose or gain from
a given epidemic and textually decompose the epidemic's effect on the firm's demand and supply.
We find that the effects of COVID-19 manifest as a simultaneous shock to demand and supply,
with both shocks affecting firms' market valuations in equal measure on average. By contrast,
demand-related impacts appear more important in accounting for the observed collapse in firm-
level investment during the COVID-19 crisis.
Tarek Alexander Hassan Markus Schwedeler
Department of Economics Boston University
Boston University 270 Bay State Road
270 Bay State Road Boston, MA 02215
Boston, MA 02215 mschwed@bu.edu
and NBER
thassan@bu.edu Ahmed Tahoun
London Business School
Stephan Hollander 26 Sussex plc, Regent's Park
Tilburg University London NW1 4SA
Warandelaan 2 United Kingdom
5037 AB Tilburg atahoun@london.edu
the Netherlands
s.hollander@tilburguniversity.edu
Laurence van Lent
Frankfurt School of Finance and Management
Adickesallee 32-34
60322 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
l.vanlent@fs.de
Data is available at www.firmlevelrisk.com

“[D]o you want to touch on cancellations and just the whole hype around coronavirus?”
— Colin V. Reed, Chairman and CEO, Ryman Hospitality Properties Inc., in the company’s
Q4-2019 earnings call (February 25, 2020)
When the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of the COVID-19 virus a
pandemic on March 11, 2020, the disease had already wreaked havoc in large swathes of
China and Northern Italy. What started as a new illness in a middling city in China had
grown within a few months to a global public health crisis unseen for a century. Stock
markets around the world crashed.1 Even though governments rushed in equal measure to
stem the further spread of the virus, locking down entire regions and supporting a suddenly
wobbling economy, it became clear that the shock would leave few untouched.
While perhaps a singular event, the COVID-19 pandemic has underscored the need to
quicklyunderstandhowfirmsareaffected by andrespond to large, aggregate, andunexpected
events (“shocks”). However, those wishing to understand the ongoing or anticipated firm-
level impact of a large shock face four fundamental challenges related to measurement: How
to identify which firm is affected? How to quantify the intensity of a firm’s exposure to the
shock? Howtodeterminethenatureofafirm’sshock(forexample, whethertheshockresults
in a firm’s demand contraction, supply disruption, or financial difficulties)? And finally, how
to do so in time to still be useful for decision making?
A common approach to studying the firm-level impacts of large events is to examine
earnings or related accounting data. However, accounting data are, by nature, backward-
looking and reflect news only at considerable lags. Further, when considering earnings in
isolation, it would be hard to disentangle the impact of COVID-19 from that of other shocks
and to identify—let alone quantify—the specific channels through which COVID-19 disrupts
firms. That is, although one may observe firms’ earnings being (negatively) impacted, it is
much more difficult to determine whether, and if so by how much, this negative impact is
due to COVID-19 impacting firms through their demand or supply side, or perhaps through
1SeeBakeretal.(2020);GormsenandKoijen(2020);RamelliandWagner(2020);andDavisetal.(2021)
for an early discussion of the stock market response to COVID-19.
1

government regulations taken in response to the outbreak.2 Event studies (Kothari and
Warner, 2007), which look at stock price reactions to events, may identify winners and losers
but, likewise, fall short of giving clues about the channels through which a shock impacts a
given firm.
At the same time, a detailed, firm-level understanding of a shock’s distinct channels
is essential for formulating an effective policy response. For example, while well-targeted
monetary and fiscal policies can compensate for shortfalls in demand, they may fall flat or
even cause inflation in the face of a contraction in supply.3 This is, of course, also true
across countries, sectors, or even firms. Indeed, whereas firms from a specific country or
sector may predominantly experience a demand shortfall, others could suffer from supply-
chain or financing difficulties. Thus, a better understanding of how a shock manifests at the
firm level is essential for a more targeted response by monetary and fiscal authorities and
for investors considering its consequences for their portfolios.
In this paper, we introduce a toolbox of text-based measures that allow researchers to
systematically characterize the ongoing and anticipated impacts of large, potentially un-
precedented events in near real-time. Specifically, these measures allow us to identify per-
ceived winners and losers, trace the channels through which the event impacts specific firms,
and identify firm-level demand and supply shocks resulting from the event. Since we use
transcripts of earnings conference calls as our data source, the measures can be applied to
virtually all US publicly listed firms and the majority of large internationally-listed firms
in over 80 countries, and in near real-time (as soon as firms hold their earnings calls). We
demonstrate the usefulness of the toolbox by analyzing which firms are affected by and how
firms respond to the outbreak of COVID-19 and other epidemic diseases.
The keystone of our toolbox is the firm’s exposure to the shock, where ‘exposure’ is
2Barrero et al. (2021) use data from a survey to underpin their conclusion that COVID-19 is a persistent
reallocation shock, shifting employment growth to industries with a capacity for employees to work from
home.
3See, for example, the debate in the literature about whether the Great Recession was demand-driven or
due to a drop in productivity (e.g., Mian et al., 2013; Kaplan et al., 2020).
2