NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TRADE CREDIT AND THE TRANSMISSION OF
UNCONVENTIONAL MONETARY POLICY
Manuel Adelino
Miguel A. Ferreira
Mariassunta Giannetti
Pedro Pires
Working Paper 27077
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27077
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2020
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Manuel Adelino, Miguel A. Ferreira, Mariassunta Giannetti, and Pedro Pires. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Trade Credit and the Transmission of Unconventional Monetary Policy
Manuel Adelino, Miguel A. Ferreira, Mariassunta Giannetti, and Pedro Pires
NBER Working Paper No. 27077
May 2020
JEL No. E50,G30
ABSTRACT
We show that trade credit in production networks is important for the transmission of
unconventional monetary policy. We find that firms with bonds eligible for purchase under the
European Central Bank’s Corporate Sector Purchase Program act as financial intermediaries and
extend more trade credit to their customers. The increase in trade credit flows is more pronounced
from core countries to periphery countries and towards financially constrained customers.
Customers increase investment and employment in response to the additional financing, while
suppliers with eligible bonds increase their customer base, potentially favoring upstream industry
concentration. Our findings suggest that the trade credit channel of monetary policy produces
heterogeneous effects on regions, industries, and firms.
Manuel Adelino Mariassunta Giannetti
Fuqua School of Business Department of Finance
Duke University Stockholm School of Economics
100 Fuqua Drive Box 6501
Durham, NC 27708 SE-113 83 Stockholm
and NBER Sweden
manuel.adelino@duke.edu mariassunta.giannetti@hhs.se
Miguel A. Ferreira Pedro Pires
Nova School of Business and Economics Nova School of Business and Economics
Campus Carcavelos Campus Carcavelos
Rua Holanda, 1 Rua Holanda, 1
Carcavelos Carcavelos
Portugal Portugal
and CEPR and ECGI pmapires@gmail.com
miguel.ferreira@novasbe.pt

1. Introduction
Conventional monetary policy is typically thought to affect access to external finance more for
small firms than for large firms. The informational frictions that add to the cost of external finance
apply mainly to small firms such as young firms, firms with higher idiosyncratic risk, and firms
with less collateral (Gertler and Gilchrist, 1994; Holmstrom and Tirole, 1997). In addition, small
firms are more likely to be face liquidity constraints (Fazzari, Hubbard and Petersen, 1988) and
rely more on financial intermediaries, while large firms have access to public markets (Gertler and
Hubbard, 1988).
Unconventional monetary policy tools, which involve directly purchasing assets in public debt
markets, can directly affect bond yields and issuance volumes of large firms, as these firms are
much more likely to issue bonds. This has been the case for both episodes of quantitative easing
in the United States focusing on short-and long-term Treasury bills (Foley-Fisher, Ramcharan and
Yu, 2016), and for the European Central Bank’s (ECB) Corporate Sector Purchase Program
(CSPP) that involve the purchase of investment grade corporate bonds (Grosse-Rueschkamp,
Steffen, and Streitz, 2019; Todorov, 2020). Quantitative easing can also indirectly benefit small
firms in the economy through the bank lending channel (Acharya, Eisert, Eufinger, and Hirsch,
2018; Grosse-Rueschkamp, Steffen, and Streitz, 2019; Chakraborty, Goldstein, and Mackinlay,
2020).
This paper proposes and tests a new channel (trade credit channel) of transmission of
unconventional monetary policy, which operates independently from the bank lending channel.
Using the ECB’s CSPP announced in March 2016 and implemented starting in June 2016 as a
laboratory, we hypothesize that firms with access to bond markets (i.e., typically large firms) can
act as financial intermediaries by providing trade credit to their customers who do not have access
to bond markets. We examine whether this channel mitigates or exacerbates asymmetries in the
transmission mechanism of monetary policy by studying which customers are supported by firms
with eligible bonds under the CSPP. We also explore how the CSPP affects eligible firms’ ability
to acquire and retain customers and thus their competitive position in product markets.
1

The CSPP was designed with strict eligibility criteria in place, as only bonds issued by
investment-grade non-financial firms from the euro area can be purchased by the ECB. The design
of the CSPP allows us to implement a difference-in-differences analysis and to address concerns
related to shocks concurrent to the implementation of the CSPP affecting eligible firms and their
customers. We show that the CSPP resulted in a significant increase in the issuance of bonds in
the core of the euro area (includes countries such as France and Germany), where more developed
capital markets and stronger legal institutions allow firms to issue larger amount of bonds that are
deemed to be safe.
This asymmetric reaction favoring large firms in more financially and economically developed
countries and in countries with better economic conditions is a potentially unintended consequence
of the CSPP. However, if targeted (large, unconstrained) firms pass on the additional funding
liquidity to their customers through trade credit, unconventional monetary policy tools can also
benefit small and financially constrained firms through production networks. In addition, even
though firms located in core countries may experience a larger direct benefit from the CSPP,
whether the increase in liquidity spill overs to other regions depends on the geography of
production networks.
We investigate these unexplored questions using a new data set containing information on
firm-level customer-supplier networks. We compare the amount of trade credit extended by
eligible firms (i.e., firms with bonds that are eligible under the CSPP) to trade credit extended by
non-eligible firms, before and after the CSPP announcement. We find that eligible firms increase
the amount of trade credit they provide to customers (i.e., accounts receivable as a proportion of
sales) more than non-eligible firms after the CSPP. As we would expect, at the same time, we find
that the amount of trade credit received by customers of eligible firms (i.e., accounts payable as a
proportion of sales) increases after the CSPP. The increase happens only after the program
announcement, with no evidence of significant preexisting differential trends in trade credit.
We also show that the CSPP reduces financial constraints indirectly for firms in the production
network of firms targeted by the CSPP. Eligible firms extend trade credit to customers that are
2