NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BILATERAL INFORMATION DISCLOSURE IN ADVERSE SELECTION MARKETS WITH
NONEXCLUSIVE COMPETITION
Joseph E. Stiglitz
Jungyoll Yun
Andrew Kosenko
Working Paper 27041
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27041
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2020
We are grateful to several anonymous referees, to the audiences at Sciences Po, and to Gerry
Jaynes for helpful comments on an earlier draft, to Michael Rothschild and Richard Arnott, long
time collaborators, to Byoung Heon Jun, Debarati Ghosh, Andrea Gurwitt, and Lim Nayeon for
research and editorial assistance, and to the Institute for New Economic Thinking and the Ford
Foundation and Fulbright Foundation for financial support. The companion paper
“Characterization, Existence, and Pareto Optimality in Insurance Markets with Asymmetric
Information with Endogenous and Asymmetric Disclosures; Revisiting Rothschild-
Stiglitz” (Stiglitz et al 2018) contains more results. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Joseph E. Stiglitz, Jungyoll Yun, and Andrew Kosenko. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Bilateral Information Disclosure in Adverse Selection Markets with Nonexclusive Competition
Joseph E. Stiglitz, Jungyoll Yun, and Andrew Kosenko
NBER Working Paper No. 27041
April 2020
JEL No. D43,D82,D86
ABSTRACT
We study insurance markets with nonexclusive contracts, introducing bilateral endogenous
information disclosure about insurance sales and purchases by firms and consumers. We show
that a competitive equilibrium exists under remarkably mild conditions, and characterize the
unique equilibrium outcome. With two types of consumers the outcome consists of a pooling
contract which maximizes the well-being of the low risk type (along the zero profit pooling line)
plus a supplemental (undisclosed and nonexclusive) contract that brings the high risk type to full
insurance (at his own odds). We show that this outcome is extremely robust and constrained
Pareto efficient. Consumer disclosure and asymmetric equilibrium information flows are critical
in supporting the equilibrium.
Joseph E. Stiglitz Andrew Kosenko
Uris Hall, Columbia University Marist College
3022 Broadway, Room 212 School of Management
New York, NY 10027 3399 North Road
and NBER Poughkeepsie, NY 12601
jes322@columbia.edu ak2912@columbia.edu
Jungyoll Yun
Department of Economics,
Ewha University,
Seoul
Korea
jyyun@ewha.ac.kr

1 Introduction
In 1976 Rothschild and Stiglitz characterized equilibrium in a competitive market with
exogenousinformationasymmetriesinwhichmarketparticipantshadfullknowledgeof
insurancepurchases. Self-selectionconstraintsaffectedindividualchoices;butunlikethe
monopoly equilibrium (Stiglitz (1977)), no single firm framed the set of contracts among
which individuals chose. There never existed a pooling equilibrium (in which the two
types bought the same policy); if there existed an equilibrium, it entailed the high risk
getting full insurance, and the low risk individual only getting partial insurance; and
under plausible conditions—e.g. if the two types were not too different—a competitive
equilibrium did not exist; finally, the single-crossing condition on preferences was nec-
essary but not sufficient for an equilibrium. The results were disquieting, as in reality
equilibriumseemedtoexist,andoftenentailedpooling.
AvastliteraturehasappliedtheRothschildandStiglitz(1976)model(henceforthsim-
plyRS),tolabor,capital,andproductmarketsinavarietyofcontexts,withmanyempir-
ical applications. A smaller literature focused on remedying the deficiencies in the un-
derlying framework by formalizing the insurance “game”, by changing the information
assumptions,andbychangingtheequilibriumconcept.
This paper introduces bilateral endogenous information disclosure about insurance
purchases: eachfirmandeachconsumermakeadecisionaboutwhatinformationtodis-
closetowhom. Thus,informationaboutcontractpurchasesisbothendogenous,andpo-
tentially asymmetric - a firm may disclose information about a consumer to some firms,
but not others, depending on what the consumer discloses. We are motivated by the
following observations: the outcomes with full information disclosure (exclusivity is en-
forceable, so the RS model applies, and a pooling equilibrium is impossible), and with
no information disclosure (in which case pooling again cannot be an equilibrium), are
known. Withoutconsumerdisclosure,anydisclosurethatfirmsmakehastobesymmet-
ric, since they have no basis for differentiation; as we show later such disclosure cannot
underpinanequilibrium. Thequestionofwhathappensifdisclosureisbilateral,endoge-
nous,andthuspotentiallyasymmetric,isthusnatural.
The results are surprising: (i) asymmetries in information about insurance purchases
turn out to be nontrivial and important; (ii) equilibrium exists under mild assumptions
(notably,thesinglecrossingpropertyneednothold); and(iii)equilibriumalwaysentails
a pooling component. The unique insurance allocation (an allocation describes the sum
of benefits and premia over all insurance companies for each individual) consists of the
pooling contract which maximizes the well-being of the low risk individual subject to
the zero-profit constraint plus, for the high-risk individual, a supplemental contract that
bringshimtofullinsuranceathisownodds. Whiletheequilibriumallocationisunique,
2

itcanbesupportedbyalternativeinformationdisclosurestrategies.
WebeginbycharacterizingthesetofconstrainedParetoefficient(CPE)allocationsin
thepresenceofasecretcontract. WethenshowthattheCPEallocationwhichmaximizes
the well-being of the low risk individual is the unique equilibrium allocation and can be
supported by simple yet illuminating information disclosure strategies. As in RS, firms
offerinsurancecontracts,butnowtheyhaveanoptiontoreveal(possiblypartial)informa-
tionaboutinsurancepurchasestootherfirms. In RS,itwasassumedthatcontractswere
exclusive, e.g. implicitly, that if a firm discovered a purchaser had violated the exclusiv-
ity restriction, the coverage would be cancelled. (It was also assumed that the insurance
firm had the information necessary to enforce exclusivity.) Here we consider a broader
range of possible restrictions and under a broader set of assumptions concerning the in-
formation available to insurance firms. Obviously, the enforceability of any conditions
imposed is dependent on information available to the insurance firm. Consumers, too,
have a slightly more complicated life: they have to decide which policies to buy, aware
of the restrictions in place and the information that the firm may have to enforce those
restrictions. And they also have to decide on what information to reveal to which firms.
A competitive equilibrium in this model is a set of insurance contracts, such that no one
can offer an alternative contract or set of contracts and make positive profits. A contract
is defined by the benefit, the premium, any restrictions associated with the contract, and
thefirm’sdisclosurepolicy. Andinassessingtheconsequencesofofferinganalternative
contract, each firm takes into account the consumers’ response to the set of contracts on
offer,bothwithrespecttoinsurancepurchasesanddisclosures.
The intuition behind our result is this: in RS, a pooling equilibrium can always be
brokenbyadeviantpolicywhichwillbepurchasedonlybylowriskindividuals,andas
a result, is profitable. But that deviant contract will be purchased only by low risk indi-
vidualsbecausethedeviantfirmcanenforceexclusivity. Ifhighriskindividualscansup-
plementthedeviantcontract(onebreakingtheputativepoolingequilibrium)withsecret
insurance at their own odds, that policy will be purchased by high risk individuals, and
thus make a loss. Hence, the deviant policy will not be offered and the pooling contract
can be sustained. The trick is to find an information disclosure strategy which ensures
thatadeviantfirmcan’tenforceexclusivity, butwhichalsoensuresthatthefirmsselling
insuranceatthepoolingodds(whichwerefertoas“established”firms)don’t”oversell”:
highriskindividualswouldliketobuymoreinsuranceatthepoolingoddsthanlowrisk
individuals. If they did so, the pooling contract would lose money. Accordingly, there
has to be information disclosure among the established firms to prevent the high risk
individuals from doing so. Thus, supporting the equilibrium allocation requires an in-
termediateamountofdisclosure: oneneedssomeinformationsharing(enoughtoprevent
overselling), but not too much (not enough to enforce exclusivity). Furthermore, disclo-
3