NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EXPECTED PROFITS AND THE SCIENTIFIC NOVELTY OF INNOVATION
David Dranove
Craig Garthwaite
Manuel I. Hermosilla
Working Paper 27093
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27093
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2020
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by David Dranove, Craig Garthwaite, and Manuel I. Hermosilla. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Expected Profits and The Scientific Novelty of Innovation
David Dranove, Craig Garthwaite, and Manuel I. Hermosilla
NBER Working Paper No. 27093
May 2020
JEL No. I1,O3
ABSTRACT
Innovation policy involves trading off monopoly output and pricing in the short run in exchange
for incentives for firms to develop new products in the future. While existing research
demonstrates that expected profits fuel R&D investments, little is known about the novelty of the
projects funded by these investments. Relying on data that describe the scientific approaches used
by a large sample of experimental drug projects, we expand on this literature by examining the
scientific novelty of pharmaceutical R&D investments following the creation of the Medicare
Part D program. We find little evidence that the positive demand shock implied by this program
prompted firms to undertake scientifically novel R&D activity, as measured by whether the
specific scientific approach had been used before. However, we find some evidence that firms
invested in products involving novel combinations of scientific approaches. These estimates can
inform economists and policymakers assessing the tradeoffs associated with marginal changes in
commercial returns from newly developed pharmaceutical products.
David Dranove Manuel I. Hermosilla
Department of Strategy Carey Business School
Kellogg School of Management Johns Hopkins University
Northwestern University 100 International Dr
2001 Sheridan Road Baltimore, MD 21202
Evanston, IL 60208 mh@jhu.edu
d-dranove@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Craig Garthwaite
Department of Strategy
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
c-garthwaite@kellogg.northwestern.edu

1. Introduction
Pharmaceutical pricing attracts large amounts of economic, policy, and political attention. This
is perhaps not surprising. The five, six, and even seven figure price tags for many drug treatments not
only bear little relationship to marginal costs, they make potentially life-saving treatments unaffordable
for nearly anyone who lacks generous insurance coverage, while making insurance itself increasingly
expensive for everyone. Moreover, many of these high pharmaceutical prices are the result of
deliberate policy choices. Not only do drug makers receive patent protection, the United States
government deliberately leaves drug pricing largely to market forces. This stands in sharp contrast to
most other developed nations, where drug prices are constrained through the exercise of monopsony
power by purchasing entities. Nevertheless, patent protection and market-based pricing remain a
pivotal component of the existing U.S. innovative system, as they encourage the development of new
products by solving a fundamental economic “hold up” problem; i.e. biopharmaceutical firms may be
unwilling to make value-creating investments in new products without a reasonable belief they will be
able to appropriate a large enough share of the created value.
In accordance with the theory underlying these policies, there is broad consensus in the
academic literature that increases in the expected profitability of new drugs elicits a supply response
(e.g. Ward and Dranove, 1997; Acemoglu and Linn, 2004; Finkelstein, 2004; Cerda, 2007; Kyle and
McGahan, 2012; Blume-Kohout and Sood, 2013; Dubois et al., 2015). Opponents of policies intended
to reduce drug prices cite this body of empirical evidence demonstrating dynamic innovation effects, and
argue that price regulation would diminish the future supply of potentially life-enhancing and life-
saving breakthrough drugs that offer new treatment pathways.1 Supporters of policies to limit drug
prices counter that the overall supply response masks considerable heterogeneity in the types of drugs
1 For example, Heartland Institute Senior Fellow Joseph Bast (2004) writes: “Increasing importation means cutting off the stream of
investment that makes this system sustainable. It means fewer new lifesaving drugs.”
1

developed in pursuit of new market opportunities. Specifically, they argue that dynamic innovation
effects are largely limited to me-too or follow-on drugs, whereby drug makers “play it safe” and primarily
duplicate the science of established products.2 The largely unstated assumption in this argument is
that the welfare created by such products is insufficient to justify the deadweight loss caused by today’s
higher prices and the associated rent seeking.
This debate highlights the fact that regulations aimed at reducing drug prices may not only
impact consumer welfare through changes in the amount of R&D investment undertaken by firms, but
also through the nature of funded projects. While the existing literature conclusively shows that the
prospect of lowering expected profits will reduce the total amount of innovation, it provides little
evidence about the composition of this response.
In this paper, we expand the existing literature by revisiting the industry response to the
increase in expected profits created by the passage of Medicare Part D.3 We specifically focus on the
novelty (rather than the number) of clinical trial activity initiated in response to the positive demand
shock implied by the program. There are many ways to classify novelty.4 In this paper, we consider
whether a drug represents the first application of a new molecular-targeting design and would
therefore be considered novel from a scientific perspective. This definition is intended to capture
information about how the inherent risk and/or cost of development to the innovative firm varies
across potential products.
2 For example, Marcia Angell, former editor of the New England Journal of Medicine, states that “[i]n fact, the big drug companies now
concentrate mainly on … producing variations of top-selling drugs already on the market—called ‘me-too’ drugs (emphasis added). There
is very little innovative research in the modern pharmaceutical industry, despite its claims to the contrary” (Angell, 2010). Wikipedia
defines “me-too drugs” as a drug product that contains an active pharmaceutical ingredient that is chemically related, and usually very
structurally similar, to a known active pharmaceutical ingredient…The term follows from the phrase "me too" and is usually used in a
negative way, the idea being the me-too drug simply rode the coattails of the research and development done to develop the prototype
API.”
3 In a recent paper that informs our methodology, Blume-Kohout and Sood (2013) find that after the 2003 passage of Medicare Part D,
which increased the demand for drugs by elderly Americans, drug makers ramped up their research into drugs targeting seniors.
However, these authors do not examine the novelty of the response, which is the central question of our paper.
4 For example, in a prior working paper, we considered a measure of whether a drug offered therapeutic innovation, i.e. whether a drug
under development had the potential to be the first to treat a particular condition (Dranove et al, 2014). One might also examine sales
of drugs that reach the market, though this is a mixture of both innovation and potential rent seeking.
2