NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
OPTIMAL BAILOUTS AND THE DOOM LOOP WITH A FINANCIAL NETWORK
Agostino Capponi
Felix C. Corell
Joseph E. Stiglitz
Working Paper 27074
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27074
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2020, Revised January 2022
We would like to thank the editor, three anonymous referees, Árpád Ábrahám, Viral Acharya,
Thorsten Beck, Edouard Challe, Nicola Fuchs-Schündeln, Paul Glasserman, Piero Gottardi,
Philipp Grübener, Philipp Kircher, Anton Korinek, Steve Kou, Ramon Marimon, Lukas Nord,
Giorgia Piacentino, Vincenzo Quadrini, Rafael Repullo, Stefan Schmitz, our discussants Flora
Lutz, Anjan Thakor, and Dimitri Vayanos, conference participants at the 5th Annual Conference
on Network Science in Economics, the EEA Virtual Congress 2020, the 7th Sovereign Bond
Markets Conference 2020 (Bank of England), the 9th Workshop on Banks and Financial Markets
(Vienna), the 2021 SED Annual Meeting, the 20th Annual FDIC/JFSR Bank Research
Conference, and seminar participants at NYU and EUI for their helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Agostino Capponi, Felix C. Corell, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Optimal Bailouts and the Doom Loop with a Financial Network
Agostino Capponi, Felix C. Corell, and Joseph E. Stiglitz
NBER Working Paper No. 27074
May 2020, Revised January 2022
JEL No. G01,G21,G28,H63,H81
ABSTRACT
Banks usually hold large amounts of domestic debt which makes them vulnerable to their own
sovereign's default risk. At the same time, governments often resort to costly bailouts when their
banking sector is in trouble. We investigate how the network structure and the distribution of
ownership of sovereign debt within the banking sector jointly affect the optimal bailout policy
under this “doom loop”. We argue that rescuing banks with high domestic sovereign exposure is
optimal if these banks are sufficiently central, even though that requires larger bailout
expenditures than rescuing otherwise identical low-exposure banks. Our model illustrates how the
“doom loop” exacerbates the “too interconnected to fail” problem.
Agostino Capponi Joseph E. Stiglitz
Mudd Hall 535-G Uris Hall, Columbia University
Columbia University 3022 Broadway, Room 212
500 W 120th St. New York, NY 10027
New York, NY 10027 and NBER
ac3827@columbia.edu jes322@columbia.edu
Felix C. Corell
Department of Economics
European University Institute
felix.corell@eui.eu

Optimal Bailouts and the Doom Loop with a Financial Network(cid:63)
Agostino Capponia,∗, Felix Corellb, Joseph E. Stiglitza
aColumbia University, 3022 Broadway, New York, NY 10027
bEuropean University Institute, Via delle Fontanelle 18, 50014 San Domenico di Fiesole
Abstract
Banks usually hold large amounts of domestic debt which makes them vulnerable to their
own sovereign’s default risk. At the same time, governments often resort to costly bailouts
when their banking sector is in trouble. We investigate how the network structure and the
distribution of ownership of sovereign debt within the banking sector jointly affect the optimal
bailout policy under this “doom loop”. We argue that rescuing banks with high domestic
sovereign exposure is optimal if these banks are sufficiently central, even though that requires
larger bailout expenditures than rescuing otherwise identical low-exposure banks. Our model
illustrates how the “doom loop” exacerbates the “too interconnected to fail” problem.
Keywords: Financial networks, home bias, sovereign debt, bailouts, doom loop
1. Introduction
Throughout modern economic history, almost every major crisis has added its own signature
terms to the dictionary of economic thought. For the European sovereign debt crisis that
followed the Great Recession in 2008/09, one of the front-running candidates is certainly the
so-called bank-sovereign “doom loop” - a term that has made its way into the vocabulary of
5
policymakers, journalists, and researchers alike. The nexus between sovereigns and banks was
(cid:63)We would like to thank the editor, three anonymous referees, A´rp´ad A´brah´am, Viral Acharya, Thorsten
Beck, Edouard Challe, Nicola Fuchs-Schu¨ndeln, Paul Glasserman, Piero Gottardi, Philipp Gru¨bener, Philipp
Kircher, Anton Korinek, Steve Kou, Ramon Marimon, Lukas Nord, Giorgia Piacentino, Vincenzo Quadrini,
Rafael Repullo, Stefan Schmitz, our discussants Flora Lutz, Anjan Thakor, and Dimitri Vayanos, conference
participants at the 5th Annual Conference on Network Science in Economics, the EEA Virtual Congress 2020,
the7th SovereignBondMarketsConference2020(BankofEngland),the9th WorkshoponBanksandFinancial
Markets (Vienna), the 2021 SED Annual Meeting, the 20th Annual FDIC/JFSR Bank Research Conference,
and seminar participants at NYU and EUI for their helpful comments.
∗Corresponding author
Email address: ac3827@columbia.edu (Agostino Capponi)
Preprint submitted to Journal of Monetary Economics January 9, 2022

identified as a major culprit responsible for the amplification of adverse shocks during the crisis.
The doom loop can be described as follows: Banks usually hold large amounts of domestic
public debt which makes them vulnerable to sovereign default risk. For instance, as of March
2021 some euro area banking sectors held well beyond 15% of their government’s total stock
10
of outstanding debt securities. At the same time, governments often resort to costly public
bailouts when their domestic banking sector is at risk. If these bailouts are debt-financed and
lead to an increase in risk premia on sovereign debt (i.e., a decrease in bond prices), bank assets
drop in value and the size of the bailouts required to keep the banks solvent increases further. If
a significant fraction of banks’ assets consists of domestic sovereign debt, this adverse feedback
15
loop can leave both the government’s and banks’ balance sheets severely impaired.1
[Figure 1 about here.]
Historical examples for the devastating force of the “doom loop” include Greece, where turmoil
in sovereign debt markets damaged Greek banks’ balance sheets and made large bailouts nec-
essary that further weakened Greece’s fiscal position; and Ireland, where the loop originated in
20
the banking sector and thus worked in the opposite direction.
Even though it was the European sovereign debt crisis that provided the blueprint for a
crisis of the “doom loop” type, there is renewed public and academic interest in the topic in
the face of the recent Covid-19 pandemic. Hard-hit countries such as Italy (where the public
debt-to-GDP ratio was already relatively high prior to the pandemic) provide the most fertile
25
ground for a revival of the doom loop. On the one hand, strict shutdown measures during the
pandemic led to high amounts of non-performing loans that weighed on banks’ balance sheets.
On the other hand, unprecedented fiscal spending efforts exerted upward pressure on the level
of sovereign debt and, most likely, interest rate spreads. It is therefore not surprising that the
topic of bank bailouts has returned to the agenda of policymakers in Italy and elsewhere.2
30
In this paper, we investigate how the distribution of sovereign debt across banks and the
1Note for example that Italian banks currently hold around 10% of their assets in domestic sovereign debt
(Figure 1).
2Forexample,on28April2020theratingagencyFitchloweredItaly’ssovereignratingonthegroundsofthe
expectedrepercussionsfromtheCovid-19pandemic; justtwoweekslater, on12May2020, adowngradeoffour
of the biggest Italian banks (UniCredit, Intesa Sanpaolo, Mediobanca, UBI) followed suit. However, thanks in
part to the ECB’s accommodative monetary policy, Italian sovereign spreads have not persistently increased.
2