NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MEASURING THE PERCEIVED LIQUIDITY OF THE CORPORATE BOND MARKET
Sergey Chernenko
Adi Sunderam
Working Paper 27092
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27092
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2020
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Sergey Chernenko and Adi Sunderam. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Measuring the Perceived Liquidity of the Corporate Bond Market
Sergey Chernenko and Adi Sunderam
NBER Working Paper No. 27092
May 2020
JEL No. G12,G23
ABSTRACT
We propose a novel measure of bond market liquidity that does not depend on transaction data:
the strength of the cross-sectional relationship between mutual fund cash holdings and fund flow
volatility. Our measure captures how liquid funds perceive their portfolio holdings to be at a
given point in time. The perceived liquidity of speculative grade and Rule 144A bonds is
significantly lower than investment grade bonds in the cross section and deteriorated significantly
following the 2008-9 financial crisis. Our measure can be applied in settings where either
transaction data are not available or transactions are rare, including the markets for asset-backed
securities, syndicated loans, and municipal bonds.
Sergey Chernenko
Krannert School of Management
Purdue University
403 W. State Street
West Lafayette, IN 47907
schernen@purdue.edu
Adi Sunderam
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 359
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
asunderam@hbs.edu

1 Introduction
The liquidity of corporate bond markets is crucial to their functioning. If investors are
forced to sell bonds into an illiquid market, the price impact of these sales can be amplified
through fire sales channels, threatening financial stability and real economic activity (e.g.,
Shleifer and Vishny (1992), Coval and Stafford (2007), Ellul, Jotikasthira, and Lundblad
(2011),andStein(2012)). Astheshareofcorporatebondsheldbyinvestorslikemutualfunds
who may need to sell their holdings quickly has grown,1 so have concerns about liquidity and
the potential for fire sales.2 These developments make it important to understand investors’
perceptions of corporate bond market liquidity and to develop measures of market liquidity
that are forward looking and capture the risk that liquidity suddenly evaporates.
Theliteraturehasproposedmanymeasuresoftheliquidityofindividualcorporatebonds,
includingRoll(1984), Amihud(2002), Chen, Lesmond, andWei(2007), Bao, Pan, andWang
(2011), Jankowitsch, Nashikkar, and Subrahmanyam (2011), Corwin and Schultz (2012),
Feldhu¨tter (2012), and Dick-Nielsen, Feldhu¨tter, and Lando (2012). These measures differ
substantially in their construction and have various strengths and weaknesses. One key
feature they share, however, is that they do not fully capture how liquid bond traders
perceive the market to be. In particular, most existing measures rely on the characteristics
of trades that actually took place. If investors choose not to trade bonds that they perceive
to be relatively illiquid, existing measures will understate the true illiquidity of the overall
market. Similarly, if investors care about the risk that liquidity will substantially deteriorate
in (as yet unobserved) states of the world where they need to sell, these concerns will not be
captured by the existing measures. Recent debate about the liquidity of the corporate bond
market has centered exactly around these issues. Regulators who allege that liquidity has
not declined point to the traditional measures of price impact among trades that occur. In
contrast, market participants who allege that liquidity has declined point to changes in the
set of trades that occur; for instance, declines in the trading volume of smaller bonds3.
1 AccordingtotheFinancialAccountsoftheUnitedStates, alsoknownastheFlowofFunds, mutualfunds’
share of domestic holdings of corporate bonds tripled from 9.2% in 2000 to 28.3% in 2019.
2 In 2014, the Financial Stability Oversight Council issued a notice seeking public comments on
the financial stability risks posed by the asset management industry. Comments are available at
https://www.regulations.gov/docketBrowser?D=FSOC-2014-0001. In October 2016, the Securities and Ex-
changeCommissionadoptednewrulestostrengthentheliquiditymanagementpracticesofopen-endmutual
funds.
3 See, for instance, “For Bond Investors, Bigger is Better”, Wall Street Journal (2012). Consistent with a
decline in the liquidity of small bonds, the Barclays US Corporate index raised its liquidity constraint on
bond size from $250m to $300m in 2017.
2

In this paper, we propose a novel measure of the perceived liquidity of corporate bond
markets that does not depend on quote or transaction data. We take a revealed preference
approach based on the cash holdings of open-end mutual funds. The idea is that mutual
funds try to minimize the price impact of their trading, and they do so in part by holding
cashbuffers. Cashbuffersallowfundstomeetredemptionrequestsfromtheirclientswithout
trading immediately, instead trading over time in a way that minimizes price impact. Such
buffers are particularly valuable when a fund holds relatively illiquid assets. To formalize
this intuition, we write down a simple model showing that the optimal size of a fund’s cash
buffer is related to two factors: the illiquidity of its portfolio securities and the volatility of
its inflows and outflows. When a fund holds more illiquid bonds, it holds more cash because
being forced to trade those bonds is costlier. Similarly, when a fund faces more volatile
flows, it holds more cash because it faces a greater risk of having to liquidate its holdings
in order to meet redemption requests. Thus, by examining the cross-sectional relationship
between fund cash holdings and flow volatility, we can measure how illiquid funds perceive
their portfolio holdings to be. Crucially, our measure is forward looking. It captures funds’
perceptions of future liquidity and of the risk that liquidity deteriorates.
We start by providing simulation evidence to establish the feasibility of our procedure.
While our simple model is static to highlight the basic intuition, our simulations follow
Connor and Leland (1995) and consider the dynamic problem of a fund that holds both cash
and an illiquid asset while facing stochastic flows. In our simulations, we consider different
fundsthatvaryintermsoftheilliquidityoftheilliquidassettheyhold. Wesimulateflowsand
cash holdings assuming these funds follow the optimal policy in Connor and Leland (1995).
We then regress simulated fund cash holdings on the estimated volatility of the fund’s flows,
computed in sample using realized flows. The simulations show that in a realistic dynamic
setting, our procedure does a good job of recovering the liquidity of the underlying bonds.
We then implement our regression procedure in data on actively managed open-end
corporate bond mutual funds from July 2009 to June 2016. In our benchmark specifications,
weexpandthepaneltothesecurity-fund-timelevel. Thisservestwopurposes. First,itallows
us to include security-time fixed effects. Thus, the regressions tell us how cash holdings vary
with flow volatility, comparing two funds that hold the same security at the same time. This
allows us control for funds’ endogenous selection of securities, something that is missing from
our basic model and simulations, where flow volatility and illiquidity are independent. In
particular, one might expect funds facing higher flow volatility to hold more liquid securities,
thereby biasing towards zero the cross-sectional relationship between cash and flow volatility.
Second, expanding the panel to the security-fund-time level allows us to interact the fund’s
flow volatility with bond characteristics, so that we can measure how perceptions of liquidity
3