NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LOAN TYPES AND THE BANK LENDING CHANNEL
Victoria Ivashina
Luc Laeven
Enrique Moral-Benito
Working Paper 27056
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27056
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2020
We are grateful to Daniel Paravisini (discussant), José-Luis Peydró(discussant), Sebnem Kalemli-
Ozcan, Steven Ongena, Glenn Schepens, Jeremy Stein and participants at the 2019 New Topics in
Banking Conference organized by Columbia University, the 2019 NBER Corporate Finance
Summer Institute, the 10th Swiss Winter Conference on Financial Intermediation, and seminars at
the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, the European Central Bank, the Dutch Central Bank, the
University of Bonn, and the University of Massachusetts Amherst. We also thank Bryan
Gutiérrez who has helped to understand the Peruvian institutional context and data. Finally, we
are very grateful to Peruvian Superintendencia de Banca, Seguros y AFP for facilitating access to
the data used in this project. The views expressed are our own and do not reflect those of the
Bank of Spain, the ECB, or of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27056.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Victoria Ivashina, Luc Laeven, and Enrique Moral-Benito. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Loan Types and the Bank Lending Channel
Victoria Ivashina, Luc Laeven, and Enrique Moral-Benito
NBER Working Paper No. 27056
April 2020
JEL No. E0,G21
ABSTRACT
Using credit-registry data for Spain and Peru, we document that four main types of commercial
credit—asset-based loans, cash-flow loans, trade finance and leasing—are easily identifiable and
represent the bulk of corporate credit. We show that credit dynamics and bank lending channels
vary across these loan types. Moreover, aggregate credit supply shocks previously identified in
the literature appear to be driven by individual loan types. The effects of monetary policy and the
effects of the financial crisis propagating through banks’ balance sheets are primarily driven by
cash-flow loans, whereas asset-based credit is mostly insensitive to these types of effects.
Victoria Ivashina Enrique Moral-Benito
Harvard Business School Bank of Spain
Baker Library 233 Calle de Alcalá, 48,
Soldiers Field 28014 Madrid, Spain
Boston, MA 02163 enrique.moral@gmail.com
and NBER
vivashina@hbs.edu
Luc Laeven
European Central Bank
Research Department
Sonnemannstrasse 20
Frankfurt am Main
GERMANY
Luc.Laeven@ecb.europa.eu

Worldwide, much of commercial credit consists of four distinct types of loans: (i)
asset-based loans, (ii) cash flow loans, (iii) trade finance agreements, and (iv) leases.1
All of these loans are senior and secured; however, they differ in the type of
collateral that backs them (or, to be precise, the net recovery from the sale of
collateral). This separation of commercial credit is widely acknowledged in practice,
but has only been partially recognized in academic research. In particular, to date, the
work relying on the use of credit registry does not make this distinction, treating all
credit of the same firm as directly comparable. Using credit registry data from both
an advanced economy, Spain, and an emerging market, Peru, we document the
universal use and economic importance of these types of credit and empirically
examine how these different types of credit impact the bank credit channel.
The core characteristics of collateral are its liquidation value, pledgeability, and
durability. These characteristics are at the heart of the existence of different types of
commercial credit. Although some of these differences are not due to intrinsic
characteristics of the physical asset used as a collateral, but differences in
repossession of collateral, as in the case of asset-based loans versus leasing (e.g.,
Eisfeldt and Rampini, 2009; Gavazza, 2011; Rampini and Viswanathan, 2013).
Leasing is an arrangement where the creditor finances an asset and the firm uses it in
exchange for fixed rental payments. From a collateral perspective, asset-based loans
are comparable to leases: both are secured by large, typically registered physical
assets with a relatively clear liquidation value (for example, a building or an
airplane). The difference, as emphasized by Eisfeldt and Rampini (2009), is that
leasing separates ownership and use of the asset, making it easy to repossess the asset
by the lender in case of a default. So the pledged physical asset can be (and often is)
identical across these two different types of loans, but the recovery in default is
different due to the difference in pledgeability.
1 These different types of credit are widely acknowledged by the industry and bank
regulators. We abstract from factoring, which is the sale of accounts receivable, as
opposed to borrowing against them as one would do in cash flow-based financing.
Factoring generally constitutes a negligible fraction of commercial credit.
1

A significant fraction of commercial credit consists of cash flow loans. Lian and
Ma (2018) estimate that as much as 80% of syndicated credit in the U.S. is cash-flow
based. The difference between asset-based loans and cash flow loans can again be
understood from the perspective of the collateral used to secure the credit. As already
mentioned, in the case of asset-based loans, the borrower pledges specific physical
assets to secure the loan. In the case of cash flow loans, the lender has a senior claim
on all unencumbered assets of the company; that is, the lender has a first claim on all
proceeds from asset liquidations (excluding assets that were already pledged).2
Overall, the collateral in cash flow loans differs from asset-based loans and leases in
several dimensions: it is oftentimes less durable, has lower liquidation value due to
its less standardized nature, and has lower pledgeability due to uncertainty about its
value (e.g., intellectual property or retailer inventory) or lack of title (e.g., computers
and office furniture). Indeed, a typical credit agreement for a cash flow loan does not
have a comprehensive list of what represents collateral in the transaction. It is its
senior secured position in the capital structure—and not the claim over specific
assets—that allows it to have recovery in case of a default.3 As a result, in the credit
assessment of the cash flow loan, the emphasis is not on the value of collateral (as in
the case of an asset-based loan), but on the borrower’s ability to pay the interest and
amortization (hence, the label “cash flow” loan).
The last significant category of commercial credit—trade finance—backs
business-to-business (B2B) transactions.4 This type of credit is backed by a bilateral
contract, such as a contract for delivery of goods. Amiti and Weinstein (2011)
2 It is common for a company that has many hard assets to split its collateral using a
subsidiary structure and get an asset-based loan backed by hard assets in parallel to a
cash-flow based loan backed by all other remaining assets. This has a direct parallel to
person credit: it is common for an individual to have a separate mortgage, car loan, and a
student loan.
3 A standard credit agreement also includes a series of “catch-all” restrictions on asset
sales, which helps to preserve the recovery in default.
4 Not to be confused with “trade credit,” which is credit granted directly by companies to
their business clients.
2