NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE US EQUITY VALUATION PREMIUM, GLOBALIZATION, AND CLIMATE CHANGE
RISKS
Craig Doidge
G. Andrew Karolyi
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 27022
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27022
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2020, Revised September 2023
We thank Michele Dathan, Mark Johnson, Byungwook Kim, Dawoon Kim, and Leandro Sanz,
William Xiong for research assistance. Comments from Matt Baron, Nuno Fernandes, Qiang
Kang, Asaf Razin, David Schumacher, Scott Yonker, Shaojun Zhang, Luo Zuo, and conference
and seminar participants at the National Bank of Belgium, Cornell, Florida International, IESE,
Michigan State, Northern Finance Association Meetings, Wilfrid Laurier, and Ohio State are
appreciated. Karolyi serves as an ad hoc consultant to Avantis Investors. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27022
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Craig Doidge, G. Andrew Karolyi, and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The US Equity Valuation Premium, Globalization, and Climate Change Risks
Craig Doidge, G. Andrew Karolyi, and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 27022
April 2020, Revised September 2023
JEL No. F21,F65,G10,G15,G34
ABSTRACT
In the 2000s, US firms have higher valuations than comparable non-US firms listed only outside
the US but not non-US firms cross-listed in the US. Though one would expect this US valuation
premium to fall over time because of globalization, it widens for firms in developed markets by
36% and falls for firms in emerging markets by 20% after the global financial crisis of
2007-2008. This evolution is explained in part by the decreased valuation of brown firms in other
developed countries relative to the US. Other potential explanations are explored and rejected.
Craig Doidge René M. Stulz
University of Toronto The Ohio State University
105 St. George St. Fisher College of Business
Toronto, Ontario M5S 3E6 806A Fisher Hall
Canada Columbus, OH 43210-1144
craig.doidge@rotman.utoronto.ca and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu
G. Andrew Karolyi
Cornell SC Johnson College
of Business,
Cornell University
174A Statler Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
gak56@cornell.edu

1. Introduction.
US firms are valued more highly than comparable non-US firms (see, for example, Aggarwal, Erel,
Stulz, and Williamson, 2010). We call this valuation difference the US premium. In this paper, we examine
whether the US premium falls over time, as we would expect from a continuation of increased financial
globalization, or whether it increases, as would happen with a retrenchment from globalization.
The integration of global financial markets should foster a convergence of valuations. With increased
globalization, we would expect the US premium to fall over time because firms across different countries
increasingly face the same funding and investment opportunities. If firms across countries pursue the same
objective of maximizing shareholder wealth, their valuations should converge. Whatever advantage US
firms possess in creating wealth for their capital providers relative to firms in other countries, that advantage
should dissipate. Hence, we would expect that with increased globalization, the US premium should be
increasingly lower. However, many observers argue that there has been a retreat from globalization after
the global financial crisis (GFC) of 2007-2008 (among others, see Bailey and Lund, 2013). A report by the
McKinsey Global Institute (2018) states that “one of the biggest changes in the financial landscape [after
the GFC] is sharply curtailed international activity.” If non-US firms benefit more than US firms from
financial globalization via access to US markets and opportunities that US firms already have, we would
expect a retreat from globalization to increase the US premium.
There is much evidence concerning trade and capital flows to support the view that there is a retreat in
globalization after the GFC. Flows of goods and services drop and trade flows remain below their pre-GFC
levels. Cross-border capital flows and cross-border financial asset holdings play a critical role in financial
globalization as they enable investors to take advantage of valuation discrepancies across the globe and to
invest where new funding is valued the most. Yet, after the GFC, global cross-border capital flows decrease
sharply. After reaching a peak of $12.7 trillion in 2007, these flows recede to $5.9 trillion by 2017
(McKinsey Global Institute, 2018). Following the GFC, regulatory tightening in the financial sector reduces
cross-border lending. External assets of all banks reporting to the Bank for International Settlements fall
from 56% of world GDP in 2007 to 36% by 2015 (Lane and Milesi-Ferretti, LMF, 2017). Perhaps most
strikingly, there is evidence that this regulatory tightening has direct implications for capital market
integration. For example, covered interest parity (CIP) stops holding after the GFC (Chinn and Ito, 2023).
1

Du, Tepper, and Verdelhan (2018) attribute the collapse of CIP to changes in the regulatory environment
that increased the cost of using bank balance sheets for arbitrage.
Non-US developed countries (DMs) evolve differently from emerging countries (EMs) after the GFC.
While growth in many DMs is weak, some EMs have very strong growth (Foda and Prasad, 2018), so that
the share of EMs in global output and trade increases. From 2007 to 2015, EM’s share of world GDP rises
from 25% to nearly 40% (LMF, 2017, Figure 2). Cross-border flows increase dramatically among DMs
before the crisis and collapse with the crisis. From 2007 to 2015, external assets/liabilities as a fraction of
world GDP related to portfolio and FDI holdings, reserves and other investment claims decline among
DMs, but grow among EMs (LMF, 2017, Figure 4). The regulatory changes brought about by the GFC
have a particularly sharp impact on DMs. Chinn and Ito (2023) argue that “capital mobility has clearly
declined for industrial country currencies.” Foreign claims by BIS-reporting banks on advanced economies
fall from $16 trillion to $12 trillion, while those on EMs rise in nominal terms and as a share of world GDP
(IMF, 2017, Figure 11). With these differing changes in trade, financial flows, and financial claims, it is
more plausible that DMs experienced a retrenchment from globalization than EMs.
To begin, we measure the US premium as the difference in valuations between US and non-US firms,
and investigate how it changes over time. Specifically, we investigate whether the US premium changes
from before to after the GFC in a way that is consistent with a continuation of the process of globalization,
or in a way that is consistent with a retrenchment from globalization. To measure the valuations of US and
non-US firms, we use the Tobin’s q ratio. It is defined as the market value of the firm divided by its book
value. Tobin’s q is widely used in studies that compare valuations across countries (e.g., La Porta, Lopez-
de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny, 2002). We control for variables that are known to be related to Tobin’s q,
so that we are comparing the valuation of similar firms located in different countries.
With Tobin’s q, the US premium can change because the numerator and/or the denominator change.
The numerator is the present value of cash flows to capital providers and the denominator, in many
implementations including ours, is the book value of assets. The present value of cash flows can change
because of changes in discount rates and/or changes in expected cash flows. The advantage of using Tobin’s
q as opposed to an earnings-based valuation metric is that the inputs to Tobin’s q are likely to be less
affected by differences in accounting practices. There is a considerable literature that examines how
2