NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE MACROPRUDENTIAL ROLE OF STOCK MARKETS
Kyriakos T. Chousakos
Gary B. Gorton
Guillermo Ordoñez
Working Paper 27113
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27113
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2020
Thanks to Stefano Lovo, Enrique Mendoza, Ernesto Pasten, Diego Saravia, Yuliy Sannikov and
participants in seminars at the Board of Governors, the 2018 Amsterdam Workshop on Safe
Assets, the 2018 SED Meetings at Mexico City, the Cowles Foundation 15th Annual GE
Conference, the Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics 2019 Macroeconomics Conference,
the Copenhagen Business School Conference on Financial Frictions, the Bank of France, HEC,
and INSEAD for comments and suggestions. We also thank Shah Kahn and Tim Rudner for
excellent research assistance and the National Science Foundation for support. A previous version
of this paper was circulated under the title “Aggregate Information Dynamics.” The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Kyriakos T. Chousakos, Gary B. Gorton, and Guillermo Ordoñez. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Macroprudential Role of Stock Markets
Kyriakos T. Chousakos, Gary B. Gorton, and Guillermo Ordoñez
NBER Working Paper No. 27113
May 2020
JEL No. E32,E44,G01
ABSTRACT
A financial crisis is an event of sudden information acquisition about the collateral backing short-
term debt in credit markets. When investors see a financial crisis coming, however, they react by
more intensively acquiring information about firms in stock markets, revealing those that are
weaker, which as a consequence end up cut off from credit. This cleansing effect of stock
markets’ information on credit markets’ composition discourage information acquisition about
the collateral of the firms remaining in credit markets, slowing down credit growth and
potentially preventing a crisis. Production of information in stock markets, then, acts as a
macroprudential tool in the economy.
Kyriakos T. Chousakos Guillermo Ordoñez
Bank of America University of Pennsylvania
One Bryant Park Department of Economics
NY1-100-05-00 428 McNeil Building
New York, NY 10035 3718 Locust Walk
kchousakos@gmail.com Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
Gary B. Gorton ordonez@econ.upenn.edu
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
Gary.Gorton@yale.edu

1 Introduction
In stock markets agents produce information, which is then impounded in prices,
improving the allocation of resources in the economy. Stock prices are information-
sensitive. Credit markets, particularly collateralized credit markets, perform better when
information about collateral is not produced – when debt is information-insensitive (see
Dang et al. (2019)). To preserve this insensitivity, loan quantities sometimes adjust to
reduce the incentive to produce information about the collateral value. In a financial
crisis, information production about collateral in credit markets cannot be prevented, and
quantities adjust to zero (a run).
Thesetwosystems, oneapricesystemandoneaquantitysystem, interactdynamically
through the cross-incentives to acquire information. We propose a model in which
information production in stock markets is about firms’ productivities and determines the
allocation of credit, while information production – or the lack thereof – in credit markets
is about the firms’ collateral and determines the volume of credit.
Lack of information production about collateral increases the amount of credit
available in credit markets. The volume of credit determines total output in the economy
and the average productivity of projects (the more projects are undertaken, the lower is
the productivity of the marginal project). This reduction in the average quality of projects
in the economy induces information acquisition in stocks markets. When information is
produced in stock markets, weak firms (those with relatively lower project quality) are
identified and stop participating in credit markets. This cleansing effect of stock markets’
information on credit markets’ composition discourages information acquisition about
the collateral of the firms remaining in credit markets, slowing down credit growth and
potentially preventing a crisis. Stock markets act as an automatic macroprudential tool –
it slows down credit and stabilizes the economy.
This novel dynamic interaction between stock and credit markets through information
acquisition highlights the delicate balance of their function in macroeconomics. When
credit is booming because there is scarce information about collateral, output also booms
but the average productivity declines. Both forces make the economy more fragile. On the
onehandlendersaremoreworriedaboutthequalityofcollateralbackingtheirloans, which
is concerning as information production about a high volume of collateral of uncertain
1

quality (the one fueling the credit boom) is a crisis. On the other hand, worse average
project quality induces investors in stock markets to investigate firms. Information from
stock markets, however, feeds back into the composition in credit markets and reduces the
incentives for information acquisition in credit markets, and if strong enough can prevent
a crisis altogether.
As the linkage between these two markets operates through the evolution of the
average quality of projects, the model incorporates technology shocks in a different
way than standard macroeconomic models. Credit booms can be triggered by a positive
technologyshock, generatingacreditboomandgivingrisetotheaforementioneddynamics.
Similarly, negative technological shocks can induce a crisis, regardless of the amount of
information produced in stock markets.
The macroprudential role of stock markets is enhanced if the cost of producing
informationinstockmarketsislow, andcriseslesslikelyifthecostofacquiringinformation
in credit markets is high. This rationalizes the endogenous push in markets towards
facilitating information about firms in stock markets (large investment in fast computers
and detailed analysis of projects), while hampering information about collateral in credit
markets (the design of complex securities that back credit using over-the-counter opaque
contracts).
The model generates empirical counterparts of information acquisition in stock
markets, which can be proxied by the evolution of the cross-sectional dispersion of stock
returns. We also obtain the empirical counterparts for the average quality of projects
from a credit perspective, which can be proxied by the average time-series volatility of
stocks – a proxy of average fragility. As we want to capture the relation between stock
markets and financial crises, we implement an empirical analysis exploiting data for many
countries over a relatively long period of time, so we can include enough crisis events.
For that purpose, we construct stock market information measures from daily stock price
data for 52 countries over the period 1973-2012, amounting to approximately 105 million
observations.
With these measures of information, credit and quality of projects, we confront
testable implications of our model. In particular, information in stock markets reduces
future credit growth and tends to precede and predict financial crises, but less so during
high-TFP credit booms.
2