NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FOREIGN EXCHANGE ORDER FLOW AS A RISK FACTOR
Craig Burnside
Mario Cerrato
Zhekai Zhang
Working Paper 27199
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27199
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2020, Revised Febrary 2022
We thank Vania Stavrakeva and participants at the Imperial College 2019 Annual Conference in
International Finance for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Craig Burnside, Mario Cerrato, and Zhekai Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Foreign Exchange Order Flow as a Risk Factor
Craig Burnside, Mario Cerrato, and Zhekai Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 27199
May 2020, Revised Febrary 2022
JEL No. F31,G15
ABSTRACT
This paper proposes a set of novel pricing factors for currency returns that are motivated by
microstructure models. In so doing, we bring two strands of the exchange rate literature, namely
market-microstructure and risk-based models, closer together. Our novel factors use order flow
data to provide direct measures of buying and selling pressure related to carry trading and
momentum strategies. We find that they appear to be good proxies for currency crash risk.
Additionally, we show that the association between our order-flow factors and currency returns
differs according to the customer segment of the foreign exchange market. In particular, it
appears that financial customers are risk takers in the market, while non-financial customers serve
as liquidity providers.
Craig Burnside Zhekai Zhang
Department of Economics Institute of Economics and Finance
Duke University Nanjing Audit University
213 Social Sciences Building Nanjing 210000
Durham, NC 27708-0097 China
and NBER zhangzhekai@nau.edu.cn
craig.burnside@duke.edu
Mario Cerrato
Adam Smith Business School
Gilbert Scott Building
Glasgow G12 8QQ
United Kingdom
Mario.Cerrato@glasgow.ac.uk

1 Introduction
Two strands of the exchange rate literature offer explanations of anomalies in foreign ex-
change markets that are at odds with one another. One strand, which we refer to as the
stochastic discount factor (SDF) approach, uses frictionless common-information environ-
ments to explain the behavior of exchange rates. In this framework, whether the underlying
model is a reduced-form model or a structural representative agent model, the returns to
various currency-based investment strategies are interpreted as compensation for risk.1 The
other strand uses a market microstructure framework in which agents have heterogeneous
information. In these models, customer order flow is a key determinant of bilateral exchange
rate changes and, therefore, currency excess returns.2 In this paper we explore whether the
empirical facts are, in fact, consistent with both the reduced-form SDF approach and the
market microstructure approach. We argue that, in fact, empirical evidence that might nor-
mally be interpreted as favorable to the SDF approach is also compatible with the order-flow
driven view of the world, and vice-versa.
To give an example, a commonly studied anomaly in foreign exchange markets is the
profitability of the carry trade, which is a zero-cost short-term investment strategy in which
an investor borrows funds in low interest rate currencies and lends equivalent amounts in
high interest rate currencies. According to the uncovered interest-rate parity (UIP) con-
dition, this investment strategy should have zero expected returns, both conditionally and
unconditionally. However, it is well-established that carry trades have been profitable in
historical data, and this is considered to be a puzzle akin to the equity premium puzzle in
stock markets.3
According to the SDF approach, any asset that bears a positive mean excess return is
risky, in the sense that the returns to the asset are systematically correlated with some mea-
sureofrisk. Accordingtothisview, carrytradesareprofitablebecauseholdinglongpositions
in high interest rate currencies financed by short positions in low interest rate currencies is
risky. Finding measures of risk that are systematically correlated with carry trade returns
has, however, not been easy. Lustig and Verdelhan (2007) argue that a consumption-based
1A non-exhaustive list includes Lustig and Verdelhan (2006), Lustig and Verdelhan (2007), Verdelhan
(2010), Colacito and Croce (2011), Lustig and Verdelhan (2012), Lustig et al. (2014).
2See,amongothers,EvansandLyons(2002),Cerratoetal.(2011),Evans(2011),EvansandRime(2012),
Cerrato et al. (2015), Breedon et al. (2016), and Menkhoff et al. (2016).
3See, for example, Fama (1984a), Engel (1996), Burnside (2012), Burnside (2014), and Engel (2016).
1

model can price the cross-section of currency returns as well as explain the returns to the
carry trade. Burnside (2011) argues that consumption-based risk factors are, however, un-
related to currency returns and that their results are explained by the properties of weakly
identified estimators. Burnside et al. (2011), Menkhoff et al. (2012a) and Burnside (2012)
have argued that standard measures of risk used to price stock returns do not appear to be
successful in pricing currency returns. Lustig et al. (2011) show that their carry-trade port-
folio, HMLFX, is useful in pricing the cross-section of interest-rate-sorted currency portfolio
returns, but they do not explain the carry-trade portfolio, itself, with some other underlying
factor. Menkhoff et al. (2012a) price the cross-section of currency returns with a global
currency volatility factor. They find that high interest rate currencies have a tendency to
depreciate when volatility in currency markets increases, while low interest rate currencies
provide a hedge. But their factor is only weakly linked to a particular economic theory.
In this paper, we let the microstructure literature guide the construction of a model
that explains carry trade returns using the SDF approach. In this literature, the emphasis
is on how dispersed information is aggregated within the market and translated into price
changes.4 The simplest models are linear and relate exchange rate changes to news about
fundamentals that are common knowledge and changes that are driven by net order flow in
the foreign exchange market. For a particular currency, net order flow is the value of buy
orders, net of sell orders, faced by foreign exchange dealers. Order flow, itself, is driven by
the common and dispersed information received within the customer market (i.e. the agents
in the market other than dealers). The literature emphasizes the importance of the market’s
structure, with dealers interacting directly with customers but also with each other through
an inter-dealer market. This is usually captured, in models, by having sequential market
stageswherecustomersarrivefirst, andtheinter-dealermarketclearslater. Whatthemodels
show is that, in market equilibrium, the change in the spot rate of a currency’s value over
some interval is related linearly to the order flow that dealers face over that interval, and
this is the basis on which these models have been evaluated empirically.
We use order-flow data to construct risk factors that are designed to capture notions of
currency crash risk. In particular, we measure buying and selling pressure in the foreign
exchange market that is relevant to particular currency investment strategies, with the em-
phasis being on the carry trade. Our main risk factor, which we refer to as a carry-trade
4See Evans (2011) for a comprehensive review.
2