NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EARNINGS EXPECTATIONS IN THE COVID CRISIS
Augustin Landier
David Thesmar
Working Paper 27160
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27160
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2020
We thank Hector Chan, Hui Chen, Hugues Langlois and Eben Lazarus, as well as seminar participants
at MIT, for discussions & feedback. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27160.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2020 by Augustin Landier and David Thesmar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Earnings Expectations in the COVID Crisis
Augustin Landier and David Thesmar
NBER Working Paper No. 27160
May 2020
JEL No. G01,G32,G4
ABSTRACT
We analyze firm-level analyst forecasts during the COVID crisis. First, we describe expectations
dynamics about future corporate earnings. Downward revisions have been sharp, mostly focused
on 2020, 2021 and 2022, but much less drastic than the lower bound estimated by Gormsen and
Koijen (2020). Analyst forecasts do not exhibit evidence of over-reaction: As of mid-May,
forecasts over 2020 earnings have progressively been reduced by 16%. Longer-run forecasts, as
well as expected “Long-Term Growth” have reacted much less than short-run forecasts, and
feature less disagreement. Second, we ask how much discount rate changes explain market
dynamics, in an exercise similar to Shiller (1981). Given forecast revisions and price movements,
we estimate an implicit discount rate going from 10% in mid-February, to 13% at the end of
March, back down to their initial level in mid-May. We then decompose discount rate changes
into three factors: changes in unlevered asset risk premium (0%), increased leverage (+1%) and
interest rate reduction (-1%). Overall, analyst forecast revisions explain all of the decrease in
equity values between January 2020 and mid May 2020, but they do not explain shorter term
movements.
Augustin Landier
HEC Paris
1 rue de la libération
78351 Jouy en Josas Cedex
France
augustin.landier@tse-fr.eu
David Thesmar
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-632
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
thesmar@mit.edu

Earnings Expectations in the COVID Crisis∗
Augustin Landier† David Thesmar‡
This draft: May 13, 2020
First draft: April 27, 2020
Abstract
We analyze firm-level analyst forecasts during the COVID crisis. First, we describe ex-
pectations dynamics about future corporate earnings. Downward revisions have been sharp,
mostlyfocusedon2020,2021and2022,butmuchlessdrasticthanthelowerboundestimated
by Gormsen and Koijen (2020). Analyst forecasts do not exhibit evidence of over-reaction:
Asofmid-May,forecastsover2020earningshaveprogressivelybeenreducedby16%. Longer-
runforecasts,aswellasexpected“Long-TermGrowth”havereactedmuchlessthanshort-run
forecasts, and feature less disagreement. Second, we ask how much discount rate changes
explain market dynamics, in an exercise similar to Shiller (1981). Given forecast revisions
and price movements, we estimate an implicit discount rate going from 10% in mid-February,
to 13% at the end of March, back down to their initial level in mid-May. We then decompose
discount rate changes into three factors: changes in unlevered asset risk premium (0%), in-
creased leverage (+1%) and interest rate reduction (-1%). Overall, analyst forecast revisions
explain all of the decrease in equity values between January 2020 and mid May 2020, but
they do not explain shorter term movements.
1 Introduction
The stock-market market has fallen dramatically as a result of fears about the economic impact of
COVID-19. Gormsen and Koijen (2020) use dividend strips to infer the shift in the term structure
of expectations of future dividends. We propose instead to directly look at revisions of analyst
forecasts using IBES. There are advantages and disadvantages to both methods: Using prices
∗WethankHectorChan,HuiChen,HuguesLangloisandEbenLazarus,aswellasseminarparticipantsatMIT,
for discussions & feedback.
†HEC Paris
‡MIT Sloan, NBER and CEPR
1

of dividend futures has the advantage of offering an analysis purely based on prices, which are
more likely to reflect investors’ beliefs. However, it forces to focus on the aggregate and only
provides a lower bound to changes in forecasts as shocks to risk-premia are not directly observed.
Using analyst forecasts allows for a firm-level analysis and a direct measure of revisions in beliefs.
However, to connect it to stock-prices, we need to assume that analyst forecasts are a reliable
proxy for investors’ beliefs.
Our work is part of a fast growing set of papers looking at how the stock-market has reacted to
theCOVIDoutbreak. GormsenandKoijen(2020)provideslowerboundonthechangeinexpected
aggregate S&P500 dividends. Ramelli and Wagner (2020) and Ding et al. (2020) study in detail
how firm-level characteristics such as leverage, cash-holdings, supply-chain and industry affect
the cross-section of returns. Alfaro et al. (2020) show how unanticipated changes in predicted
infections forecast aggregate equity market returns. Albuquerque et al. (2020) find a positive
correlation between ESG ratings and abnormal returns through the crisis.
We address two main issues that speak to the finance literature. First we show how the term
structure of earnings expectations has shifted over the course of March, April and May 2020.
Downward revision has occurred smoothly, but was mostly focused on 2020-2022 – longer-term
forecasts have remained quite stable. Analyst forecast dispersion has mostly increased for short-
term horizons. The smooth reaction of short-term forecasts, and the rather muted response of
long-term forecasts, paints a picture that is somewhat unusual when compared to the available
literature on expectations and stock returns. This literature indeed shows that (1) short term
EPS forecasts of analysts tend to underreact to news (Bouchaud et al. (2019), Ma et al. (2020))
while (2) long-term growth expectations overreact (Bordalo et al. (2018)). The fact that long-term
forecasts have reacted less (actually, not significantly so, beyond 2023) than short-term forecasts
might reflect the intrinsic short-term nature of the shock.
Second, using stock prices, we back out the implied change over time in the discount rate for
each firm. If discount rates had not changed, by May 11, the decline in stock prices implied by
forecast revisionsis very close to realized returns (we compute unweighted returns in this paper).
We show that discount rate shocks are the main driver of the V-shaped evolution of stock-prices,
but, by mid May 2020, revisions were such that valuations were consistent with a discount rate
of about 10%, the same one as mid-February. This exercise is related to the large literature on
discount rates movements that was initiated by Shiller (1981). The difference between his analysis
and ours is twofold. First, we use forecasts of future cash-flows instead of ex post dividend realiza-
tions or model-predicted growth. Second, we decompose the increase in discount rate into three
terms: (1) interest rates, (2) unlevered asset risk premium and (3) the leverage effect (declining
stock prices lead to an increase in expected equity returns). We find that the leverage effect is
large: it contributes 2ppt to the increase in discount rate at the end of march, and 1ppt in mid
2