NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE VARIANCE RISK PREMIUM IN EQUILIBRIUM MODELS
Geert Bekaert
Eric Engstrom
Andrey Ermolov
Working Paper 27108
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27108
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2020
The views expressed in this document do not necessarily reflect those of the Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System, its staff, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Geert Bekaert, Eric Engstrom, and Andrey Ermolov. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Variance Risk Premium in Equilibrium Models
Geert Bekaert, Eric Engstrom, and Andrey Ermolov
NBER Working Paper No. 27108
May 2020
JEL No. E44,G12,G13
ABSTRACT
The equity variance risk premium is the expected compensation earned for selling variance risk in
equity markets. The variance risk premium is positive and shows moderate persistence. High
variance risk premiums coincide with the left tail of the consumption growth distribution shifting
down. These facts, together with a positive, yet moderate, difference between the risk-neutral
entropy and variance of the aggregate market return, refute the bulk of the extant consumption-
based asset pricing models. We introduce a tractable habit model that does fit the data. In the
model, the variance risk premium depends positively (negatively) on “bad” (“good”)
consumption growth uncertainty.
Geert Bekaert Andrey Ermolov
Graduate School of Business Fordham University
Columbia University 45 Columbus Avenue (Martino Hall) room 623A
3022 Broadway, 411 Uris Hall New York, NY 10023
New York, NY 10027 aermolov1@fordham.edu
and NBER
gb241@columbia.edu
Eric Engstrom
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Washington DC 20551
eric.engstrom@frb.gov

1 Introduction
Consumption-based asset pricing models are typically confronted with a set of salient
features regarding the first and second moments of interest rates, equity returns, and
in some cases, bond returns including a low risk free rate, a high equity premium and
high stock market volatility. At this point, the main paradigms, Campbell and Cochrane
(1999)’s habit model, Bansal and Yaron (2004)’s long run risk model and Rietz (1988)’s
disaster risk model can all match these stylized facts. A small subset of the vast literature
on consumption-based asset pricing has started to explore equity option prices to disci-
pline models and uncover what mechanisms best fit the data. These articles include, inter
alia, Du (2011) and Bekaert and Engstrom (2017) for habit models; Bollerslev, Tauchen
and Zhou (2009) and Drechsler and Yaron (2011) for long run risk models; Gabaix (2012)
and Wachter and Seo (2019) for disaster risk models. Option prices are powerful financial
instruments for this purpose, because they reflect at each point in time the conditional
expectation of market participants on the equity return distribution, combining their
preferences and views on the physical distribution of the underlying returns.
In this article, we explore how these models fit salient facts regarding the variance risk
premium and where they fail. The variance risk premium is the expected compensation
earned for selling volatility in equity markets. While it can be measured from variance
swaps, it can also be measured as the difference between the famous VIX index and an
estimate of the conditional variance of equity returns, which is the approach we follow
here. Well-known as a “fear index” for asset markets (Whaley, 2000), the VIX uses a
weighted average of option prices to approximate the risk neutral variance and is usually
higher than the “physical” expected stock market variance. Essentially, this premium
reflects out of the money options being more expensive than near the money option
prices (Britten-Jones and Neuberger, 2000; Bakshi, Kapadia, and Madan, 2003; Martin
2017). The variance premium also varies considerably through time. In periods of stress,
out-of-the money put options that insure against market downturns become relatively
more expensive than call options; protection against increases in variance become more
expensive as well and the VIX and the variance risk premium both increase.
We confront representative models in the literature with three sets of stylized facts
regarding the variance risk premium. The first set comprises time series properties of
the variance risk premium. While many models are presumably calibrated to fit these
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547

features, the relative fit is still quite different across models. Moreover, the mere fact
that the variance risk premium is positive refutes all models that employ only Gaussian
shocks to key state variables. Such a result has surfaced in the literature before, but
we provide an alternative proof and an alternative result showing that when returns and
the pricing kernel are jointly conditionally log-normally distributed, the variance risk
premium can only be positive if the equity premium is negative. This result is useful
as the standard habit model (Campbell and Cochrane, 1999) and long-run risk model
(Bansal and Yaron, 2004, when solved using the typical first order approximation), are
conditionally Gaussian.
Our second stylized fact regards the relation between tails in the variance risk pre-
mium and consumption growth distributions. For consumption-based asset pricing mod-
els to have any chance of explaining options data, there must be correlation between the
variance risk premium and consumption growth. However, mimicking the general lack
of correlation between asset returns and consumption growth, the correlation between
the variance risk premium and consumption growth is negligible using real consump-
tion growth of non-durables and services (1990:M1-2017:M12) to measure consumption
growth. The correlation with the variance premium at time t is -0.13 using “future” con-
sumption growth between time t and t+1; and -0.05 using consumption growth between
time t−1 and t correlated with the variance risk premium at time t.
However, there is a strong correlation in the tails of the distribution. When the
variance risk premium is relatively high, the consumption growth distribution becomes
more negatively skewed, and the quantile shifts for the consumption growth distribution
when conditioning on low versus high variance risk premiums are statistically significant
for the left tail. These empirical facts pose a challenge for most of the models we examine.
Finally, as our third stylized fact, we rely on Martin (2017) who raises several issues
regardingthemeasurementofriskneutralvariancesandshowsthatthedifferencebetween
the risk-neutral entropy and the risk-neutral variance of returns provides a challenging
data moment for various models in the literature. The moderately positive difference
between the risk-neutral entropy and variance of returns is an economically important
moment, because it tells us that the left tail of the risk-neutral aggregate equity return
distribution is heavier than the right tail, but the difference is not large. We examine
a wider set of models than Martin (2017) does, taking the opportunity to clarify the
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547