NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANK MARKET POWER AND MONETARY POLICY TRANSMISSION:
EVIDENCE FROM A STRUCTURAL ESTIMATION
Yifei Wang
Toni M. Whited
Yufeng Wu
Kairong Xiao
Working Paper 27258
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27258
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2020
We would like to thank Harjoat Bhamra, Marco Bonomo, Yasser Boualam, Dean Corbae, Olivier
Darmouni, Itamar Dreschler, Mark Egan, Brent Glover, Valentin Haddad, Ali Hortacsu, Frank de
Jong, Erica Li, Gregor Mavtos, Patricia Mosser, Stijn van Nieuwerburgh, Neil Pearson, George
Pennacchi, Alexi Savov, David Sraer, Olivier Wang, and Pavel Zryumov for their helpful
comments and discussions. We also thank participants at the CICF, EFA, FIRS, the Chicago
Booth Asset Pricing Conf., the Financial Innovation and Risk Management Conf., the FMA Wine
Country Finance Conf., the FRBSF Conf. on Advances in Financial Research, the Macro-Finance
Society Workshop, the NBER SI, the Northeastern University Finance Conf., the RCFS Conf.,
the Short-Term Funding Markets Conf., the University of Connecticut Conf., the UBC Summer
Conf., the Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics (SITE) Summer Workshop, the SFS
Cavalcade, and seminar participants at the Bank of Canada, Chicago Booth, Columbia
University, CUHK, Georgetown University, Johns Hopkins University, Northwestern University,
the FDIC, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve Board, ITAM, INSPER,
the University of Lausanne, the University of Michigan, the University of Rochester, UIUC,
Wharton, Harvard University, MIT, and Wirtschaftsuniversitat Wien. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2020 by Yifei Wang, Toni M. Whited, Yufeng Wu, and Kairong Xiao. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Bank Market Power and Monetary Policy Transmission: Evidence from a Structural Estimation
Yifei Wang, Toni M. Whited, Yufeng Wu, and Kairong Xiao
NBER Working Paper No. 27258
May 2020
JEL No. E51,E52,G21,G28
ABSTRACT
We quantify the impact of bank market power on monetary policy transmission through banks to
borrowers. We estimate a dynamic banking model in which monetary policy affects imperfectly
competitive banks’ funding costs. Banks optimize the pass-through of these costs to borrowers
and depositors, while facing capital and reserve regulation. We find that bank market power
explains much of the transmission of monetary policy to borrowers, with an effect comparable to
that of bank capital regulation. When the federal funds rate falls below 0.9%, market power
interacts with bank capital regulation to produce a reversal of the effect of monetary policy.
Yifei Wang Yufeng Wu
University of Michigan University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Finance Department 340D Wholers
701 Tappan St., Suite R5431 1206 S Sixth Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109 Champaign, IL 61820
wangyf@umich.edu yufengwu@illinois.edu
Toni M. Whited Kairong Xiao
Ross School of Business Columbia University
University of Michigan Uris 822
701 Tappan Ave. 3022 Broadway
Ann Arbor, MI 48109 New York, NY 10027
and NBER kairong.xiao@gsb.columbia.edu
twhited@umich.edu

We examine the quantitative impact of bank market power on the transmission of mone-
tary policy through the banking system. Interest in this question has sharpened after three
decades of consolidation in the banking industry that has softened competitive pressure.
Indeed, recent research o↵ers qualitative evidence that bank market power a↵ects the pass-
throughofmonetarypolicytothesupplyofloans(ScharfsteinandSunderam2016;Drechsler,
Savov, and Schnabl 2017). Yet market power is not the only friction in the banking system
that influences pass-through. For example, traditional analysis of monetary policy trans-
mission focuses on regulatory constraints, such as bank reserve or capital requirements, as
the central frictions that influence monetary policy transmission (e.g., Bernanke and Blinder
1988; Kashyap and Stein 1995). However, the qualitative nature of all of this evidence leaves
open the question of the relative magnitude of traditional versus market-power transmission
channels.
We answer this question by using data on U.S. banks to estimate a dynamic banking
model with three frictions: regulatory constraints, financial frictions, and imperfect compe-
tition. The estimation allows our data to discipline the model parameters and thus expose
the relative magnitude of these three frictions. We find that bank market power plays an
important role in determining the degree of monetary policy transmission. In terms of mag-
nitude, the e↵ects of bank market power are comparable to those of bank capital regulation,
while the e↵ects of bank reserve requirements are limited.
Our analysis produces two further results. First, we show that banks face nontrivial costs
when they access external financial markets. This friction plays a pivotal role in connecting
banks’ deposit market power to their lending decisions, as external financing costs serve to
link banks’ sources and uses of funds. We also show that these frictions help explain the
di↵erential sensitivity of lending to the policy rate for big and small banks.
Second, we show that bank market power interacts with capital regulation to reverse the
e↵ect of monetary policy when the federal funds rate is very low. Specifically, we estimate
that, when the federal funds rate is below 0.9%, further cuts in the policy rate can be
contractionary. Moreover, we find external validation of this reversal rate by showing in
a simple regression framework that the relation between bank capital and interest rates
switches sign at a threshold predicted by the model.
To provide intuition for these results, we elaborate on the model. In an industry equilib-
rium, imperfectly competitive banks act as intermediaries between borrowers and depositors.
1

Banks’ lending decisions are dynamic for two reasons: a maturity mismatch between short-
term deposits and long-term loans and financial frictions that induce precautionary capital
accumulation. In this setting, monetary policy alters the federal funds rate. Because banks
are not price takers in deposit or loan markets, they choose the extent to which they pass
rate movements through to depositors and borrowers. The magnitude of this pass-through
depends on the tightness of regulatory constraints, the severity of financial frictions, and the
intensity of competition.
These frictions in our model map into four channels of monetary policy transmission. The
firstisthebankreservechannel, inwhichahighfederalfundsrateraisestheopportunitycost
of holding reserves, thus contracting deposit creation (Bernanke and Blinder 1988; Kashyap
and Stein 1995). The second is the bank capital channel, in which a high federal funds
rate reduces bank capital because of a balance-sheet maturity mismatch and thus constrains
banks’ capacity to lend (Bolton and Freixas 2000; Van den Heuvel 2002; Brunnermeier and
Sannikov 2016). The third is the deposit market power channel, in which a high federal
funds rate allows banks to charge higher markups on deposits, thus leading to a contraction
in deposits and loans (Drechsler et al. 2017). The fourth is the loan market power channel, in
which banks reduce markups to mitigate the e↵ects of monetary tightening on loan demand
(Scharfstein and Sunderam 2016).
To gauge the quantitative importance of these transmission channels, we estimate our
model using data on U.S. commercial banks from 1994 to 2017. Our estimation combines
methods used in the industrial organization literature (Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes 1995;
Nevo 2001) with those used in the corporate finance literature (Hennessy and Whited 2005;
Bazdresch, Kahn, and Whited 2018). We begin by using demand estimation techniques to
obtain the elasticities of loan and deposit demand to interest rates. We then plug these esti-
mates into our model and use simulated minimum distance to obtain estimates of parameters
that quantify financial frictions and operating costs. The sequential use of these two tech-
niques represents a methodological advance that enables us to consider a rich equilibrium
model that would otherwise be intractable to estimate.
We use counterfactual experiments to assess the relative importance of each transmission
channel. Westartwithamodelwithallfrictionsasestimatedandthensubtracteachfriction
one at a time. We find that eliminating reserve requirements leaves the sensitivity of lending
to the federal funds rate nearly unchanged. Eliminating either capital regulation or deposit
2