NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE COST OF PRIVACY:
WELFARE EFFECTS OF THE DISCLOSURE OF COVID-19 CASES
David O. Argente
Chang-Tai Hsieh
Munseob Lee
Working Paper 27220
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27220
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2020
We thank Fernando Alvarez, Jingting Fan, David Lagakos, Marc-Andreas Muendler, Valerie A.
Ramey, and Nick Tsivanidis for helpful comments. We use proprietary data from SK Telecom
and thank Geovision at SK Telecom and Brian Kim for their assistance with the data. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2020 by David O. Argente, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Munseob Lee. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Cost of Privacy: Welfare Effects of the Disclosure of COVID-19 Cases
David O. Argente, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Munseob Lee
NBER Working Paper No. 27220
May 2020, Revised July 2020
JEL No. E0,I0
ABSTRACT
South Korea publicly disclosed detailed location information of individuals that tested positive
for COVID-19. We quantify the effect of public disclosure on the transmission of the virus and
economic losses in Seoul. The change in commuting patterns due to public disclosure lowers the
number of cases by 200 thousand and the number of deaths by 7.7 thousand in Seoul over two
years. Compared to a city-wide lock-down that results in the same number of cases over two
years as the disclosure scenario, the economic cost of such a lockdown is almost four times
higher.
David O. Argente Munseob Lee
Pennsylvania State University University of California at San Diego
Department of Economics 9500 Gilman Drive, #0519
403 Kern Building La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
University Park munseoblee@ucsd.edu
State College, PA 16801
dargente@psu.edu
Chang-Tai Hsieh
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
chsieh@chicagoBooth.edu
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27220

1 Introduction
On January 30, 2020, residents of Jungnang district in northeast Seoul received the following
message on their cellphone about the second person in South Korea that tested positive for
COVID: “Korean male, born 1987, living in Jungnang district. Confirmed on January 30,
Hospitalized in Seoul Medical Center.” The text went on to disclose the whereabouts of the
individual in the past few days:
• January 24: Return trip from Wuhan without symptoms.
• January 26: Merchandise store∗ at Seongdong by subway at 12 pm; massage spa∗ by
subway in afternoon; two convenience stores∗ and two supermarkets∗.1
• January 27: Restaurant∗ and two supermarkets∗ in afternoon.
• January 28: Hair salon∗ in Seongbuk; supermarket∗ and restaurant∗ in Jungnang by
bus; wedding shop in Gangnam by subway; home by subway.
• January 29: Tested at hospital in Jungnang.
Over the following weeks, as more people were tested for COVID, South Koreans received
similar texts for every relevant patient that tested positive. This information was widely
disseminated on websites and incorporated into mobile phone applications.
This paper uses South Korea’s experience to show that public disclosure can be an im-
portant tool to combat the spread of a virus. Since a testing regime is likely to only catch
a fraction of infected individuals, disclosure of locations of people that have tested positive
can help non-infected people avoid places where they are more likely to be in contact with
infected people that have not yet been detected. For example, on March 30, local authorities
in Seoul disclosed that a patient visited a coffee shop in Mapo district on March 28. Nobody
visited the coffee shop on May 30.2 If the person who visited the coffee shop on March 28
infected others in the vicinity, this behavior by the public can help reduce the probability
that an infected person spreads the virus.
Figure 1 shows that the response of the public to the disclosure of the visit by the infected
person to the coffee shop in Mapo district may hold more generally. The figure uses daily
data on commuting flows between neighborhoods in Seoul from South Korea’s largest mobile
phone company.3 It shows the mean and the 95 percent confidence interval of the change
in the number of commuters from other districts of Seoul, relative to the first week for
February, in each of the 25 districts in Seoul during the weekdays. We highlight two facts.
First, commuter inflows in the average district in Seoul decreased by about 10% in March
1An asterisk ∗ indicates that the establishment’s name was disclosed.
2“Seoul’s Radical Experiment in Digital Contact Tracing,” The New Yorker, April 17, 2020.
3We describe the mobile phone data in Section 3.
1

and April and recovered by the end of May. Second, there is substantial heterogeneity across
districts in the change in commuting inflows. At the peak of the pandemic in early March,
inflows fell by more than 20% in some districts but by only 5% in other districts. In late
May when inflows in the average district were back to “normal”, inflows into some districts
appear to be permanently lower while in other districts, the reverse is true. We show that
commuting inflows fell by more in districts with a large number of COVID patients lived or
visited compared to districts with few COVID patients.
Figure 1: Change in Weekday Inflows into Districts in Seoul
Note: The figure shows the mean and the 95 percent confidence interval of the percent change in the inflow
of people into each district of the city of Seoul, relative to the first week of February, calculated from SK
Telecom’s mobile phone data.
We then quantify the effect of the change in commuting flows in Seoul shown in Figure 1
on the transmission of the virus. We use a SIR model where the virus spreads as susceptible
people in a neighborhood commute and come into contact with infected people from other
neighborhoods. We show that the change in commuting flows observed in mobile phone
location data predicts the heterogeneous spread of the virus across neighborhoods in Seoul.
We also project the effect of public disclosure on the transmission of the virus over the next
2