NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE TERM STRUCTURE OF COVERED INTEREST RATE PARITY VIOLATIONS
Patrick Augustin
Mikhail Chernov
Lukas Schmid
Dongho Song
Working Paper 27231
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27231
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2020, Revised February 2024
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. We thank the editor Stefan Nagel, the associate editor,
and two referees for their valuable feedback. We are also grateful to Hitesh Doshi, Wenxin Du,
Gregory Duffee, Nicolae Gârleanu, Valentin Haddad, Ben Hebert, Robert Hodrick, Michael
Johannes, Lukas Kremens, Wenhao Li, Lars Lochstoer, Hanno Lustig, Tyler Muir, Paolo
Pasquariello, Yang Song, Fabrice Tourre, Adrien Verdelhan, Irina Zviadadze and participants in
seminars and conferences sponsored by the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Kenan-
Flagler Business School, the Swiss Finance Institute at USI Lugano, the Stockholm School of
Economics, HEC Liége, Seoul National University, Bocconi University, the Hong Kong Institute
of Monetary and Financial Research, the 2021 Adam Smith Workshop, the Federal Reserve
Board, the University of Oklahoma Price College of Business, C. T. Bauer College of Business at
the University of Houston, 2021 NBER LTAM conference, Texas A&M University, the
University of Washington Foster School of Business, the University of Toronto Rotman School
of Management, the University of Southern California Marshall School of Business, HEC
Montréal, McGill University’s Desautels Faculty of Management, Arizona State University
Carey School of Business, MIT Sloan School of Management, UCLA Anderson School of
Management, the 2021 Vienna Symposium on Foreign Exchange Markets, the CDI Virtual
Derivatives Workshop, and the 2020 David Backus memorial conference. Augustin
acknowledges the support of the Hong Kong Institute for Monetary and Financial Research for
this project. An earlier version of the paper was titled “A no-arbitrage perspective on global
arbitrage opportunities.”
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Patrick Augustin, Mikhail Chernov, Lukas Schmid, and Dongho Song. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Term Structure of Covered Interest Rate Parity Violations
Patrick Augustin, Mikhail Chernov, Lukas Schmid, and Dongho Song
NBER Working Paper No. 27231
May 2020
JEL No. C01,E43,E44,G12,H60
ABSTRACT
We quantify the impact of risk-based and non-risk-based intermediary constraints (IC) on the
term structure of CIP violations. Using a stochastic discount factor (SDF) inferred from interest
rate swaps, we value currency derivatives. The wedge between model-implied and observed
derivative prices reflects the impact of non-risk-based IC because our SDF incorporates risk-
based IC. There is no wedge at short horizons, while the wedge accounts for 40% of long-term
CIP violations. Consistent with IC theory, the wedge correlates with the shadow cost of
intermediary capital, and the SDF-implied interest rate is a weighted average of collateralized and
uncollateralized interest rates.
Patrick Augustin Lukas Schmid
Desautels Faculty of Management Marshall School of Business
McGill University University of Southern California
1001 Sherbrooke Street West, Room 552 and CEPR
Montreal, Qc H3A 1G5 Canada lukas@marshall.usc.edu
and CDI (Canadian Derivatives Institute)
patrick.augustin@mcgill.ca Dongho Song
Johns Hopkins University
Mikhail Chernov Carey Business School
Anderson School of Management 100 International Drive
University of California, Los Angeles Baltimore, MD 21202
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C-417 dongho.song@jhu.edu
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and CEPR
and also NBER
mikhail.chernov@anderson.ucla.edu

1 Introduction
CIP violations are viewed as prima facie evidence that intermediary constraints (IC)
matter for asset valuation (e.g., Ivashina, Scharfstein, and Stein, 2015; Du, Tepper,
and Verdelhan, 2018). These violations are measured using currency forwards at
short, and using cross-currency basis swaps (XCCY) at long horizons. In this paper
we quantify the impact of IC on CIP violations across its term structure.
IC come in a variety of forms, most notably in form of risk based constraints, such as
those implied by an asset’s volatility or Value-at-Risk, and non-risk based constraints,
such as leverage caps or margin requirements. Measuring the impact of IC constraints
on CIP violations involves delineating the impact of these two types of constraints as
they operate via different channels. The former operate similarly to and jointly with
conventional risk factors via covariance with a stochastic discount factor (SDF). The
latter constraints result in departures from the standard covariance-based framework
and manifest themselves as anomalies.
SeparatingthetwoconstraintsisimpossibletoaccomplishbyobservingCIPviolations
alone. We make progress by introducing a model of risk. By taking a stand on such
a model, we are able to identify the non-risk-based IC component of these violations.
Quantifying this component is our primary focus because it is difficult to disentangle
the effects of risk factors and risk-based IC.
Specifically, we extract an SDF by estimating an affine term structure model that
accurately prices interest rate swaps (IRS) across G10 countries. This model-implied
SDFisparticularlyrelevantbecauseIRSarecloselyrelatedtoXCCYcontracts. Insti-
tutional arrangements are similar since both contracts trade over-the-counter among
a similar set of market participants, they have similar collateralization requirements
and cash flows that are contractually linked to LIBOR. Moreover, the IRS market is
highly liquid with a weekly traded notional of one trillion USD and subject to central
clearing, suggesting a relatively small role for non-risk IC.
We show more formally below that if non-risk-based IC do not matter or if they have
a similar impact across the two markets, the IRS-implied SDF would correctly price

XCCY as well. In contrast, if non-risk-based IC do matter, they should manifest
themselves as departures between observed XCCY premiums and the ones implied
by our model. We refer to such departures as ‘IC wedge’.
For example, the traditional measure of the IC wedge used in the literature is the
cross-currency basis (measured as the spread between the forward currency premium
and the difference between LIBOR rates in two countries) and the XCCY premium at
short and long horizons, respectively. Figure 1 offers an example, using the 3-month
basis and the 5-year XCCY premium for the Euro to U.S. Dollar (USD) exchange
rate. Departures from zero for both time series are attributed by the literature to IC.
We use the estimated SDF model to gauge the magnitude and structure of the IC
wedge. That is, we value FX forwards and XCCY. What we discover is that the tra-
ditional benchmark used in the literature to measure CIP violations is an inaccurate
measure of the IC wedge. In fact, the IC wedge is much smaller than the traditional
measures of CIP violations would suggest. For instance, the average 5-year XCCY
rate across countries during the post-crisis period is 22 basis points (bps) in the risk-
based model vs. 25 bps in the data. Our variance decomposition of the 5-year XCCY
rates shows that the risk-based model explains, on average, 60% of the variation in
their levels. Thus, one conclusion is that XCCY and IRS markets are, to a large
degree, priced consistently.
Two elements of our approach drive the risk-based valuation of XCCY close to that
in in the data. First, it is important to account for effective funding rates (EFRs) in
over-the-counter markets when counterparty risk is effectively removed via collater-
alization. Using LIBOR to compute the cross-currency basis may not be appropriate
because it reflects counterparty default risk (Du, Im, and Schreger, 2018).1 We asso-
ciate the mean of the IRS-based SDF with the EFR. Second, XCCY contracts feature
recurring cash flows that are linked to LIBOR. Therefore, both the basis and XCCY
rates are simultaneously zero only when the EFR coincides with LIBOR. Otherwise,
XCCY rates may differ from zero even when the basis is zero or in the absence of IC.
1OIS rates, which also represent uncollateralized interbank lending, are not appropriate either
because they may reflect market segmentation due to unequal access to interest on excess reserves
paid by the Federal Reserve (Bech and Klee, 2011)
2