NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE ANATOMY OF THE TRANSMISSION OF MACROPRUDENTIAL POLICIES
Viral V. Acharya
Katharina Bergant
Matteo Crosignani
Tim Eisert
Fergal J. McCann
Working Paper 27292
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27292
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2020
We thank Sergey Chernenko, Stijn Claessens, Anthony DeFusco, Adam Guren, Tim Landvoigt,
Philip Lane, Tomasz Piskorski, José-Luis Peydró, Andrea Polo, Andres Sarto, Roberto Savona, Tess
Scharlemann, Sanjay Singh, and James Vickery for their comments. We also thank conference
participants at the NBER Summer Institute (CF), WFA-CFAR Corporate Finance Conference (Olin),
11th Annual Paul Woolley Centre Conference (LSE), AFA, EFA, Labor and Finance Group
Conference (Chicago Booth), CEPR-Bank of Finland Monetary Policy and Reality Conference, UCLA-
FRBSF Conference on Housing, Financial Markets, and Monetary Policy, Workshop on Housing and
Household Finance (Oslo), RFS Banking Conference (Rome), BIS “Impact of Banking Regulation on
Financial Markets” Conference, CREDIT Conference, Bocconi Carefin Conference, MFA, CSEF
Banking Conference, 14th Meeting of German Economist Abroad, Fed “Day Ahead” Conference,
and seminar participants at Fed Board, NY Fed, Boston Fed, UNSW, University of Melbourne,
Michigan Ross, Central Bank of Ireland Financial Stability Reading Group, ECB, FDIC, TU Munich,
IWH Halle, Johns Hopkins Carey, and Frankfurt School of Finance & Management. We thank
Ronan Lyons for helping us access and interpret the house price data. The views expressed in this
paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views
the Central Bank of Ireland or the International Monetary Fund. All results have been reviewed to
ensure no confidential information is disclosed. All errors are our own. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2020 by Viral V. Acharya, Katharina Bergant, Matteo Crosignani, Tim Eisert, and Fergal J. McCann.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Anatomy of the Transmission of Macroprudential Policies
Viral V. Acharya, Katharina Bergant, Matteo Crosignani, Tim Eisert, and Fergal J. McCann
NBER Working Paper No. 27292
May 2020
JEL No. E21,E44,E58,G21,R21
ABSTRACT
We analyze how regulatory constraints on household leverage—in the form of loan-to-income
and loan-to-value limits—affect residential mortgage credit and house prices as well as other
asset classes not directly targeted by the limits. Supervisory loan level data suggest that mortgage
credit is reallocated from low-to high-income borrowers and from urban to rural counties. This
reallocation weakens the feedback loop between credit and house prices and slows down house
price growth in “hot” housing markets. Consistent with constrained lenders adjusting their
portfolio choice, more-affected banks drive this reallocation and substitute their risk-taking into
holdings of securities and corporate credit.
Viral V. Acharya Tim Eisert
Stern School of Business Erasmus University Rotterdam
New York University Burg. Oudlaan 50 / PO Box 1738
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-65 3000 DR Rotterdam
New York, NY 10012 The Netherlands
and CEPR eisert@ese.eur.nl
and also NBER
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu Fergal J. McCann
Central Bank of Ireland
Katharina Bergant fergal.mccann@centralbank.ie
International Monetary Fund
Research Department
kbergant@imf.org
Matteo Crosignani
University of Michigan
Ross School of Business
mcrosign@gmail.com

1 Introduction
Policymakers have recently proposed and implemented macroprudential policies aimed at
limiting household leverage to slow down the feedback loop between credit and house prices.
The academic literature|by showing that build-ups of household leverage have historically
led to busts, lower output growth, and higher unemployment (Mian et al., 2017)|has high-
lighted the importance of these policies, adopted by more than 60 countries since 1990.
In this paper, we provide a comprehensive analysis of the most widely used type of
macroprudential regulations, namely, policies that limit household leverage in the residential
mortgage market. Combining county level house price data, loan level data on residential
mortgages and credit to (cid:12)rms, as well as bank security level holdings, we study the introduc-
tion in 2015 of loan-to-value (LTV) and loan-to-income (LTI) limits for residential mortgages
issued by Irish banks.1 The policy was introduced in the aftermath of a dramatic boom-bust
cycle that led to a (cid:12)nancial crisis that, in turn, forced the government to adopt a costly
bailout (Acharya et al., 2014).2 The lending limits affect 43% of the typical mortgage origi-
nation and are immediately effective after the announcement. The goal, in the words of at
the time central bank governor Patrick Honahan, was to \prevent another psychological loop
between credit and prices and credit" and \keep banks and borrowers safe."
We document that whereas the lending limits affect a large share of the residential mort-
gage market, mortgage issuance keeps growing after the policy introduction as the market
\moves" to conform with the new limits. Our analysis of this reallocation provides three
main (cid:12)ndings: (i) Mortgage credit is reallocated from low- to high-income borrowers and
1Alam et al. (2019) collected data from 1990 to 2016 on macroprudential policies in 134 countries. LTV
andLTIlimitshavebeenadoptedby60and42countries, respectively. LTVlimitsarethemostwidelyused
tool in advanced economies. See Cerutti et al. (2017) for another cross-country database.
2The household debt/GDP ratio increased from 55% to 101% from 2002 to 2007, followed by -10% GDP
growth and a +8% unemployment rate change over the next three years.
2

from counties where borrowers are close to the lending limits (typically urban areas) to coun-
ties where borrowers are more distant from the lending limits (typically rural areas); (ii)
this reallocation is effective in slowing down house price growth, and in turn, the feedback
loop between mortgage credit and house prices, in \hot" housing markets; and (iii) this
reallocation is consistent with a bank portfolio choice channel as banks more affected by the
limits drive the mortgage credit reallocation and increase their risk-taking in their holdings
of securities and credit to (cid:12)rms, two asset classes not targeted by the policy.
Next,wedescribetheseresultsindetail. First,weshowthat43%ofthemortgageissuance
in the year before the policy would have been affected if the rules had been in place during
this period. Nevertheless, the increase in \conforming" issuance offsets the collapse in the
issuance of those mortgages that exceed the newly imposed limits, leaving aggregate issuance
barelyaffected. However, noteverymortgageisaffectedinthesameway. Inthecross-section
of counties, \hot" housing markets (typically urban counties) are closer to the limits than
\cool" housing markets (typically rural counties). In the cross-section of borrowers, high-
income borrowers are more distant from the limits than low-income borrowers. We show
that, after the policy introduction, residential mortgage issuance moves from hot to cool
housing markets and from low- to high-income borrowers. Following the methodology in
Mian et al. (2019), we compare estimated coefficients with and without county-time (cid:12)xed
effects, which absorb the general equilibrium forces at the county level. This comparison
suggests that the policy weakened the sizable general equilibrium \loop between credit and
prices and credit" at work before the policy introduction.
Second, we show that the evolution of house prices is consistent with the observed geo-
graphic credit reallocation. House price growth, around 14% year-on-year (YoY) and rapidly
increasing at the time of the policy announcement, stabilized below 10% post-regulation.
This evolution is driven by hot housing markets where house price growth, well above 20%
YoY and rapidly increasing at the time of announcement, collapsed to around 4% post-
regulation. As a result, the lending limits substantially reduced the geographical heterogene-
3