NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PREDICTABLE FINANCIAL CRISES
Robin Greenwood
Samuel G. Hanson
Andrei Shleifer
Jakob Ahm Sørensen
Working Paper 27396
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27396
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2020
Greenwood and Hanson gratefully acknowledge funding from the Division of Research at
Harvard Business School. Sørensen gratefully acknowledges support from FRIC Center for
Financial Frictions (grant no. DNRF102). We thank Matthew Baron, Xavier Gabaix, Jeremy
Stein, Adi Sunderam, Emil Verner, and Wei Xiong as well as seminar participants at Harvard and
Princeton for helpful comments, and Peggy Moreland for editorial assistance. We are grateful to
Matthew Baron, Emil Verner, and Wei Xiong for generously sharing their data. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27396.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Robin Greenwood, Samuel G. Hanson, Andrei Shleifer, and Jakob Ahm Sørensen. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Predictable Financial Crises
Robin Greenwood, Samuel G. Hanson, Andrei Shleifer, and Jakob Ahm Sørensen
NBER Working Paper No. 27396
June 2020
JEL No. E44,E7,G01,G4
ABSTRACT
Using historical data on post-war financial crises around the world, we show that crises are
substantially predictable. The combination of rapid credit and asset price growth over the prior
three years, whether in the nonfinancial business or the household sector, is associated with about
a 40% probability of entering a financial crisis within the next three years. This compares with a
roughly 7% probability in normal times, when neither credit nor asset price growth has been
elevated. Our evidence cuts against the view that financial crises are unpredictable “bolts from
the sky” and points toward the Kindleberger-Minsky view that crises are the byproduct of
predictable, boom-bust credit cycles. The predictability we document favors macro-financial
policies that “lean against the wind” of credit market booms.
Robin Greenwood Andrei Shleifer
Harvard Business School Department of Economics
Baker Library 267 Harvard University
Soldiers Field Littauer Center M-9
Boston, MA 02163 Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER and NBER
rgreenwood@hbs.edu ashleifer@harvard.edu
Samuel G. Hanson Jakob Ahm Sørensen
Harvard Business School D4.17
Baker Library 361 Solbjerg Plads 3
Soldiers Field Frederiksberg 2000
Boston, MA 02163 Denmark
and NBER jso.fi@cbs.dk
shanson@hbs.edu

1. Introduction
A central issue in the study of macroeconomic stability is the predictability of financial
crises. An important line of thought holds that crises are largely unpredictable. For example,
each of the three principal policymakers in the 2008 U.S. financial crisis, Hank Paulson, Tim
Geithner, and Ben Bernanke, has taken this position at different times.1 Similarly, Gorton
(2012, p.42) argues that “crises are sudden, unpredictable events.” This view is bolstered by
theories that see crises as being due to sunspot equilibria (Cole and Kehoe 2000, Chari and
Kehoe 2003), and by early evidence showing that, while crises are often preceded by weak
economic fundamentals, the degree of predictability is low (Kaminsky and Reinhart 1999).
An alternative view sees financial crises as substantially predictable byproducts of rapid
expansions of credit accompanied by asset price booms (Minsky 1977, 1986 and Kindleberger
1978). Borio and Lowe (2002) show that rapid credit growth and asset price growth predict
banking crises in 34 countries between 1970 and 1999, spurring an extensive literature on so-
called “early warning indicators.” More recently, Schularick and Taylor (2012) and others
show that credit expansions, growth of risky credit as a share of the total, and narrow credit
spreads, all predict financial fragility and deteriorating macroeconomic outcomes (Greenwood
and Hanson 2013, Baron and Xiong 2017, Lopez-Salido, Stein, and Zakrajšek 2017, Mian,
Sufi, and Verner 2019). Kirti (2020) and Richter, Schularick, and Wachtel (2020) document
the characteristics that can help separate good and bad credit booms. Yet even with all this
evidence, precise estimates of the probability of a financial crisis following credit and asset
price booms remain unavailable. More importantly, it remains an open question how high the
probability of a crisis should be permitted to climb before prompting early policy action.
In this paper, we estimate the probability of financial crises as a function of past credit
and asset price growth. Such an estimate has been made significantly easier by the development
of historical chronologies of financial crises by Reinhart and Rogoff (2011), Jordà, Schularick,
and Taylor (2017), and Baron, Verner, and Xiong (BVX 2020). Most recently, BVX use hand-
collected historical data on bank stock returns to improve existing crisis chronologies, which
to date have been based solely on narrative accounts. We use BVX’s chronology to construct
1 According to former U.S. Secretary of the Treasury Tim Geithner, “Financial crises cannot be reliably anticipated
or preempted” (see Geithner 2014). According to former U.S. Secretary of the Treasury Hank Paulson, “My strong
belief is that these crises are unpredictable in terms of cause, timing, or the severity when they hit.” (See
https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/es_20180912_financial_crisis_day2_transcript.pdf).
According to Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke, “This crisis involved a 21st century electronic panic by
institutions. It was an old-fashioned run in new clothes.” (See https://www8.gsb.columbia.edu/articles/chazen-
global-insights/financial-system-will-survive-says-ben-bernanke.)
1

an indicator variable for the onset of a financial crises. We combine historical data on the
growth of outstanding credit to nonfinancial businesses and households with data on the growth
of equity and home prices, to estimate the future probability of a financial crisis in a panel of
42 countries over 1950–2016.
We present six findings. First, consistent with Schularick and Taylor (2012), crises can
be predicted using past credit growth in simple linear forecasting regressions. We show that
both nonfinancial business and household credit growth forecast the onset of a future crisis.
However, the degree of predictability is modest, even at horizons of up to five years. Schularick
and Taylor (2012) find that a one standard deviation rise in real 1-year credit growth leads to a
2.8 percentage point increase in the probability of a crisis over the next five years. Repeating
their analysis on our sample with BVX’s crisis chronology, we obtain virtually the same result.
Second, we show that the degree of predictability rises substantially when we focus on
large credit expansions that are accompanied by asset price booms. Specifically, when
nonfinancial business credit growth is high and stock market valuations have risen sharply, or
when household credit growth is high and home prices have risen sharply, the probability of a
subsequent crisis is substantially elevated. The combination of rapid credit growth and asset
price growth in the same sector is a natural signal of an outward shift in the supply of credit,
which then sows the seeds of its own destruction (Borio and Drehmann 2009, Greenwood and
Hanson 2013, Jorda, Schularick, and Taylor 2015, López-Salido, Stein, and Zakrajšek 2017,
and Kirti 2020). Our results are robust to different classifications of financial crises such as
those in Reinhart and Rogoff (2011) and Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2017). However, we
do not use data on credit spreads in this paper, which would likely increase the predictability
of crises, because the historical scarcity of these data would substantially reduce our sample.
To demonstrate these results, we construct a simple indicator variable called the Red-
zone, or the “R-zone” for short, that identifies periods of potential credit-market overheating.
Specifically, we say that a country is in the “business R-zone” if nonfinancial business credit
growth over the past three years is in the top quintile of the historical distribution, and stock
market returns over the same window are in the top tercile. The probability of a crisis at a 1-
year horizon is 13% if a country is in the business R-Zone, a substantial increase over the
unconditional probability of 4%. The comparable 1-year probability is 14% if a country is in
the household R-zone—i.e., if household credit growth and home price growth are jointly
elevated. Crucially, the degree of predictability increases dramatically with horizon. The
probability of experiencing a financial crisis within the next three years is 45% for countries
2