NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DYNAMICS OF MARKUPS, CONCENTRATION AND PRODUCT SPAN
Elhanan Helpman
Benjamin C. Niswonger
Working Paper 27389
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27389
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2020
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Elhanan Helpman and Benjamin C. Niswonger. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Dynamics of Markups, Concentration and Product Span
Elhanan Helpman and Benjamin C. Niswonger
NBER Working Paper No. 27389
June 2020
JEL No. D43,L11,L13,L25
ABSTRACT
We develop a model with a finite number of multi-product firms that populate an industry
together with a continuum of single product firms, and study the dynamics of this industry that
arises from investments in the invention of new products. Consistent with the available evidence,
the model predicts rising markups and concentration and a declining labor share. We then
examine the dynamics of market shares and product spans in response to improvements in the
technologies of the multi-product and single product firms, and the impact of these changes on
the steady state distribution of market shares and product spans. Our model predicts the
possibility of an inverted-U relationship between labor productivity and product span in the cross-
section of firms, for which we provide suggestive evidence. It also predicts that rising entry costs
of single-product firms may flatten the relationship between labor productivity and market shares
of the large multi-product firms.
Elhanan Helpman
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1875 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and CEPR
and also NBER
ehelpman@harvard.edu
Benjamin C. Niswonger
Harvard University
niswonger@g.harvard.edu

1 Introduction
Anumberofrecentstudieshaveinvestigatedtheevolutionof markupsandthegrowthofconcentra-
tioninU.S.industries, findingthatbothmarkupsandconcentrationhaveincreased; seeAutor et al.
(2020); De Loecker et al. (2020). These studies find that the ascent in average markups was driven
byrisingmarkupsofthelargestfirmsandmarketsharereallocationfromlow-tohigh-markupfirms.
Contemporaneously, the labor share declined. We develop a model of firm dynamics that generates
these patterns, as well as rich predictions about the unfolding of the cross-section of firms. Our
theory focuses on the evolution of a sector rather than on long-run growth of the entire economy.
An industry has a continuum of varieties of a differentiated product and it is populated by
a continuum of single-product firms and a finite number of large multi-product firms. While the
turnover of single-product firms is very high, the large multi-product firms have long life spans.
Large firms lose some products over time, but they can invest in innovation in order to replenish
or expand the range of their products. Free entry of the single-product firms, which engage in
monopolistic competition, creates a competitive fringe that impacts the oligopolistic competition of
the large firms. The interaction between the single- and multi-product firms plays a key role in the
1
dynamics of this industry, both during transition and in steady state.
Our assumptions capture salient feature of the data. According to Cao et al. (2019), 95% of
firms in the U.S. economy are single-establishment firms, but their share in employment is only
45%. Furthermore, Kehrig and Vincent (2019) report that during 1972-2007 an average of 72%
of the plants in manufacturing belonged to single-plant firms and 28% belonged to multi-plant
firms (see their Table A1). At the same time, single-plant firms manufactured 22% of value added
compared to 78% of the value added manufactured by multi-plant firms. Both studies point out
that firm growth took place mostly through the extensive margin, by opening new plants that
often produced new products. In addition Hsieh and Rossi-Hansberg (2020) provide evidence that
firm growth through the acquisition of new product lines played an important role in the business
strategies of U.S. corporations in three major sectors: services, retail and wholesale. Growth of
firms in these sectors was driven by expansions to new locations, i.e., new product lines. Finally,
studying the size distribution of firms between 1995 and 2014, Cao et al. (2019) conclude that the
largest contributors to the increase in the number of establishments per firm were declining costs of
innovation and declining exit rates.
The theory developed in this paper predicts that large multi-product firms grow through inno-
vation that expands their product lines, eventually reaching a steady state. In the processes, these
firms raise their markups and reduce their labor share. As a result, the aggregate markup rises and
the aggregate labor share declines. The aggregate markup rises as a result of rising markups of
1Interactions between a monopolistically competitive fringe of single-product firms and oligopolistic large firms
havebeenstudiedinastaticframeworkbyShimomuraandThisse(2012)inaclosedeconomyandbyParenti(2018)
in an open economy. Cavenaile et al. (2019) develop a model of endogenous growth with quality-ladders, in which
there is a fringe of competitive small firms that produce a homogenous good. In addition, there are single-product
large firms that produce different varieties of a product. Their model is mostly quantitative, used to study the
relationship between innovation and competition.
2

the multi-product firms and the reallocation of market shares from single- to multi-product firms.
The steady state size distribution of firms is driven by heterogeneity of labor productivity, with
more productive firms having larger market shares. Nevertheless, this monotonic relationship does
not translate into a monotonic relationship between productivity and product span. The reason
is that the marginal profitability of investment in innovation is larger when manufacturing costs
are lower, but larger market shares reduce the incentives to invent new products. We show this
tension can produce an inverted-U relationship between labor productivity and product span in the
cross-section of firms. Using the Compustat data for 2018, we provide evidence that supports this
prediction. Our model also predicts that improvements in the technology of single-product firms,
whichraisethecompetitivepressureonthemulti-productoligopolies,leadtoadeclineinthemarket
share of every large firm on impact. Still, the resulting transition dynamics to a new steady state
vary across the large firms according to size. In particular, multi-product firms with large market
shares compensate for the initial loss of competitiveness, as reflected in the loss of market share, by
gradually expanding their product span and raising their market share over time, while firms with
small market shares further reduce their product span and market shares over time. As a result,
the size distribution of multi-product firms becomes more unequal in the new steady state.
We describe some basic elements of the model in the next section. In Section 3 we detail the
entrydecisionsofsingle-productfirmsandtheirimpactonthepricingstrategyoflargefirms. These
results are then used in Section 4 to study the innovation decisions of large firms and the resulting
transition dynamics. We show that whenever multi-product firms widen their product span in the
transition,theygrowinsizeandsodotheirmarkups,whilethelaborsharedeclines. Inthefollowing
Section5westudycomparativedynamics,someofwhichweredescribedabove. Section6concludes.
2 Preliminaries
We consider an economy with a continuum of individuals of mass 1, each one providing l units of
labor. The labor market is competitive and every individual earns the same wage rate.
There are two sectors. One sector produces a homogeneous good with one unit of labor per unit
output and there is always positive demand for its product. We normalize the price of this good to
equal one. Therefore the competitive wage also equals one. The other sector produces varieties of
2
a differentiated product.
Every individual has a utility function:
ε N σ−1 (ε−1)σ
u = x 0 + x(ω) σ dω ε(σ−1), σ > ε > 1, (1)
ε 1
− (cid:20)Z0 (cid:21)
where x is consumption of the homogeneous good, x(ω) is consumption of variety ω of the differ-
0
entiated product, σ is the elasticity of substitution between varieties of the differentiated product
and ε gauges the degree of substitutability between varieties of the differentiated product and the
2It is straightforward to generalize the analysis to multiple sectors with differentiated products.
3