NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CORPORATE BOND LIQUIDITY DURING THE COVID-19 CRISIS
Mahyar Kargar
Benjamin Lester
David Lindsay
Shuo Liu
Pierre-Olivier Weill
Diego Zúñiga
Working Paper 27355
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27355
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2020, Revised May 2021
We thank Darren Aiello, Roc Armenter, Mitchell Berlin, John Cochrane, Nathan Foley-Fisher,
Itay Goldstein, Valentin Haddad, Ricardo Lagos, Alan Moreira, Borghan Narajabad, Avanidhar
Subrahmanyam, Stéphane Verani, James Vickery, Jonathan Vogel, Bin Wei, Haoxiang Zhu, two
anonymous referees, and, seminar participants at the Journal of Finance and the Fama-Miller
Center virtual conference on the financial consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic, Atlanta
Fed/GSU virtual conference on financial stability and the coronavirus pandemic, Search and
Matching in Macro and Finance virtual workshop on liquidity in fixed income markets, Midwest
Finance Association, University of Illinois, UCLA Anderson, and UCLA economics for
comments and suggestions. Yiling Pan provided expert research assistance. The views expressed
here do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the Federal
Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. The first version of this paper
was circulated on April 16th, 2020.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Mahyar Kargar, Benjamin Lester, David Lindsay, Shuo Liu, Pierre-Olivier Weill, and
Diego Zúñiga. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Corporate Bond Liquidity During the COVID-19 Crisis
Mahyar Kargar, Benjamin Lester, David Lindsay, Shuo Liu, Pierre-Olivier Weill, and Diego
Zúñiga
NBER Working Paper No. 27355
June 2020, Revised May 2021
JEL No. E5,E58,E65,G0,G01,G12,G21,G23
ABSTRACT
We study liquidity conditions in the corporate bond market during the COVID-19 pandemic. We
document that the cost of trading immediately via risky-principal trades increased dramatically at
the height of the sell-off, forcing customers to shift towards slower, agency trades. Exploiting
eligibility requirements, we show that the Federal Reserve’s corporate credit facilities had a
positive effect on market liquidity. A structural estimation reveals that customers’ willingness to
pay for immediacy increased by about 200 bps per dollar of transaction, but quickly subsided
after the Fed announced its interventions. Dealers’ marginal cost also increased substantially, but
did not fully subside.
Mahyar Kargar Shuo Liu
Gies College of Business Department of Economics
Department of Finance UCLA
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 8283 Bunche Hall
435 Wohlers Hall Los Angeles, CA 90095
1206 S. Sixth Street lsfly0926@ucla.edu
Champaign, IL 61820
kargar@illinois.edu Pierre-Olivier Weill
Department of Economics University
Benjamin Lester of California, Los Angeles Bunche
Research Department Hall 8283
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Los Angeles, CA 90095
10 Independence Mall and NBER
Philadelphia, PA 19106 poweill@econ.ucla.edu
Benjamin.Lester@phil.frb.org
Diego Zúñiga
David Lindsay zung@g.ucla.edu
Department of Economics
UCLA
8283 Bunche
Los Angeles, CA 90095
lindsayd@ucla.edu

1 Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic induced an unprecedented shock to the global economy. As the im-
plications of this shock began to crystalize in mid-March, 2020, financial markets plummeted
and reports of illiquidity began to surface. One particularly important market that was “under
significantstress”(BernankeandYellen,2020)wasthe$10trillioncorporatebondmarket,whicha
March18reportfromBankofAmericadeemed“basicallybroken”(Idzelis,2020). Inresponse,the
FederalReserveintroducedseveralfacilitiesdesignedtobolsterliquidityandreducethecostsand
risksofintermediatingcorporatedebt,includingthePrimaryDealerCreditFacility(PDCF)andthe
Primary and Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facilities (PMCCF and SMCCF, respectively).
The latter two facilities represented a particularly bold intervention, in that they allowed the Fed,
for the first time, to make outright purchases of investment-grade corporate bonds issued by US
companies,alongwithexchange-tradedfunds(ETFs)thatinvestedinsimilarassets.
The purpose of this paper is to study trading conditions in the US corporate bond market
in response to the large economic shock induced by COVID-19, as well as the unprecedented
interventionsthatfollowed. Giventheexogenousnatureofthepandemic,setagainstthebackdrop
ofawell-capitalizedfinancialsector,thisepisodeoffersauniqueopportunitytoidentifythenature
ofshocksthatprecipitateilliquidityinfinancialmarkets,theconsequencesformarketparticipants,
andtheefficacyofvariouspolicyresponsesdesignedtorestoreliquidityintimesofdistress.
A central feature of our analysis is the distinction between two types of transactions offered
by dealers: “risky-principal” trades, in which a dealer offers a customer-seller immediacy by
purchasing the asset directly and storing it on his balance sheet until finding a customer-buyer;
and “agency” trades, in which the customer-seller retains the asset while waiting for a dealer to
find a customer-buyer to take the other side of the trade. This distinction, which has been studied
1

recently using pre-pandemic data, is crucial in generating several new insights.1 We highlight
three.
First, distinguishing between risky-principal and agency trades provides a more complete as-
sessmentofmarketliquiditybyaccountingforboththecostoftradingandthetimeittakestotrade.
Indeed,weshowthatfocusingontransactioncostsalone—ignoringchangesinthecompositionof
risky-principal and agency trades—understates the deterioration in liquidity after the COVID-19
shock. Second, studying the cost and quantity of these distinct types of trades in concert with a
structural model allows us to disentangle two widely cited (but not mutually exclusive) sources of
illiquidity: a large, unexpected increase in customers’ demand for immediacy, sometimes called a
“dash for cash”; and a decrease in dealers’ willingness to supply immediacy by absorbing assets
onto their balance sheets, either because of rising costs or binding regulatory constraints. A key
finding is that matching the data requires large shocks to both demand and supply at the onset of
the crisis. Finally, studying the evolution of demand and supply factors against the timeline of
the Fed’s interventions offers new insights into the efficacy of various policies. In particular, we
show that the surge in customers’ demand for immediacy receded almost immediately, and fully,
after the announcement of the Fed’s interventions, whereas the negative shock to dealers’ supply
ofimmediacyrespondedmoregradually,andonlypartially.
AfterprovidingsomebackgroundinformationinSection2,webeginouranalysisinSection3
by documenting trading conditions in the corporate bond market in response to the panic of mid-
MarchandtheFed’sinterventionsthatfollowed. UsingdatafromtheTradeReportingCompliance
Engine(TRACE),wefirstconstructtimeseriestomeasurethecostsofrisky-principalandagency
trades in the corporate bond market. We find that the cost of risky-principal trades increased
significantly during the COVID-induced panic, reaching a peak of more than 250 basis points
(bps), while the cost of agency trades increased much more modestly. As the premium paid for
risky-principal trades increased, we show that customers substituted towards agency trades: the
1Forrecentworkthatstudiesthedistinctionbetweenrisky-principalandagencytrades,seeSchultz(2017),Bao,
O’Hara,andZhou(2018),ChoiandHuh(2018),Bessembinder,Jacobsen,Maxwell,andVenkataraman(2018),and
Goldstein and Hotchkiss (2020). To the best of our knowledge, we are the first (and only) paper to employ this
distinctiontostudyliquidityconditionsduringtheCOVID-19pandemic.
2