NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TO POOL OR NOT TO POOL? SECURITY DESIGN IN OTC MARKETS
Vincent Glode
Christian C. Opp
Ruslan Sverchkov
Working Paper 27361
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27361
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2020
The authors thank Jason Donaldson, Thomas Eisenbach, Barney Hartman-Glaser, Rich
Kihlstrom, Chester Spatt, Basil Williams, Marius Zoican, Pavel Zryumov, and audiences at the
Bank of England, BI-Oslo, EIEF, Illinois, INSEAD, Norwegian School of Economics (NHH),
Rochester, UT-Dallas, Wharton, the Financial Intermediation Research Society conference, the
Northern Finance Association meetings, the Oxford Financial Intermediation Theory conference,
the Society of Financial Studies cavalcade, and the Western Finance Association meetings for
their helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Vincent Glode, Christian C. Opp, and Ruslan Sverchkov. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

To Pool or Not to Pool? Security Design in OTC Markets
Vincent Glode, Christian C. Opp, and Ruslan Sverchkov
NBER Working Paper No. 27361
June 2020
JEL No. D82,G32,L14
ABSTRACT
We study security issuers' decision whether to pool assets when facing counterparties endowed
with market power, as is common in over-the-counter markets. Unlike in competitive markets,
pooling assets may be suboptimal in the presence of market power - both privately and socially -
in particular, when the potential gains from trade are large. In these cases, pooling assets reduces
the elasticity of trade volume in the relevant part of the payoff distribution, exacerbating
inefficient rationing associated with the exercise of market power. Our results shed light on
recently observed time-variation in the prevalence of pooling in financial markets.
Vincent Glode Ruslan Sverchkov
University of Pennsylvania University of Pennsylvania
Wharton School Wharton School
3620 Locust Walk 3620 Locust Walk
Phildelaphia, PA 19104 Philadelphia, PA 19104
USA USA
vglode@wharton.upenn.edu ruslans@wharton.upenn.edu
Christian C. Opp
Simon Business School
University of Rochester
3-110N Carol Simon Hall
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
opp@rochester.edu

1 Introduction
Structured products are typically originated in over-the-counter (OTC) markets, where
asymmetric information and market power have been shown to be prevalent frictions.1
In these markets, issuers may face prices that are not fully competitive, especially when
only few financial institutions are well-positioned to acquire new securities. For example,
asmostinstitutionsaresubjecttosimilarregulatoryconstraints,holdingcostscanincrease
simultaneously for many market participants, leaving only few institutions well positioned
toprovideliquidity.
Motivated by these observations, we study the security design problem of a privately
informedissuerwhopossessesmultipleassetsandfacesliquiditysuppliers,orbuyers,that
are potentially endowed with market power. Our analysis reveals how the allocation of
marketpowerhasrelevantandrobustimplicationsforsecuritydesignthatcontrastwiththe
takeaways from models considering only competitive environments. To isolate the effect
ofmarketpower,weconsiderbothcompetitiveandnon-competitivemarkets.
When buyers act competitively, our results echo the findings of the existing literature
(e.g., DeMarzo 2005) — pooling all assets into one security is optimal for the issuer. As
diversification reduces an issuer’s informational advantage, pooling assets helps alleviate
adverse selection problems, which is in the interest of the issuer when prices are set com-
petitively, since in this case, the issuer fully internalizes the benefits of improving the effi-
ciencyoftrade.
In contrast, when an issuer receives non-competitive offers for his securities, pool-
ing assets still has the advantage of reducing adverse selection concerns, but it now also
1For evidence that OTC trading often involves heterogeneously informed traders, see Green, Hollifield,
andSchu¨rhoff(2007),JiangandSun(2015),andHollifield,Neklyudov,andSpatt(2017). Forevidencethat
OTC trading tends to be concentrated among a small set of players, see Cetorelli et al. (2007), Atkeson,
Eisfeldt,andWeill(2014),Begenau,Piazzesi,andSchneider(2015),DiMaggio,Kermani,andSong(2017),
Hendershottetal.(2017),LiandSchu¨rhoff(2019),andSiriwardane(2019).
1

comes at a cost, namely, a potential reduction in the issuer’s information rents. Counter
to conventional wisdom, a privately informed issuer may prefer not to pool assets in this
case, especially when the potential gains from trade are large relative to the information
asymmetry between the issuer and prospective buyers. In fact, any pooling decision that
achieves perfect diversification is never optimal for an issuer facing market power on the
demand side. We provide explicit, sufficient conditions under which the issuer’s best op-
tion is to simply sell all assets separately. Under these conditions, separate sales are not
onlyprivatelyoptimalbutalsoachievethefirst-bestleveloftotaltradesurplus. Incontrast,
when assets are pooled, both the issuer’s private surplus and the total surplus from trade
are strictly lower, as diversification invites strategic buyers with market power to choose
pricing strategies that lead to inefficient rationing. As pooling affects the shape of the
distributions characterizing information asymmetries between issuers and buyers, it alters
how elastically trade volume responds to prices, which is crucial in settings with market
power. In particular, pooling would typically worsen inefficient rationing when selling as-
sets separately leads to little or no exclusion of buyer types. Diversification causes payoff
distributions to have thinner tails, which, in turn, leads to less elastic trade volume in the
righttailofthedistributionandgreaterrationinginequilibrium.
Our results highlight how, in recent years, liquidity shortages among major institu-
tions actively trading in OTC markets might have been an important driver of the dramatic
declines in asset-backed security (ABS) issuances, which occurred concurrently with an
increase in the volume of assets sold separately.2 Our analysis shows that, when liquidity
becomes scarce and concentrated among few market participants, the benefits of pooling
assetshighlightedintheliteraturecanbeoutweighedbyanassociatedincreaseinthesever-
2In 2015, issuance volume of ABS in the U.S. was 60% lower than it was in 2006, while the issuance
volume of CDO was 80% lower. In contrast, the total issuance volume in fixed income markets was 3%
higherin2015thanin2006. Formoredata,seetheSecuritiesIndustryandFinancialMarketsAssociation:
http://www.sifma.org/research/statistics.aspx.
2