NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INFORMATION AND THE ACQUISITION OF SOCIAL NETWORK CONNECTIONS
Toman Barsbai
Victoria Licuanan
Andreas Steinmayr
Erwin Tiongson
Dean Yang
Working Paper 27346
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27346
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2020
For helpful discussions, we thank Christine Binzel, David McKenzie, David Miller, Sharon
Maccini, John O’Sullivan, Christoph Trebesch, Justin Valasek, Tricia Yang, and Andy
Zapechelnyuk, as well as seminar audiences at U. Illinois (Urbana-Champaign), U. Kiel, U. Paris
1 Panthéon-Sorbonne, U. St Andrews, LMU Munich, U. Hohenheim, Wharton, and UC Davis,
and conference participants in Berlin, Edinburgh, Florence, Heidelberg, and Landeck. We
received funding from the International Initiative for Impact Evaluation (3ie), grant number
OW4/1171. The views expressed in this article are not necessarily those of 3ie or its members.
IRB review was provided by the University of Michigan (HUM00087460). We are deeply
indebted to CFO’s former Officer-in-Charge Regina Galias, Ivy Miravalles, former Secretary
Imelda M. Nicolas, former Undersecretary Gertie A. Tirona, and the whole CFO team for their
continuous support. We also thank the PDOS officers and all contributors to the new PDOS
modules. We are grateful to Isabel Hernando for excellent project coordination and Alexander
Jung, Franziska Paul, and Jennifer Umlas for superb research assistance. Last but not least we
thank 3ie for funding, technical review, and support throughout the study. All remaining errors
are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2020 by Toman Barsbai, Victoria Licuanan, Andreas Steinmayr, Erwin Tiongson, and Dean Yang.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Information and the Acquisition of Social Network Connections
Toman Barsbai, Victoria Licuanan, Andreas Steinmayr, Erwin Tiongson, and Dean Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 27346
June 2020
JEL No. D83,D85,F22
ABSTRACT
How do information interventions affect individual efforts to expand social networks? We study a
randomized controlled trial of a program providing information on settling in the U.S. for new
immigrants from the Philippines. Improved information leads new immigrants to acquire fewer
new social network connections. Treated immigrants make 16-28 percent fewer new friends and
acquaintances and are 65 percent less likely to receive support from organizations of fellow
immigrants. The treatment has no effect on employment, wellbeing, or other outcomes.
Consistent with a simple model, the treatment reduces social network links more in places likely
to have lower costs of acquiring network links (those with more prior fellow immigrants).
Information and social network links appear to be substitutes in this context: better-informed
immigrants invest less in expanding their social networks upon arrival. Our results suggest that
endogenous reductions in acquisition of social network connections can reduce the effectiveness
of information interventions.
Toman Barsbai Erwin Tiongson
School of Economics Walsh School of Foreign Service
Priory Road Complex Georgetown University
Bristol Washington, DC 20057
UK ert@georgetown.edu
toman.barsbai@bristol.ac.uk
Dean Yang
Victoria Licuanan University of Michigan
123 Paseo de Roxas Department of Economics and
Legazpi Village Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
Makati 735 S. State Street, Room 3316
1229 Metro Manila Ann Arbor, MI 48109
Philippines and NBER
vlicuanan.aim@gmail.com deanyang@umich.edu
Andreas Steinmayr
Department of Economics
University of Munich (LMU)
Ludwigstr. 33
D-80539 Munich
Germany
andreas.steinmayr@econ.lmu.de
A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/1389

1 Introduction
Failures of the perfect information assumption – that agents are endowed with
full information relevant for the decisions they make – are a popular focus of
research in economics. Imperfect information takes center-stage in economic
studies of health (Dupas, 2011; Einav and Finkelstein, 2018), labor market
search (Calvo´-Armengol, 2004), and financial literacy (Lusardi and Mitchell,
2014), among other areas. Programs to mitigate information imperfections
are ubiquitous, and are themselves a frequent subject for applied research in
economics.
Individuals and households also make their own efforts to fill information gaps.
A commonly-studied information source is social networks, which can channel
information from more- to less-informed network members and thus provide
information capital (Jackson, 2019). Social networks facilitate flows of in-
formation about new agricultural technologies (Foster and Rosenzweig, 2010;
Carter, Laajaj and Yang, forthcoming), health goods (Dupas, 2014), microfi-
nance products (Banerjee et al., 2013), employment opportunities (including
migration) (Munshi, 2003; Beaman, 2012; Beaman and Magruder, 2012; Dust-
mann et al., 2016; Blumenstock, Chi and Tan, 2019), and business opportuni-
ties (Cai and Szeidl, 2018).
To date, there has been scarce research on how interventions to improve in-
formation might interact with the acquisition of social network connections.
Immigrants who have just arrived in their country of destination are a fruitful
context in which to study this interaction. Immigrants typically have im-
perfect information about their new societies. At the same time, immigrants
usually have small social networks at arrival. They are hence likely to invest in
social networks to reduce information imperfections. Substantial past research
documents the important role of social networks for immigrants.1 Immigrants
frequentlyliveandworkwithcompatriotsinethnicenclaves, motivatedinpart
1 KeycitationsincludeMassey(1988);Borjas(1992);Carrington,DetragiacheandVish-
wanath(1996);Orreniusetal.(1999);Munshi(2003);Calv´o-ArmengolandJackson(2004);
Orrenius and Zavodny (2005); Amuedo-Dorantes and Mundra (2007); Dolfin and Genicot
(2010); Docquier, Peri and Ruyssen (2014); Mahajan and Yang (2020).
2

by eased sharing of information that comes with geographic proximity (Portes
and Jensen, 1989; Beaman, 2012).
We implemented a randomized controlled trial on the impact of reducing im-
perfect information problems among immigrants. In collaboration with the
Philippine government, we designed an information intervention for new immi-
grants to the U.S.: an enhanced “pre-departure orientation seminar” (PDOS)
and an accompanying paper handbook. We randomly assigned these to Fil-
ipinos about to depart for the U.S. as new legal permanent residents (“green
card” holders). A control group received the standard PDOS, which was sub-
stantially less informative in terms of both quantity and quality of information
provided. We surveyed treatment and control group participants after arrival
on their settlement in the U.S.,2 social networks, employment, and overall life
satisfaction. Our empirical analyses are guided by a pre-analysis plan and
account appropriately for multiple hypotheses.
We find that the treatment led to reductions in the number of social network
links in the U.S. As pre-specified, we measure social network size with an
index combining information on the number of new friends and acquaintances,
and support received from Filipino organizations. This effect is substantial
in magnitude, amounting to 0.14 to 0.17 standard deviations of the network
size index, and is stable across the short- and longer-run. The treatment
has negative effects on each component of the index, reducing the number
of friends and acquaintances by 16-28 percent, and reducing support received
from organizations by two-thirds. The treatment has no large or statistically
significant impacts on settlement, employment, or self-reported wellbeing.
Our finding of a negative effect on social network links was unanticipated.
Because the new PDOS explicitly encourages migrants to make new friends
and join Filipino associations in the U.S., in our pre-analysis plan we hy-
pothesized a positive treatment effect on social network connections. After
seeing the actual negative treatment effect, we wrote down a simple theoret-
ical model that can rationalize such an effect. We consider individuals with
2 We measure “settlement” as the fraction of the following items the immigrant has
acquired: bank account, Social Security number, health insurance, and driver’s license.
3