NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INSIDER-OUTSIDER LABOR MARKETS, HYSTERESIS AND MONETARY POLICY
Jordi Galí
Working Paper 27385
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27385
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2020
I am grateful for comments and suggestions to Sanjay Chugh, Juanjo Dolado, Yuriy
Gorodnichenko, Nils Gottfries, Andy Levin, Silvana Tenreyro, Antonella Trigari, and two
anonymous referees, as well as seminar and conference participants at the NBER Summer
Institute, Oxford-NY Fed workshop, Banque de France, EUI-ADEMU, IAE-MacFinRobods
Workshop, ECB-Fed International Research Forum on Monetary Policy, EABCN-University of
Zurich Conference, Colegio Carlo Alberto, Riksbank, Norges Bank, IIES, Einaudi Institute and
National Bank of Ukraine. Christian Hoynck, Cristina Manea, and Alain Schlaepfer provided
excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2020 by Jordi Galí. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Insider-Outsider Labor Markets, Hysteresis and Monetary Policy
Jordi Galí
NBER Working Paper No. 27385
June 2020
JEL No. E24,E31,E32
ABSTRACT
I develop a version of the New Keynesian model with insider-outsider labor markets and
hysteresis that can account for the high persistence of European unemployment. I study the
implications of that environment for the design of monetary policy. The optimal policy calls for
strong emphasis on (un)employment stabilization which a standard interest rate rule fails to
deliver, with the gap between the two increasing in the degree of hysteresis. Two simple
targetiing rules are shown to approximate well the optimal policy. The properties of the model
and effects of different policies are analyzed through the lens of the labor wedge and its
components.
Jordi Galí
Centre de Recerca en Economia Internacional (CREI)
Ramon Trias Fargas 25
08005 Barcelona
SPAIN
and NBER
jgali@crei.cat

Much discussion on the European unemployment problem has tended to
focus on its high level, relative to the U.S. and other advanced economies.
But a look at the path of the European unemployment rate over the past
four decades points to another de…ning characteristic of that variable: its
high persistence. The latter property has been emphasized by many authors,
going back to Blanchard and Summer’s in‡uential hysteresis paper.1
Can the standard New Keynesian model, the workhorse framework of
modern macroeconomics, account for the high persistence of European un-
employment? The analysis below suggests that the answer is a negative one.
In particular, I show that simulations of a (realistically calibrated) version of
that model tend to generate ‡uctuations in the unemployment rate that are
too short-lived relative to the data.
Motivated by the previous observation, I develop a variant of the New
Keynesian model whose equilibrium properties can be more easily reconciled
with the evidence on unemployment persistence. The modi…ed model, in-
spired by the seminal work of Blanchard and Summers (1986), Gottfries and
Horn (1987) and Lindbeck and Snower (1988), has two key distinctive fea-
tures: (i) insider-outsider labor markets, and (ii) hysteresis. The …rst feature
leads unions to give a disproportionate weight to a subset of the labor force–
the insiders–when setting wages.2 The second feature implies that the mea-
sure of insiders evolves endogenously over time as a function of employment.
I show how a calibrated version of the modi…ed model can generate a de-
gree of unemployment persistence comparable to that observed in the data,
in response to a variety of shocks, and under a "realistic" monetary policy
rule that responds to in‡ation and output growth. Under such a rule, large
negative deviations of employment from its e¢ cient level do not bring about
signi…cant de‡ationary pressures, since unions largely ignore the interests of
outsiders (the non-employed) when setting wages. As a result, such devia-
tionsdonotelicitastabilizingresponsefromthecentralbank, thusrendering
them highly persistent, even in the face of transitory shocks.
Having made a case for insider-outsider labor markets and hysteresis as a
potential explanation for the high persistence of European unemployment, I
1Blanchard and Summers (1986). See Ball (2008, 2014) and Blanchard (2018) for an
empirical analysis of hysteresis across a number of OECD countries.
2Wagesettingbyinsidersisonlyoneoftheseveralmechanismsthathavebeenproposed
in the literature as a source of hysteresis in the unemployment rate. Other mechanisms
include the lower employability of long-term unemployed, or the impact of unemployment
on labor market institutions. See Blanchard (2018) for a discussion.
1

turn to the implications of that environment for the design of monetary pol-
icy. Iderivetheoptimalpolicywithcommitment,characterizeitsequilibrium
implications and compare themto those implied by the baseline simple inter-
estraterule. Ishowthatthegapbetweentheeconomy’sresponsetodi¤erent
shocks under the two policies is increasing in the degree of hysteresis. Fur-
thermore, the welfare gains induced by a switch from the simple rule to the
optimal policy are shown to be large, the more so the higher the degree of
hysteresis.
Motivated by the behavior of the insider-outsider economy under the op-
timal policy, I propose two simple targeting rules that get around the com-
plexity of the optimal policy while approximating the latter’s outcomes. The
…rst rule, which I label n-targeting, seeks to fully stabilize employment (or,
equivalently, wage in‡ation). The second, labeled u-targeting, keeps the un-
employment rate constant. Both rules do an excellent job at approximating
the outcomes of the fully optimal policy, including its welfare consequences.
Finally, I study the model’s implications regarding the relation between
hysteresis and labor wedge volatility, and how that relation is a¤ected by the
policy rule in place. The analysis yields a number of interesting insights. In
particular, it shows that the adoption of the optimal policy (or the simple
targeting rules that approximate it) reduce dramatically the volatility of
the labor wedge by stabilizing one of its two components, namely, the wage
markup. That reduction is larger the higher is the degree of hysteresis in the
economy.
Theanalysisand…ndingsbelow, thoughbasedonahighlystylizedmodel,
convey a message that is likely to remain valid in more general settings:
monetary policies that focus excessively on in‡ation stabilization may fail
to keep the economy close to its optimal level of activity in environments
in which in‡ation is not responsive to such gaps, even if the latter are large
and persistent. The economy with insider-outsider labor markets and strong
hysteresis analyzed below provides a clear example of such an environment.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 1 presents evidence of high
unemployment persistence in the euro area. Section 2 develops the New
Keynesian model with insider-outsider labor markets. Section 3 analyzes the
ability of that model to generate unemployment persistence, and contrasts
it with the standard New Keynesian model. Section 4 derives the optimal
monetary policy in the presence of insider-outsider labor markets, and char-
acterizes the implied equilibrium. Section 5 analyzes the properties of two
2