NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANK HETEROGENEITY AND FINANCIAL STABILITY
Itay Goldstein
Alexandr Kopytov
Lin Shen
Haotian Xiang
Working Paper 27376
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27376
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2020
Itay Goldstein has been retained by a law firm as an expert on a case involving a liquidity crisis
and government intervention in a European bank. This case has not influenced the research in this
paper, and the research in this paper has not influenced the case. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Itay Goldstein, Alexandr Kopytov, Lin Shen, and Haotian Xiang. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Bank Heterogeneity and Financial Stability
Itay Goldstein, Alexandr Kopytov, Lin Shen, and Haotian Xiang
NBER Working Paper No. 27376
June 2020
JEL No. G01,G21,G23
ABSTRACT
We study how heterogeneity in banks’ asset holdings affects fragility. In the model, banks face a
risk of bank runs and have to liquidate long-term assets in a common market to repay runners.
Liquidation prices are depressed when many banks sell their assets at the same time. When banks
are homogeneous, their selling behaviors are synchronized, and bank runs are exacerbated. We
show that differentiating banks to some extent enhances the stability of all banks, even those
whose asset performance ends up being weaker. Our analyses provide new insights about the
regulation of banking sector’s architecture and the design of government support during crises.
Itay Goldstein Lin Shen
The Wharton School Boulevard de Constance
University of Pennsylvania INSEAD
3620 Locust Walk 77300, Fontainebleau
Philadelphia, PA 19104 France
and NBER lin.shen@insead.edu
itayg@wharton.upenn.edu
Haotian Xiang
Alexandr Kopytov Peking University
Princeton University xiang@gsm.pku.edu.cn
alexandrkopytov91@gmail.com

1 Introduction
One of the key questions coming out of the financial crisis of 2008 surrounds the way
by which shocks can spread across financial institutions (for short, banks) and bring
down the system as a whole. A key challenge going forward is understanding how the
financial system should be designed to make it more resilient and less prone to fragility.
Of particular concern is the issue of homogeneity. On the one hand, various regulations
push towards greater homogeneity across banks, e.g., by encouraging banks to diversify
their assets and be less exposed to local shocks. On the other hand, there is a growing
recognition that homogeneity might synchronize fragility across institutions making its
overall impact on the system greater (e.g. Haldane, 2009, Haldane and May, 2011, Yellen,
2013).
In this paper, we provide theoretical analysis on this particular issue: how bank asset
heterogeneity affects financial stability. We model a banking sector in which assets of an
individual bank are subject to both aggregate and idiosyncratic shocks. Banks finance
themselves with short-term demandable debt, and so are exposed to the risk of a run a
la Diamond and Dybvig (1983). Banks are indirectly interconnected due to the fact that,
in the face of a run, they liquidate their assets in a common asset market, which leads
them to impose negative fire-sale externalities on one another.
This structure leads to two layers of coordination problems. First, typical to a bank-run
model, there is a within-bank strategic complementarity. Investors withdrawing money
from the bank impose a negative externality on those who stay, because withdrawals lead
to costly liquidations and reduce the amount available to those who do not withdraw.
Hence, investors’ inclination to withdraw increases when they expect that more of the
other investors in their bank will do so. Second, there is a cross-bank strategic comple-
mentarity. Because of the liquidation fire-sale externality among different banks in the
asset market, an individual bank needing to pay its own investors has to bear a higher
liquidationcostwhenmorebanksintheeconomyliquidatetheirlong-termassetstorepay
their investors. This implies that the inclination of investors to withdraw increases also
when they expect that more investors in other banks will do so.
Crucially for our results, it turns out that these two types of strategic complementarities
amplify each other. Investors are more affected by the expected behavior of investors in
other banks when they think that more investors in their own bank are likely to run.
This is intuitive: the fire-sale externality matters only when the bank needs to liquidate
1

significant amounts in the asset market, which is the case only when the bank is under a
run. We think that this framework, where investors are concerned about the behavior of
their own bank’s investors and about the behavior of other banks’ investors, and where
the two concerns feed into each other, is a natural and realistic description of the financial
system. As far as we know, our paper is the first one to capture it in a tractable analytical
framework.
With this framework in place, we turn to analyze our main research question about the
effect of homogeneity on fragility. We consider a system where the fundamentals of all
banks are affected by the same aggregate shock, and in addition by idiosyncratic shocks
with a zero mean across the system. The idiosyncratic shocks separate banks ex post
into two types: strong banks who receive a positive shock and weak banks who receive a
negative shock. An increase in heterogeneity in this framework amounts to an increase
in the ex-post difference between the fundamentals of the weak banks and those of the
strong banks without changing the average fundamentals of the financial system.
In this framework, we show a striking result: an increase in heterogeneity makes all banks
morestableandisthusParetoimproving, aslongascross-bankstrategicuncertaintiesare
in place, that is, as long as investors are uncertain about the run behaviours of investors
in other types of banks. An increase in heterogeneity enlarges the wedge between weak
and strong banks, making the former relatively more fragile than the latter. But, it pulls
all banks to an equilibrium of greater stability in absolute terms due to its effect on the
indirect interactions across banks in the asset market where assets are being sold. In the
face of greater heterogeneity, strong banks’ stability is challenged by the greater pressure
thatweakbanksimposeonliquidationprices,andweakbanks’fragilityisalleviatedbythe
lower pressure that strong banks impose. The key behind the decrease in overall fragility
is that the effect on weak banks dominates the one on strong banks. This is a direct
result of the fact that within-bank complementarities and cross-bank complementarities
feed and amplify each other. In particular, given that weak banks are more internally
fragile, their investors are more strongly affected by the lower fire-sale pressure from
strong banks than strong bank investors are affected by the higher fire-sale pressure
from weak banks. Hence, heterogeneity leads to overall lower fragility. Importantly, in
the absence of the interaction between the within- and cross-bank complementarities,
increasing heterogeneity would produce zero net effect on the overall fragility. With this
interactioninplace, thewaythatlowerfragilityinstrongbankshelpscalmingthefragility
in weak banks becomes the dominant force, making heterogeneity a stabilizing force for
2