NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE SEARCH THEORY OF OTC MARKETS
Pierre-Olivier Weill
Working Paper 27354
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27354
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2020
Prepared for the Annual Review of Economics. This paper benefited from comments and
suggestions by Stephen Morris (the Editor), David Lindsay, Semih Uslu, Mengbo Zhang, and
Diego Zuniga. David Lindsay provided expert research assistance. I would like to thank
Batchimeg Sambalaibat for sharing data about trading volume across markets. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Pierre-Olivier Weill. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The search theory of OTC markets
Pierre-Olivier Weill
NBER Working Paper No. 27354
June 2020
JEL No. G0,G12
ABSTRACT
I review the recent literature that applies search-and-matching theory to the study of Over-the-
Counter (OTC) financial markets. I formulate and solve a simple model in order to illustrate the
typical assumptions and economic forces at play in existing work. I then offer thematic tours of
the literature and, in the process, discuss avenues for future research.
Pierre-Olivier Weill
Department of Economics
University of California, Los Angeles
Bunche Hall 8283
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
poweill@econ.ucla.edu

1 Introduction
Centralized financial markets are typically organized as limit order books: all-to-all trading
platforms with executable quotes. In contrast, over-the-counter (OTC) markets are harder to
categorize. TouseLucas(1989,page272)famousparaphraseofTolstoy,“allcentralizedmarkets
are the same, but each OTC market is unique in its own way.” However, OTC markets do have
common features. In particular, investors trade in small groups and not in all-to-all auctions.
For example, they trade with only one dealer or in a Request For Quote (RFQ) auction with
a few dealers. There is no pre-trade transparency: quotes, if any, are not executable and so
in principle are up for negotiation. Post-trade transparency may also be limited in the sense
that investors may have to negotiate terms of trades under imperfect and often asymmetric
information about overall market conditions.
Examples of assets that trade mostly in OTC markets include fixed-income securities,
various types of derivatives, repos and federal funds loans (SIFMA, 2018; ISDA, 2018). Even
for assets that mostly trade in centralized markets, OTC markets may attract an economically
significant fraction of volume. For example, traditionally, large “blocks” of equity have traded
bilaterally in the upstairs market (see Harris, 2003, chapter 15). Also, in the last decade,
the equity market has become extremely fragmented across multiple trading venues, some
centralized and some OTC (Tuttle, 2014; Hatheway, Kwan, and Zheng, 2017). Figure 1 breaks
down the outstanding supply of publicly traded domestic securities between centralized (black
bar) and OTC markets (grey bar), in 2018.1 It reveals that the value of all domestic assets
traded in OTC markets is very large, over 50,000 billion USD. It exceeds the value of assets
traded in centralized markets, by more than 20,000 billion USD.
Some have argued that OTC markets are doomed to disappear: ever improving trading
technologies will inevitably make markets more centralized. But the historical record suggests
otherwise. BiaisandGreen(2019)showthat, priortothe1940s, corporateandmunicipalbonds
traded mostly in centralized markets, but that the trading volume migrated over time towards
OTC markets. Riggs, Onur, Reiffen, and Zhu (2018) document that, in the market for credit
default swaps, investors can now freely choose between different types of trading mechanisms,
some more centralized than others. They find that the most centralized mechanism, a limit-
order book, attracts very little volume.
1Forequities,IusevolumesharetocalculatethefractionofsupplytradedincentralizedandinOTCmarkets.
ForTreasuries,Iuseestimatesofthevolumeshareofelectronicandvoicetrading,foron-the-runandoff-the-run
securities. See online appendix for underlying assumptions and details.
2

25,000
Centralized
20,000
OTC
15,000
10,000
5,000
0
Eq uity
O n
Exc
T
h
r
a
e
n
a
g
s u
e
ry El
E
ec
q
t
u
ro
it
n
y
ic
O ff-
Excha ng
T
e
reas
ury V
M
o
o
ic
r
e
tgage
Relate d Cor porate
M
u nici p
F
a
e
l
deral
Age ncy
Asset
Backe d
Figure 1: Securitysupplyoutstandingin2018,brokendownbetweenCentralizedandOTC
markets, Billions of 2019 USD.
Why are we interested in the economics of OTC markets? Over the last two decades,
OTC markets have been at the center of several policy and regulatory debates, all of which
underscore the need for rigorous theoretical analyses. For example, in the early 2000s, reporting
systems were put in place in the OTC markets for corporate and municipal bonds, with the
goal of disseminating price information to the market. This led to an important debate on the
economicvalueofpost-tradetransparency(seeBessembinderandMaxwell,2008). SeveralOTC
markets were at the core of the 2008 financial crisis, which ignited vigorous policy debates. For
example, how should policymakers and regulators respond to the collapse of trading volume
in several asset classes traded in OTC markets? Should the government engage in ex-post
intervention such as large-scale purchase of Mortgage Based Securities (MBS)? Should there
be a mandate to implement more centralized and transparent trading mechanisms? Another
debate concerned the appropriate policy response to the build up of systemic risk in the OTC
market for credit derivatives. In particular, should these derivatives be centrally cleared, so as
to concentrate counterparty credit risk in central clearing parties?
OTC markets also matter for broader macroeconomic questions. For example, given that
most fixed-income securities are traded OTC, these markets impact the cost of capital of
firms and sovereigns. For the most part, conventional and unconventional monetary policy is
implemented in OTC markets for Treasuries, Repo, Federal Funds loans, and Mortgage related
3