NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE ROLE OF GOVERNMENT AND PRIVATE INSTITUTIONS IN CREDIT CYCLES
IN THE U.S. MORTGAGE MARKET
Manuel Adelino
William B. McCartney
Antoinette Schoar
Working Paper 27499
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27499
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2020
We thank seminar participants at the Bank of Portugal, Boston College, Boston University, the
Chinese University of Hong Kong, MIT finance lunch, Nazarbayev University, NBER Corporate
Finance Summer Institute and our discussant Claudia Robles-Garcia, New York Fed, NOVA
School of Business and Economics, Philadelphia Fed, SFS Cavalcade and our discussant Gonzalo
Maturana, UCLA finance lunch, and the Wabash River Finance Conference and our discussant
Alexei Tchistyi, as well as Ed Golding, Barney Hartman-Glaser and Christopher Palmer for
helpful comments. We thank Yuting Wang for outstanding research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Manuel Adelino, William B. McCartney, and Antoinette Schoar. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Role of Government and Private Institutions in Credit Cycles in the U.S. Mortgage Market
Manuel Adelino, William B. McCartney, and Antoinette Schoar
NBER Working Paper No. 27499
July 2020
JEL No. E03,G21,G28,G30,R30
ABSTRACT
We show that the distribution of combined loan-to-value ratios (CLTVs) for purchase mortgages
in the U.S. has been remarkably stable over the last 25 years. But there was a dramatic shift
during the housing boom of the 2000s in the provision of high- CLTV loans through private
sources, which replaced almost one-for-one the share of high-CLTV loans directly guaranteed by
the government, via FHA and VA. Post 2008, FHA/VA loans increased back to 30% of all
purchase mortgages. This substitution between government and privately backed high-CLTV
loans holds within ZIP codes, properties and borrower types over the full sample period. We also
show that the increase in private high-CLTV lending follows local house price increases rather
than preceding them. These findings suggest that the housing boom was not accompanied by a
shift towards more high-CLTV loans, and instead favor models that rely on changes in collateral
values or broad changes in house price expectations.
Manuel Adelino Antoinette Schoar
Fuqua School of Business MIT Sloan School of Management
Duke University 100 Main Street, E62-638
100 Fuqua Drive Cambridge, MA 02142
Durham, NC 27708 and NBER
and NBER aschoar@mit.edu
manuel.adelino@duke.edu
William B. McCartney
Purdue University
403 West State Street
West Lafayette, IN 47907
wmccartn@purdue.edu

1 Introduction
Housing markets in the United States and many countries around the world have been
marked by recurring boom and bust cycles. Several of these episodes, most notably the
2008 financial crisis, are associated with a significant expansion in the amount of mortgage
debt that households take on.1 A large and influential literature in macroeconomics on the
credit channel highlights the role of house prices in creating a multiplier feedback loop for
asset values and the broader economy (see Bernanke et al. (1999) and Kiyotaki and Moore
(1997)). If contract enforcement is limited, lenders impose loan-to-value (LTV) limits to
ensure repayment and discourage strategic default. Higher asset prices allow borrowers to
access more credit relative to their income even if LTV ratios stay constant. This increase
in debt-to-income (DTI) levels can lead to a higher likelihood of distress following income
shocks. More recent leverage cycle models propose that LTV constraints themselves are
relaxed in a boom, which allows investors with higher valuations of an asset to bid more
aggressively and drive up prices (see, for example, Geanakoplos (2010)). This relaxation of
LTVs can increase the likelihood of strategic default if house prices are volatile. Therefore,
it is important to analyze the exact nature of the credit relaxation to understand what role
creditplaysineitheramplifyinghousepricebubblesorcausingtheriseinpricesinthefirst
place.2
It is by now well understood that during the housing boom of the early 2000s lenders
were willing to relax DTI constraints across the whole income distribution. Prior research
has shown that the level of mortgage credit to income rose significantly in the U.S. during
thistimeperiodespeciallyforthemiddleclass(see,forexample,Adelinoetal.(2016,2017),
Foote and Willen (2018), and Albanesi et al. (2019)). In this paper, we show that this re-
laxation of DTI constraints did not go hand in hand with a relaxation in LTV constraints
1Recent work has shown that credit expansions often precede financial crises (Greenwood et al., 2020;
KrishnamurthyandMuir,2017;Mianetal.,2017).
2See, for example, Greenwald (2018) for an analysis of the role LTV and DTI constraints play for house
pricecyclesandmonetarypolicytransmission.
2

in the U.S. We document that the distribution of CLTVs for purchase mortgages, which in-
cludes all liens on a property, remained unchanged across home buyers between 1996 and
2015. Loansizesatoriginationincreasedsignificantlywiththehousingcycle(drivenbythe
changes in house values), but the CLTV distribution did not become more skewed towards
very high-CLTV loans. We focus on CLTVs at the time of home purchase to analyze the role
of access to finance in house price formation. It also alleviates the concern of potential bias
in appraisals that would affect measurement of CLTV for refinances.3
The main reason why CLTVs did not increase during the housing boom is that U.S.
householdsalreadyhadaccesstoveryhighCLTVloans(loanswithaCLTVabove95%)prior
to the housing boom via directly government-backed mortgages from the Federal Housing
Administration (FHA) and the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) (see also Glaeser et al.
(2012)andFerreiraandGyourko(2015)). Whatchangedwasthesourceofhigh-CLTVloans
over the boom and bust period. While the share of privately securitized high-CLTV loans
for used home purchases increased substantially during the housing boom (in line with
Pinto (2010) and Keys et al. (2012)), we show that they replaced one for one the share of
equally high CLTV ratio loans backed by FHA and VA. In addition, the shift from gov-
ernment backed to privately supplied high-CLTV loans did not change across ZIP codes,
propertiesoreventypesofborrowersoverourwholesampleperiod. Inotherwords,theZIP
codes and borrower types with a high share of FHA and VA loans in the early 2000s are
thesameoneswherehigh-CLTVprivateloansexpandedrapidlypost-2002andcrowdedout
FHA/VA loans. These are also the ZIP codes and borrower types where FHA share surged
post-2008.
In a second step, we show that the type of collateral backing house purchase transac-
tions was stable over the cycle. The distribution of age and size of houses purchased with
FHA/VA versus private, high-CLTV loans is unchanged over time. In addition, we use a
3Earlierpapershaveshownthathouseholdsborrowedheavilyagainsttheincreaseinhouseprices,increas-
ingcurrentLTVs(MianandSufi(2011),Justinianoetal.(2015)),andconsumedoutoftheincreasedborrowing
(CampbellandCocco(2007),Mianetal.(2013)).
3