NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
U.S. BANKS AND GLOBAL LIQUIDITY
Ricardo Correa
Wenxin Du
Gordon Y. Liao
Working Paper 27491
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27491
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2020
We thank seminar and conference participants at the AEA, Chicago Booth, the Federal Reserve
Board, Imperial (Zoom), PBCSF (Zoom), Princeton (Zoom), and Yale SOM (Zoom) for helpful
comments. We thank Markus Brunnermeier, Tyler Muir, James Clouse, Patrick McCabe and
Mike Hsu for helpful comments. We are grateful to Luke Pettit, Thomas Doherty, Phillip Weed,
and Brian Hefferle for their insights into the FR2052 data and advice on liquidity regulations and
to Vickie Chang and Martin Sicilian for their excellent research assistance. The views in this
paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the
views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, any other person associated with
the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All remaining errors
are our own.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Ricardo Correa, Wenxin Du, and Gordon Y. Liao. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

U.S. Banks and Global Liquidity
Ricardo Correa, Wenxin Du, and Gordon Y. Liao
NBER Working Paper No. 27491
July 2020
JEL No. E4,F3,G2
ABSTRACT
We characterize how U.S. global systemically important banks (GSIBs) supply short-term dollar
liquidity in repo and foreign exchange swap markets in the post-Global Financial Crisis
regulatory environment and serve as the "lenders-of-second-to-last-resort". Using daily
supervisory bank balance sheet information, we find that U.S. GSIBs modestly increase their
dollar liquidity provision in response to dollar funding shortages, particularly at period-ends,
when the U.S. Treasury General Account balance increases, and during the balance sheet taper of
the Federal Reserve. The increase in the dollar liquidity provision is mainly financed by reducing
excess reserve balances at the Federal Reserve. Intra-firm transfers between depository
institutions and broker-dealer subsidiaries within the same bank holding company are crucial to
this type of "reserve-draining" intermediation. Finally, we discuss factors that contributed to the
repo spike in September 2019 and the subsequent response of U.S. GSIBs to recent policy
interventions by the Federal Reserve.
Ricardo Correa Gordon Y. Liao
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Board
Federal Reserve System 20th Street and Constitution Avenue N.W.
Division of International Finance Washington, DC 20551
Washington DC 20551 gliao@post.harvard.edu
ricardo.correa@frb.gov
Wenxin Du
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
Wenxin.Du@chicagobooth.edu
An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27491

1 Introduction
Recent rate spikes in the U.S. repurchase agreement (repo) markets and the failure of
covered interest rate parity (CIP) point to frictions in global dollar intermediation. Fi-
nancial intermediaries with broad access to dollar deposits and wholesale funding markets
can lend dollars to market participants without ready access to dollar funding and earn an
intermediation spread. Among all the financial intermediaries, large U.S. banks stand out
as natural intermediaries for global dollar funding due to their access to the broadest dol-
lar deposit base, high levels of dollar excess reserve balances, extensive global operations,
and active foreign exchange spot and derivative services.
In this paper, through the lens of large U.S. banks, we provide an empirical character-
ization of how dollar funding is intermediated by U.S. banks and investigate the drivers
for these intermediation activities. We find that large U.S. banks moderately increase
their dollar funding liquidity provision in response to an increase in dollar intermediation
spreads, and finance the additional liquidity provision mainly by reducing their excess re-
serve balances at the Federal Reserve (or the Fed). Our results shed light on the dynamic
interplay among money market rates, banks’ balance sheet constraints, and the conduct
of U.S. monetary policy in the post-Global Financial Crisis (GFC) regulatory environ-
ment. In particular, we highlight the trade-offs faced by policymakers between financial
regulations and the effectiveness of monetary policy implementation, and the central role
of bank reserves to help mitigate these trade-offs.
This empirical characterization of U.S. banks’ short-term dollar liquidity provision
could not be performed in the past due to the absence of high-frequency balance sheet
data broken down by currencies and counterparties. As a part of the regulatory effort to
calculatetheBaselIIIliquiditycoverageratio(LCR),theFederalReservestartedtocollect
detailed daily consolidated bank balance sheet information (and for material entities)
by currency for the largest U.S. banks in the FR2052a Complex Institution Liquidity
1

Monitoring Report, starting in December 2015. We use aggregate data from the FR2052a
report for six global systemically important banks (GSIBs) headquartered in the United
States: Bank of America, Citigroup, Goldman Sachs, JP Morgan, Morgan Stanley, and
Wells Fargo to shed light on the global dollar intermediation activities of the largest U.S.
banks.1
We focus on two types of secured short-term dollar liquidity provision: dollar lending
via repurchase agreements (known as repos) or dollar lending via the foreign exchange
(FX) swap market. In a repo agreement, a cash loan is collateralized by securities such
as Treasury securities. The borrower receives cash in exchange for posting securities
as collateral at the inception of the trade with a promise to repurchase the securities
with cash at maturity. Dollar lending via FX swaps can also be viewed as a form of
secured lending collateralized by foreign currency — the borrower receives dollars and
posts foreign currency at the spot exchange rate against a bank counterparty at the
inception of the trade and promises to repurchase the foreign currency with dollars at the
forward exchange rate at maturity. The foreign currency that the bank receives from the
FX swap counterparty is either deposited at the corresponding foreign central bank or
on-lent to borrowers.
With the detailed balance sheet data for U.S. GSIBs by currency and instrument,
we classify the mechanism of short-term dollar liquidity provision into two channels —
matched-book intermediation and reserve-draining intermediation. In matched-book in-
termediation, an increase in the dollar reverse repo position or the FX swap lending
position is financed by a corresponding increase in liabilities such as repo borrowing. As
a result, the size of the bank balance sheet expands by the same amount as the increase
in dollar lending. In reserve-draining intermediation, increases in reverse repo or FX
swap lending positions are financed by reducing "drainable" excess reserve balances at
1TherearecurrentlyeightGSIBsintheUnitedStates. WeexcludetheBankofNewYorkMellonand
State Street from our sample due to their specialization in the custodian business.
2