NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE PERFORMANCE OF HEDGE FUND PERFORMANCE FEES
Itzhak Ben-David
Justin Birru
Andrea Rossi
Working Paper 27454
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27454
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2020
We thank Berk Sensoy, René Stulz, and Cristian Tiu for helpful comments. Ben-David is with
The Ohio State University and the National Bureau of Economic Research, Birru is with The
Ohio State University, and Rossi is with the University of Arizona. Ben-David is a co-founder
and a partner in an investment advisor that manages a small number of friends-and-family
accounts for an incentive fee. Until 2016, the investment advisor was a general partner in a hedge
fund. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Itzhak Ben-David, Justin Birru, and Andrea Rossi. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Performance of Hedge Fund Performance Fees
Itzhak Ben-David, Justin Birru, and Andrea Rossi
NBER Working Paper No. 27454
June 2020
JEL No. G11,G23
ABSTRACT
We study the long-run outcomes associated with hedge funds' compensation structure. Over a 22-
year period, the aggregate effective incentive fee rate is 2.5 times the average contractual rate
(i.e., around 50% instead of 20%). Overall, investors collected 36 cents for every dollar earned on
their invested capital (over a risk-free hurdle rate and before adjusting for any risk). In the cross-
section of funds, there is a substantial disconnect between lifetime performance and incentive
fees earned. These poor outcomes stem from the asymmetry of the performance contract,
investors' return-chasing behavior, and underwater fund closures.
Itzhak Ben-David Andrea Rossi
The Ohio State University University of Arizona
Fisher College of Business Eller College of Management
606A Fisher Hall Department of Finance
Columbus, OH 43210-1144 1130 E. Helen St.
and NBER Tucson, AZ 85721
ben-david.1@osu.edu rossi2@email.arizona.edu
Justin Birru
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
824 Fisher Hall
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
birru.2@osu.edu

1 Introduction
“Performance comes, performance goes. Fees never falter.”
Warren Buffett, referring to hedge fund performance1
One of the tenets of modern economics is that agency conflicts can be mitigated by imple-
menting compensation contracts that align the agent’s interests with those of the principal.
Hedge fund fees are considered a prime example of such a pay-for-performance compensa-
tion structure, as contract features are appealing to both managers and investors. Managers
receive a fraction—often 20%—of the gains earned. And investors are typically protected by
provisions meant to ensure they pay incentive fees only on profits that exceed a predefined
benchmark, which often includes the previous highest portfolio valuation (high-water mark)
and sometimes a hurdle rate.
The consensus among economists is that incentive fees (also known as performance fees)
strongly motivate managers to exert high effort.2 Practitioners also share this view. Ac-
cording to recent surveys of large hedge fund managers (Waterman and Kehoe, 2019) and
of large institutional investors (JP Morgan, 2019), respondents in both groups agree that
incentive fees are a useful tool to align the interests of managers with those of investors.
Further demonstrating investors’ preference for performance-based compensation, in recent
years, there has been pressure from investors to reduce management fees, usually in exchange
for higher incentive fee rates (JP Morgan, 2019; Waterman and Kehoe, 2019).
Academics have studied hedge fund compensation contracts extensively, generally focus-
ing on the tradeoff between the benefit of the increased managerial effort and the drawback
of possible risk-shifting due to the asymmetric nature of the contract.3
But how do incentive fees fare in practice? We deviate from the literature that explores
1Chairman’s Letter, Berkshire Hathaway Inc., Annual Report 2017, p. 12.
2 See, for example, Starks (1987), Elton, Gruber, and Blake (2011), Agarwal, Daniel, and Naik (2009),
Aragon and Qian (2009), Panageas and Westerfield (2009), Lan, Wang, and Yang (2013), Lim, Sensoy, and
Weisbach (2016), and Mitchell, Muthuraman, and Titman (2019). See also Jesse Eisinger, “Could mutual
funds benefit from hedge-fund fee structure?,” The Wall Street Journal, April 19, 2005.
3See Agarwal, Mullally, and Naik (2015) for an extensive review of the literature.
1

the function of performance contracts in mitigating agency costs. Instead of asking whether
the incentive fee contract is optimal ex-ante, we focus on the ex-post implications of the
asymmetry embedded in the contract. Specifically, we measure the long-term outcomes
realized over full market cycles. To do so, we analyze the returns and fees earned by nearly
6,000 hedge funds over two decades (1995 to 2016).
Our results indicate that the asymmetry of the incentive fee contract has quantitatively
largeyetunderappreciatedimplicationsfortheaggregateandcross-sectionalrelationbetween
hedgefundperformanceandfees. Duringthe22-yearsampleperiod,investorspaidabouthalf
of their aggregate gross profits as incentive fees—whereas the average contractual incentive
fee is below 20%. Moreover, there is a considerable disconnect between returns generated
and incentive fees earned across all but the worst-performing 5% of funds. After including
management fees, investors collected about 36 cents for each dollar of gross excess return
generated by funds on their invested capital. The other 64 cents were paid as management
and incentive fees. Adding insult to injury, these results are obtained before adjusting fund
returns for risk.
This study has three parts. The first part examines aggregate realized fees. The second
part examines the mechanisms contributing to the difference between aggregate realized fees
and nominal fees. The final part examines the allocation of fees in the cross-section of funds.
In the first part, we present aggregate estimates of the fees paid by investors over the
years.4 The results are striking. Hedge funds in our sample charge a nominal incentive
fee rate of 19.0% of gross profits, on average. In practice, however, investors paid 49.6%
of the cumulative gross profits as incentive fees during our sample period. That is, the
effective incentive fee rate is 2.62 times higher than the corresponding nominal rate. Adding
management fees to the equation, managers collected the lion’s share of returns over the
years. Total fees paid amount to 63.6% of the cumulative gross returns when including
4Similar to other studies, we infer gross returns and fees from reported net returns. Our results are
therefore based on estimates. In the last section of the paper, we present extensive sensitivity analyses with
respect to the assumptions used to obtain these estimates.
2