NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO BANK INSIDERS IMPEDE EQUITY ISSUANCES?
Martin Goetz
Luc Laeven
Ross Levine
Working Paper 27442
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27442
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2020
We thank Dean Corbae, Terry Hendershott, Chen Lin, Sascha Steffen, and seminar participants at
the Chicago Federal Reserve Bank, University of Münster, Vienna University, the Dutch Central
Bank, for helpful comments, and Matteo Bagnara, Yangming Bao, Claudio Hantzsche, Florian
Maisch, Fabian Nemeczek, Yuma Iwase and Mohammad Izadi for excellent research assistance.
Goetz gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Center of Excellence SAFE, funded by
the State of Hessen initiative for research LOEWE. The views expressed are our own and do not
reflect those of the ECB, the Eurosystem, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Martin Goetz, Luc Laeven, and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Bank Insiders Impede Equity Issuances?
Martin Goetz, Luc Laeven, and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 27442
June 2020
JEL No. G21,G28,G32
ABSTRACT
We evaluate the role of insider ownership in shaping banks’ equity issuances in response to the
global financial crisis. We construct a unique dataset on the ownership structure of U.S. banks
and their equity issuances and discover that greater insider ownership leads to less equity
issuances. Several tests are consistent with the view that bank insiders are reluctant to reduce
their private benefits of control by diluting their ownership through equity issuances. Given the
connection between bank equity and lending, the results stress that ownership structure can shape
the resilience of banks—and hence the entire economy—to aggregate shocks.
Martin Goetz Ross Levine
SAFE and Goethe University Haas School of Business
Frankfurt University of California at Berkeley
GERMANY 545 Student Services Building, #1900 (F685)
goetz@econ.uni-frankfurt.de Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
Luc Laeven Ross_levine@haas.berkeley.edu
European Central Bank
Research Department
Sonnemannstrasse 20
Frankfurt am Main
GERMANY
and CEPR
Luc.Laeven@ecb.europa.eu

1. Introduction
There are strong linkages between bank equity and economic stability. As reviewed by
Thakor (2014), banks with more equity tend to lend more, create more liquidity, and have
higher probabilities of surviving crises. Baron, Verner, and Xiong (2019) show that adverse
shocks to bank equity predict contractions in lending and output, while Berger and Bouwman
(2013) and Jorda et al. (2017) discover that lower bank equity ratios are associated with slower
recoveries following crises.1 Extensive research also stresses that bank equity can foster
stability by mitigating excessive risk-taking by banks and absorbing adverse shocks to bank
assets (e.g., Boot and Greenbaum 1993). These connections between bank equity and the
resilience of the economy to aggregate shocks highlight the value of understanding the factors
that shape the differing degrees to which banks issue new stock to replenish bank equity in
response to crises. The comparative incentives and influence of differing owners are one
potential factor influencing stock sales.
Research offers conflicting perspectives on the impact of ownership structure on stock
issuances following adverse shocks to bank equity. In the presence of large private benefits of
control, a bank’s controlling owners may resist new stock issuances to protect those rents
(Barclay and Holderness 1989; Doidge et al. 2009). From this “dilution reluctance”
perspective, greater insider ownership will reduce stock sales, potentially making the economy
less resilient to aggregate shocks. In contrast, other research suggests that banks with greater
insider ownership can more effectively coordinate the actions of stakeholders with differing
interests during crises, (e.g., Chakraborty and Gantchev 2013), allowing such banks to sell
more stock than banks with less insider ownership. The overall impact of insider ownership on
stock sales in times of crisis, therefore, is an open empirical question.
In this paper, we evaluate the role of insider ownership in shaping U.S. banks’ sale of
stock in response to the 2008 global financial crisis, which adversely bank valuations and put
1 Theory explains how reductions in bank equity can reduce lending by increasing the risk premium paid by banks,
reducing banks’ ability to collateralize their assets, and hindering banks’ ability to commitment to effective
monitoring (e.g., Holmstrom and Tirole 1997; Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist 1999; Gertler and Kiyotaki 2010;
He and Krishnamurthy 2013; Brunnermeier and Sannikov 2014; and Rampini and Viswanathan 2018).
1

pressure on banks to raise new capital. We compile a unique database on the ownership
structure and equity issuances of private and public banks. We hand-collect annual data on the
ownership of 566 U.S. bank holding companies (BHCs). We define insiders as bank directors
and executives, as reported in banks’ regulatory FR Y-6 filings. Furthermore, we compile data
on stock sales by each bank. Using these data, we explore how insider ownership shapes banks’
stock issuances following the onset of the financial crisis.
There are two distinct periods of bank equity issuances following the collapse of Bear
Stearns, the failure of Lehman Brothers, and the placement of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac
into government conservatorship. First, the U.S. Treasury started the Capital Purchase Program
(CPP) in Q4/2008 that encouraged financial institutions to sell preferred stock to the Treasury.
The program triggered a temporary surge in preferred stock sales in Q4/2008 and Q1/2009.
Second, following Q1/2009, the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) (“stress
test”) results encouraged banks to issue common equity and/or make other adjustments to
satisfy capital regulatory requirements (e.g., Bayazitova and Shivdasani 2012). Banks’ sales of
common stock increased markedly after Q1/2009. Given our focus on the potential dilution of
control through stock sales, we are most concerned with common stock—and not CPP-induced
preferred stock sales to the Treasury. Thus, we focus on the post-Q1/2009 period while
controlling for bank issuances of preferred and common stock before Q2/2009, but note that
our results are robust to including earlier quarters.
We employ three empirical tests to assess the relationship between insider ownership
and equity issuances. First, we conduct cross-sectional analyses of common stock sales and
insider ownership during the period from Q2/2009 through Q1/2011. We measure “insider
ownership” as the proportion of the BHC’s stock owned by insiders and calculate “common
stock sales” as the total amount of funds raised through common stock sales as a proportion of
bank equity in Q2/2008. We use ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions while controlling for
an array of BHC-specific and geographic fixed effects. Second, to address concerns about the
potential endogeneity of bank ownership, we employ a “shift-share” instrumental variable (IV)
in the spirit of Bartik (1991) and Goldsmith-Pinkham, Sorkin and Swift (2018). Third, we
extend these IV analyses and assess whether the relationship between stock sales and insider
2