NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE HIDDEN COSTS OF STRATEGIC OPACITY
Ana Babus
Maryam Farboodi
Working Paper 27471
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27471
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2020
Maryam Farboodi has received financial support from Princeton and MIT Sloan during this
research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2020 by Ana Babus and Maryam Farboodi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Hidden Costs of Strategic Opacity
Ana Babus and Maryam Farboodi
NBER Working Paper No. 27471
July 2020
JEL No. D43,D82,G14,G21
ABSTRACT
We explore a model in which banks strategically hold interconnected and opaque portfolios,
despite increasing the likelihood they are subject to financial crises. In our framework, banks
choose their degree of exposure to other banks to influence how investors can use their
information. In equilibrium banks choose portfolios which are neither fully opaque, nor fully
transparent. However, their portfolios are excessively interconnected to obfuscate investor
information. Banks can create a degree of opacity that decreases welfare, and makes bank crises
more likely. Our model is suggestive about the implications of asset securitization, as well as
government bailouts.
Ana Babus
Washington University in St. Louis
One Brookings Dr.
ST. LOUIS, Miss 63130
anababus@gmail.com
Maryam Farboodi
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-627
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
m.farboodi@gmail.com

1 Introduction
Bank interconnectedness has increased dramatically in the past few decades both in the
US and worldwide. A substantial fraction of connections are represented by overlapping
portfolio exposures across financial institutions. For instance, at its peak asset securi-
tization alone contributed $1.5 trillion to the increase in the interdependence of banks’
portfolios. Such connections render the financial system inherently opaque. The lack of
transparency plays a significant role in shaping market participants’ beliefs, which have
been a key ingredient in the unfolding of the global financial crisis. But how costly is it
forbankstoraisefundswheninvestorsarenotableevaluatethewebofinterconnections
between them?
In this paper we explore a model in which banks purposefully create opacity for
their investors, by choosing interconnected portfolios. Even as they compete to attract
investors, banks are able to raise funds at a negative premium for holding opaque
portfolios. Moreover, banks decide on portfolio allocations which expose investors to
uncertainty about banks’ counterparty risk, and lead to an increase in the probability
of banking crises. In other words, banks sow the seeds for crises in order to boost profits
while they operate.
We consider a simple three-period model with two banks and two investors. Each
bank has access to a risky investment project. A bank can decide to swap a fraction
of its project with the other bank. If banks exchange a positive share of their projects,
their portfolios are interdependent. Otherwise, their portfolios are independent.
To finance the projects, banks need to raise funds from investors. We consider an
economywherebankscompetetoattractfundsfrominvestorsbypromisingthemalong-
term debt contract that maximizes investors’ expected payoff. Although banks offer
competitive debt contracts, banks exercise market power when deciding their portfolio
allocation. Thus, there exists a wedge between how banks manage their asset exposures
andhowtheirliabilitiesaresetwhichallowsbankstomakepositiveprofitsinourmodel.
Eachinvestorhastheoptiontoliquidatethecontractprematurelyagainstanoutside
redemption value. The outside redemption value represents the investors’ reservation
2

value, and can be interpreted as a reduced form of secondary market liquidity in the
tradition of Allen and Gale (1994), and more recently of Dewatripont and Tirole (2018).
If the investor liquidates early, the bank receives zero. If the investor continues the
contract, the bank repays him the face value of debt if the return of the portfolio is
sufficiently high. Otherwise the bank defaults. The bank is the residual claimant on
the return of the portfolio.
In this environment we consider two frictions. First, we assume that investors can
use their funds to finance only one bank. The interpretation is that each bank needs
to be monitored, as in Diamond (1984), and monitoring two banks is prohibitively
expensive. This does not preclude the banks to offer competitive debt contracts, just as
inastandardBertrand-NashsettingstudiedbyMatutesandVives(1996)andestimated
empirically by Egan, Hortacsu and Matvos (2018).
Second,weconsideraninformationfrictionbetweenbanksandinvestors. Weassume
that each investor receives information that perfectly reveals the return of his bank’s
project, and it is completely uninformative about the other bank’s project. Thus, if
banksswapafractionoftheirprojects, thesignaltheinvestorsreceiveislessinformative
about the success of their bank’s overall portfolio. This can be, for instance, because
banks specialize in lending to different industries and investors learn about their bank’s
industry, in the spirit of rational inattention. While empirical work on how much
information investors decide to process is limited, evidence from international financial
marketssuggeststhatagentsdoindeedallocatemoreattentiontocountrieswhoseassets
make up a greater share of their portfolios (Mondria, Wu, and Zhang, 2010). Based
on the information they receive, investors can decide to liquidate their debt contract
before it matures, leading to a financial crisis. The degree of opacity of the financial
system is then given by the degree of interconnectedness of banks’ portfolios.
Our main focus is on whether banks choose opaque portfolios, whether opacity is
an efficient outcome, and what it implies about the frequency of financial crises.
We obtain three sets of results. The first set of results characterizes the portfo-
lio allocation that banks hold in equilibrium and the implications for welfare. Our
3