NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CREDIT BOOMS, FINANCIAL CRISES AND MACROPRUDENTIAL POLICY
Mark Gertler
Nobuhiro Kiyotaki
Andrea Prestipino
Working Paper 27481
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27481
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2020
We would like to thank the participants of various seminars and conferences, particularly Juliane
Begenau, Jonathan Heathcote, Urban Jermann, Vincenzo Quadrini and Alejandro Van der Ghote
for thoughtful comments. The Financial Support of the National Science Foundation is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Mark Gertler, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, and Andrea Prestipino. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Credit Booms, Financial Crises and Macroprudential Policy
Mark Gertler, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, and Andrea Prestipino
NBER Working Paper No. 27481
July 2020
JEL No. E00
ABSTRACT
We develop a model of banking crises which Is consistent with two important features of the
data: First, banking crises are usually preceded by credit booms. Second, credit booms often do
not result in a crisis. That is, there are "good" booms as well as "bad" booms in the language of
Gorton and Ordonez (2019). We then consider how the optimal macroprudential policy weighs
the benefits of preventing a crisis against the costs of stopping a good boom. We show that
countercyclical capital buffers are a critical feature of a successful macropudential policy.
Mark Gertler Andrea Prestipino
Department of Economics Federal Reserve System
New York University Washington DC, 20551
269 Mercer Street, 7th Floor andrea.prestipino@frb.gov
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
mark.gertler@nyu.edu
Nobuhiro Kiyotaki
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
kiyotaki@princeton.edu

1 Introduction
We develop a model of banking panics which is consistent with two important features of the
data: First, banking crises are usually preceded by credit booms. Second, credit booms often
do not result in crises. That is, there are ”bad booms” as well as ”good booms” in the language
of Gorton and Ordonez (2019). We then use the model to study macroprudential policy.
We first describe the main facts we think a model of financial crises should capture. Figure
1 portrays the link between credit growth and financial crises, using data from Krishnamurthy
and Muir (2017). The evidence is based on a panel of annual data of industrialized countries,
ranging from 1869 to 2018. The authors use the narrative based classification in Jorda` et al.
(2011) to determine periods in which a country experienced a financial crisis. The figure then
plots the average behavior of output, credit growth and credit spreads, around the time a crisis
occurs. In each of the three panels, the crisis occurs at year zero. The upper-right panel shows
that credit growth on average steadily increases prior to the crisis before declining afterward, as
a number of authors have recently noted, e.g. Schularick and Taylor (2012). The bottom panel
shows that prior to a crisis, GDP growth on average increases relative to trend by roughly two
percent, but when the crisis hits it experiences a sharp and persistent decline of nearly eight
percent. Finally, as support for the notion that the output contractions reflect financial crises,
credit spreads increase on average prior to and during the crisis, before eventually going back
to a normal level, as shown in the upper-left panel.
Figure 2, however, makes clear that high credit growth does not always lead to a crisis, nor
is it necessary for a crisis to arise. The data in the figure plots annual demeaned credit growth
in a country lagged two years (the horizontal axis) versus one year (the vertical axis).1 The red
dots are episodes where a country experienced a financial crisis while the blue are instances
where a crisis did not occur. If we think of a credit boom as a period in which credit growth is
aboveaveragefortwoconsecutiveyears, thentheupperrightquadrantreflectsperiodspreceded
by credit booms. Accordingly, crisis episodes happening after credit booms are all the red dots
in the upper right hand quadrant in the figure, while the blue dots in the upper right quadrant
are episodes in which a credit boom did not result in a crisis. As the figure shows, more often
than not, a credit boom does not result in a financial crisis. Conditional on a credit boom, the
probability of a crisis is just 4.9 percent. It is true, however, that a credit boom makes a crisis
more likely: conditional on no credit boom, the probability of a crisis drops to 2.8 percent.
Our goal in this paper is to first develop a macroeconomic framework with banking panics
that is consistent with the evidence in Figures 1 and 2, and then to use the model to study
regulatory policy. The framework we develop is based on Gertler et al. (2020b), henceforth
1Credit growth data is from Jord`a et al. (2011). To demean the data we compute for each country seperate
means of credit growth for the pre-war period and post-war periods.
2

GKP (2020), which is a standard New Keynesian macro model modified to include banks and
bankingpanicsthatdisruptrealactivity. Withinthatframework, wecapturebothcreditbooms
preceding crises and the banking collapse and disruption of real activity that follows. In the
spirit of Geanakoplos (2010) and Bordalo et al. (2018), the source of the boom is optimistic
beliefs by financial intermediaries (or banks in short) about future returns to capital that are
eventually disappointed.2 This leads to a buildup of bank credit that is funded by an increase
in bank leverage, mostly in the form of short term debt. High levels of debt, in turn, make
the system vulnerable to a run by increasing the exposure of banks to negative returns on
their assets, so that even small negative shocks can trigger system wide runs that result in deep
contractions in economic activity. In this latter regard, the model captures the highly nonlinear
dimension of financial crises. We use global methods to solve the model numerically in order
to characterize these nonlinearities.
There are several di↵erences from our earlier work. First, while in our earlier paper we used
a canonical New Keynesian framework with capital accumulation and focused our study on the
Great Recession, here we consider a simple endowment economy but allow for recurrent credit
booms that may or may not result in banking crises. This allows us to capture the statistical
relationship between credit booms and financial crises described above. The presence of good
and bad credit booms sets the stage for our study of macroprudential regulation. By restricting
financial intermediation, macroprudential policies can prevent the large credit booms that are
the root cause of financial crises. However, since the regulator can’t tell apart bad credit
booms from good ones, attempts at preventing crises will often end up stifling good booms.
By matching the relative frequency of good and bad credit booms in the data, our framework
allows us to study quantitatively how the optimal policy weighs the benefits of preventing crises
against the costs of stopping good booms. We also analyze the features of optimal regulation
and show, for example, that countercyclical capital bu↵ers are a critical feature of a successfully
designed macroprudential policy.
One final important modelling di↵erence from our earlier work is that we allow for equity
injections into the banking sector. In our earlier work we assumed that bank capital was
only accumulated via retained earnings. What this implies is that to meet equity capital
requirements, the only margin of adjustment is for banks to reduce assets. Allowing for new
equity injections introduces a second margin of adjustment. We assume however that at the
margin, equity injections are costly. If they were costless, equity finance would become the sole
source of funding for banks, eliminating the possibility of runs or any other type of banking
2Thoughweuseadi↵erentbeliefmechanismfromBordaloetal.(2018),wefollowtheseauthorsinourearlier
work (Gertler et al. (2020b)) by showing that investor forecast errors from our mechanism during the recent
boom and bust are consistent with the evidence. See also Boz and Mendoza (2014) and Boissay et al. (2016)
for other models that try to capture the boom-bust cycle in credit associated with financial crises.
3