NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BARBARIANS AT THE STORE? PRIVATE EQUITY, PRODUCTS, AND CONSUMERS
Cesare Fracassi
Alessandro Previtero
Albert W. Sheen
Working Paper 27435
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27435
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2020
The authors thank comments from and discussions with Shai Bernstein, Jonathan Cohn, Xavier
Giroud, John Grin, Laura Lindsey, Juhani Linnainmaa, Antoinette Schoar, Sheri Tice, and
Rebecca Zarutskie. The authors also thank comments from seminar participants at Indiana
University, the University of Calgary, University of Oregon, University of Texas at Austin,
University of Utah, Columbia University, Texas Christian University, Cornell University, and
Rutgers University, and participants at the following conferences: 2017 University of Kentucky
Finance Conference, 2017 SFS Finance Cavalcade, 2017 Western Finance Association, 2017
Tuck Private Equity and Entrepreneurship Research Conference, and 2018 UCLA finance
conference. We thank Wei Wang for superb research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2020 by Cesare Fracassi, Alessandro Previtero, and Albert W. Sheen. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Barbarians at the Store? Private Equity, Products, and Consumers
Cesare Fracassi, Alessandro Previtero, and Albert W. Sheen
NBER Working Paper No. 27435
June 2020
JEL No. G24,L11
ABSTRACT
We investigate the effects of private equity on product markets using price and sales data for an
extensive number of consumer products. Following a buyout, target firms increase sales 50%
more than matched control firms. Price increases—roughly 1% on existing products—do not
drive this growth. The launch of new products and geographic expansion do. Competitors lose
shelf space and marginally raise prices. Results for public vs. private targets, during and after the
financial crisis, and in industries that vary in structure suggest private equity tailors strategies to
the environment, eases financial constraints, and provides expertise to manage growth.
Cesare Fracassi Albert W. Sheen
University of Texas at Austin Lundquist College of Business
McCombs School of Business 1208 University of Oregon
Department of Finance Eugene, OR 97403
1 University Station - B6600 asheen@uoregon.edu
Austin, TX 78712
cesare.fracassi@mccombs.utexas.edu
Alessandro Previtero
Kelley School of Business
Indiana University
1309 E. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47405
and NBER
aleprevi@indiana.edu
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27435

I. Introduction
Private equity firms have raised more than $3 trillion in capital over the last five years,
exercising a growing influence on the day-to-day purchases of millions of consumers.1 Private
equity (PE) firms have a simple goal: acquire businesses, and exit with gains. How they
achieve gains, however, is an open question. Do PE firms simply transfer wealth from
stakeholders,2 or do they create value by improving firm operations? Studies show that
PE firms improve total factor productivity (Davis et al., 2014a) and managerial practices
(Bloom et al., 2015, Bernstein and Sheen, 2016), focus patenting activity (Lerner et al.,
2011), increase employee safety (Cohn et al., 2016), and reduce agency problems (Edgerton,
2012).
Firms, however, exist to sell goods and services. Despite this, the e↵ects of private equity
on target firm products has received little academic attention. Thus in this paper, we use
micro-level retail scanner data to study private equity’s strategies in the consumer product
market. We answer the following basic questions: When PE acquires a manufacturer of
consumer goods, what happens to product prices and sales? Does the product mix change?
And does product availability expand or contract? Answering these questions helps reveal
whether and how PE firms attempt to create wealth. It also provides insight into how
private equity impacts consumers, a topic under constant scrutiny by policy makers and the
media. We find that, in the years following the buyout, target firms increase sales by 50% on
average compared to matched control firms. Price increases do not drive this sales growth.
1Bain and Company (2018) reports that private equity firms have raised $701 billion globally in 2017,
reaching a total level of over $3 trillion in the 2012-2017 period. A series of articles published by the New
York Times, titled ”This is Your Life, Brought to You by Private Equity”12/24/16, highlights the extensive
influence of private equity on consumers.
2For example, by exploiting tax rules, extracting dividends, charging monopoly prices, or repackaging
assets.
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387

The launch of new products and geographic expansion do.
We compile monthly store-level prices and unit sales for nearly two million unique con-
sumer products sold in nearly 43,000 locations in the United States between 2006 and 2016.
This sample covers over 50% of grocery and drug store sales and over 30% of mass mer-
chandiser sales in the United States. The data is remarkably detailed. For example, we can
see that in the first week of August 2008, twenty-four cans of Del Monte French style green
beans were sold in a particular store in Chicago at an average price of $1.15 per can. We link
each product to its parent company. Private equity firms acquired 236 of these companies
over our sample period. Most of these firms (222) were privately owned at the time of the
acquisition. These companies are the manufacturers of goods sold within retailers; we do not
study buyouts of retail chains themselves as, for example, in Chevalier (1995a) and Chevalier
(1995b).
We test for changes in product prices and sales, innovation, and availability after a PE
buyout. Specifically, we first match each private equity target with a similar counterfactual
at the time of the private equity event. We go beyond the firm-level match commonly used
in the literature; the granularity of our data allows us to compare product lines and even
products within the same store. Each of these di↵erent treatment-control pairs represents
a cohort. We stack cohort-level observations and run a generalized di↵erence-in-di↵erences
estimation.
Webeginbydocumentingthatinthefiveyearspost-buyoutprivateequitytargetsincrease
revenues by 50% on average compared to matched control firms. Price increases do not drive
this growth. The average price of the products in a firm’s product line increases by about 5%
relative to competitors. Further, this increase is primarily a composition e↵ect from either
the introduction of new products or expansion into richer areas, as the price of an existing
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387