NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHAT JOBS ARE BEING DONE AT HOME DURING THE COVID-19 CRISIS?
EVIDENCE FROM FIRM-LEVEL SURVEYS
Alexander W. Bartik
Zoe B. Cullen
Edward L. Glaeser
Michael Luca
Christopher T. Stanton
Working Paper 27422
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27422
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2020
We thank Karen Mills for connecting us to Alignable and the Alignable founders for providing
data. Mateo Arbelaez provided excellent research assistance. Research funding was provided by
Harvard Business School. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27422.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2020 by Alexander W. Bartik, Zoe B. Cullen, Edward L. Glaeser, Michael Luca, and Christopher
T. Stanton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

What Jobs are Being Done at Home During the Covid-19 Crisis? Evidence from Firm-Level
Surveys
Alexander W. Bartik, Zoe B. Cullen, Edward L. Glaeser, Michael Luca, and Christopher T.
Stanton
NBER Working Paper No. 27422
June 2020
JEL No. J01,J24,M5,O3
ABSTRACT
The threat of COVID-19 has increased the health risks of going to an office or factory, leading
more workers to do their jobs remotely. In this paper, we provide results from firm surveys on
both small and large businesses on the prevalence and productivity of remote work, and
expectations about the persistence of remote work once the COVID-19 crisis ends. We present
four main findings. First, while overall levels of remote work are high, there is considerable
variation across industries. The Dingel and Neiman (2020) measure of suitability for remote work
does a remarkably good job of predicting the industry level patterns of remote work - highlighting
the challenge of moving many industries to remote work. Second, remote work is much more
common in industries with better educated and better paid workers. Third, in our larger survey,
employers think that there has been less productivity loss from remote working in better educated
and higher paid industries. Fourth, more than one-third of firms that had employees switch to
remote work believe that remote work will remain more common at their company even after the
COVID-19 crisis ends.
Alexander W. Bartik Michael Luca
University of Illinois Harvard Business School
1407 W. Gregory Road Soldiers Field
214 David Kinley Hall Boston, MA 02163
Urbana, IL 61821 and NBER
abartik@illinois.edu mluca@hbs.edu
Zoe B. Cullen Christopher T. Stanton
Rock Center 210 210 Rock Center
Harvard Business School Harvard University
60 N. Harvard Harvard Business School
Boston, MA 02163 Boston, MA 02163
zcullen@hbs.edu and NBER
christopher.t.stanton@gmail.com
Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu

I. Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic left companies in some industries, such as meatpacking, with a choice
between stopping production altogether or taking on the health risk of continuing business as usual.
In other industries, like accounting, there was a third option: having more employees work from home.
In this paper, we use two firm level surveys to shed light on remote work during the pandemic. We
explore the extent of remote work - both overall and across industries, as well as the implications for
productivity and inequality, and the extent to which remote work is likely to persist after the end of
the pandemic.
To explore, we use two survey populations. Our first, larger survey population queries 1,770 leaders
of small businesses who are part of the Alignable network.2 Eight weeks after the first survey,
Alignable conducted a follow up survey to further probe remote work. We supplement this data with
a survey of 70 business economists who are members of the National Association of Business
Economists (NABE). The first Alignable survey and the NABE survey were conducted during March
and April of 2020 (respectively), while much of the country was under stay-at-home restrictions. The
Alignable survey’s much larger size makes it our preferred source, but the NABE survey provides
better coverage of larger employers. The surveys also asked slightly different questions, reflecting
different respondent bases -- as Alignable respondents were generally owners or managers of small
businesses, whereas NABE respondents generally work at larger firms and are not owners.
Overall, we observe high levels of remote work, which we define as working from home at least two
days per week. In the Alignable network, 45 percent of firms report having any workers switch to
working remotely during the COVID-19 pandemic. In the NABE survey, 50 percent of firms have
more than one-fifth of their employees working remotely. The NABE firms seem to have more
remote working, likely due to the fact that more of these firms are in white collar industries where
remote working is easier.
To explore the cross-industry variation in remote work, we build on recent work by Dingel and
Neiman (2020), in which they construct an industry level classification of remote work feasibility (i.e.
an assessment of which jobs could plausibly be done at home)3. This classification has now been
influential both in research and in practice, and has been applied to multiple settings as a way to
understand the potential for remote work across industries and in different countries (Saltiel 2020,
Stratton 2020). Whereas they focus on the potential to work from home, we can observe the extent
to which feasibility constraints bind in practice, and whether they predict the observed variation in
remote work. Applying this classification to OES data from the BLS, they find that roughly 37% of
jobs could potentially be done entirely from home across the full composition of US firms. Applying
their measure to the small businesses responding to our Alignable survey, we find that roughly 27 to
31 percent of employees in the Alignable sample could feasibly work remotely. The gap reflects the
2 Previous work has assessed the representativeness of this survey sample, and found it to provide broad coverage across
industries and geographies, and to roughly match the distribution of Census firms on firm size and location (Bartik et al.,
2020, Balla-Elliott et al., 2020).
3 They do this using pre-COVID-19 O*NET data, and cross validate with a hand coding of occupations.
2

composition of our sample, which focuses on small businesses. Approximately 60 percent of
employees at firms responding to the NABE survey (due to their larger size and industry composition)
are able to telecommute.
We also find that the Dingel and Neiman classification of work from home capacity is a strong
predictor of industry level variation in remote work during the pandemic. Figure 1 shows a 33 percent
correlation across industries between the potential for remote work identified by Dingel and Neiman
(2020) and the actual prevalence of remote work in the Alignable survey. Figure 2 shows a 29 percent
correlation between the Dingel and Neiman (2020) measure and the prevalence of remote work across
industries in the NABE survey. We have a very limited number of industries in the NABE sample,
but even so both correlations are statistically significant.
The uneven ability to work from home raises concerns about inequality as well. Merging our survey
with pre-crisis industry-level characteristics from the American Community Survey, we find remote
work during the crisis is more common in highly educated industries. In the most educated quartile
of industries, 64 percent of firms had some workers switch to remote work. In the least educated
quartile of industries, only 36 percent of firms had any workers switch to remote work. In the NABE
survey, there is also a statistically significant relationship between education and the share of workers
engaged in remote work. This suggests that less educated workers may tend to face a starker choice
between health risks and their jobs, whereas more educated workers are more likely to have - and take
- the option to work from home.
Does the shift to remote work increase or decrease productivity? From both the NABE survey and a
small set of respondents from the Alignable survey, we have some information about the productivity
of remote workers. In the NABE survey, respondents chose broad categories for remote worker
productivity, such as above, below or equal to non-remote productivity. In the Alignable survey, we
asked them to quantify productivity relative to pre-COVID non-remote levels. In both cases, we
believe that these answers are often impressionistic, and may miss longer term productivity
consequences of shifting to remote work.
The NABE respondents were generally positive about remote working productivity. A majority
believed that remote working did not involve any productivity loss and 28 percent thought that
workers had become more productive through remote working. The Alignable respondents were less
optimistic, reporting an average productivity change of -0.198 (on a -1 to 1 scale, with 0 representing
no change). However, this average masks significant heterogeneity, as 29 percent of Alignable
respondents thought that workers had become more productive by staying home.
In the Alignable survey, productivity assessments for remote workers are positively correlated with
the Dingel and Neiman (2020) measure of suitability of remote work, which provides further support
for the validity of their measure. Remote work productivity is also correlated with both education and
the share of employees who worked from home pre-COVID. Given the small sample in the NABE
survey, there are few significant correlations of remote work productivity in the NABE survey.
3