NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW MUCH DOES COVID-19 INCREASE WITH MOBILITY? EVIDENCE FROM
NEW YORK AND FOUR OTHER U.S. CITIES
Edward L. Glaeser
Caitlin Gorback
Stephen J. Redding
Working Paper 27519
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27519
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2020, Revised October 2020
We thank Sam Patterson and Andrei Freund for excellent research assistance. Any errors,
opinions and omissions are our own. The U.S. Department of Transportation supported this
project through an inter-agency agreement with the National Science Foundation (grant
1559013). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Edward L. Glaeser, Caitlin Gorback, and Stephen J. Redding. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How Much does COVID-19 Increase with Mobility? Evidence from New York and Four Other
U.S. Cities
Edward L. Glaeser, Caitlin Gorback, and Stephen J. Redding
NBER Working Paper No. 27519
July 2020, Revised October 2020
JEL No. H12,I12,J17,R41
ABSTRACT
How effective are restrictions on mobility in limiting COVID-19 spread? Using zip code data
across five U.S. cities, we estimate that total cases per capita decrease by 20% for every ten
percentage point fall in mobility. Addressing endogeneity concerns, we instrument for travel by
residential teleworkable and essential shares and find a 27% decline in cases per capita. Using
panel data for NYC with week and zip code fixed effects, we estimate a decline of 17%. We find
substantial spatial and temporal heterogeneity; east coast cities have stronger effects, with the
largest for NYC in the pandemic’s early stages.
Edward L. Glaeser Stephen J. Redding
Department of Economics Department of Economics &
315A Littauer Center School of Public and International Affairs
Harvard University Princeton University
Cambridge, MA 02138 Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER and CEPR
eglaeser@harvard.edu and also NBER
reddings@princeton.edu
Caitlin Gorback
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
gorback@nber.org

1 Introduction
A central challenge in evaluating lock-downs and other restrictions on mobility in response to
COVID-19isestimatingtheireffectivenessinlimitingthedisease’sspread. Thisestimationis
challenging for several reasons. Mobility restrictions are introduced as a response to disease
outbreaks, individuals make mobility decisions based on the threat of infection, and the
relationship between transmission and mobility depends on the composition of susceptible,
infected and recovered agents.
To address these challenges, we combine weekly data on COVID-19 cases by zip code
in New York City (NYC) and cross-sectional data for four other U.S. cities, information
on mobility from SafeGraph cellular phone data and subway turnstile data for NYC, and
exogenous variation in mobility from the ability to work remotely and designation as an
essential worker in state shutdown orders. We interpret “mobility” broadly, in the sense
of workers leaving home, or passing through a subway turnstile, which exposes them to
contact while travelling and at their destination.1 In our preferred instrumental variables
specification, we estimate that a ten percentage point decrease in mobility leads to a 30% fall
in COVID-19 cases per capita. We find substantial heterogeneity across both space and over
time, with stronger effects for NYC, Boston and Philadelphia than for Atlanta and Chicago,
and the largest estimated coefficients for NYC in the early stages of the pandemic.
The hypothesis that movement spreads COVID-19 inspired the stay-at-home orders
adopted across the world in 2020. While any contagious disease can be propagated through
human interaction, the actual link between mobility and contagion is mediated by the nature
of the disease and traveler behavior. The social benefits of regulations limiting mobility de-
pend on the empirical magnitude of the link between mobility and disease. The link between
mobility and contagion could be minimal if infections occurred mostly through intimate con-
tact, as with sexually transmitted infections, or large if transit hubs enabled super-spreading
events.
We focus on the relationship between the logarithm of the COVID-19 cases per capita,
ln(Cases ), and the decline in mobility, %∆Trips , relative to February 2020 or the same
i i
1For the SafeGraph data, “mobility” is the number of trips outside of one’s residential zip code. For the
MTA data, “mobility” is the number of turnstile entries in each zip code.
1

date one year earlier.2 We cannot determine if the disease spread through travel itself or
through interactions at a final destination. We lack individual-specific COVID-19 tests, and
consequently measure the number of cases by zip code.
One potential concern is that neighborhood specific COVID-19 rate may not capture the
true prevalence of the disease, because of differences in testing rates. To address this, we
control for demographic variables that might predict testing rates, and for zip code fixed
effects in our panel specifications. Although levels of testing in the United States were low
throughout our time period, another concern is that testing could mechanically increase
mobility, as people travel to get tested. We address this concern using our instrumental
variables for mobility. As an additional specification check, we also replicate our cross-
sectional case results with COVID-19 death rates in NYC. Unfortunately, the NYC zip
code death data begins the week of May 18-24, 2020, and so cannot be used in our panel
specifications.
Our primary mobility data source is the SafeGraph cellphone location data, which is
available at the census blockgroup level nationwide. We aggregate travel data to the zip
code to conform with our COVID-19 case data. For NYC, we supplement this data with
public transit turnstile data provided by the Metropolitan Transit Authority (MTA). For
panel analysis, we aggregate the daily case and turnstile data to the week level so that
it is compatible with the weekly Safegraph data. As the impact of mobility on infection
could change both with the level of infection in the population of travelers and the level of
precaution, we test whether that impact changes over time in NYC. We split our sample
into an early period that ends on April 26 and a later period, to test whether the impact of
mobility on contagion was higher when cases were increasing or after the wave of infection
peaked.
Figure 1 shows two maps of NYC that illustrate our core findings. The upper map shows
the change in cell phone-measured mobility. The lower map shows the total COVID-19 cases
per capita as of June 1, 2020. In the parts of NYC where mobility fell, case rates have been
low. In the areas of New York where mobility remained higher, COVID-19 cases per capita
2The relationship is governed by a quasi-elasticity, β, which is in log points. A 1 percentage point increase
in %∆Trips implies a (100×β)% increase in cases per capita.
i
2