NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE REAL EFFECTS OF MODERN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES:
EVIDENCE FROM THE EDGAR IMPLEMENTATION
Itay Goldstein
Shijie Yang
Luo Zuo
Working Paper 27529
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27529
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2020, Revised June 2023
We gratefully acknowledge the helpful comments of Regina Wittenberg Moerman (editor), two
anonymous associate editors, an anonymous reviewer, Musaib Ashraf, Lucian Bebchuk, John
Core, Henry Friedman, Enrique Gomez, Sudarshan Jayaraman, John Jiang, Alon Kalay, Louis
Kaplow, Bin Ke, Ranjani Krishnan, Charles Lee, Andrew Leone, Xitong Li, Chen Lin, Yifei Lu,
Jing Pan, Vivek Pandey, K. Ramesh, David Reeb, Sugata Roychowdhury, Yanting Shi, Eric So,
Holger Spamann, Sri Sridhar, Rodrigo Verdi, Yanyan Wang, Joseph Weber, Franco Wong,
Joanna Wu, and Jason Xiao, as well as seminar participants at Cornell University, Harvard
University, HEC Paris, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Michigan State University,
National University of Singapore, Northwestern University, Southern Methodist University, the
University of Rochester, the University of Toronto, Wuhan University, the 2020 Virtual
Conference of Accounting Society of China, and the 2021 Hawai’i Accounting Research
Conference. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Itay Goldstein, Shijie Yang, and Luo Zuo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Real Effects of Modern Information Technologies: Evidence from the EDGAR Implementation
Itay Goldstein, Shijie Yang, and Luo Zuo
NBER Working Paper No. 27529
July 2020, Revised June 2023
JEL No. G12,G14,G31,M41
ABSTRACT
Using the implementation of the Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis, and Retrieval (EDGAR)
system from 1993 to 1996 as a shock to information dissemination technologies, we examine how
a significant reduction in disclosure processing costs affects the real economy. We find that the
EDGAR implementation leads to an increase in corporate investment and that this effect is
concentrated in value firms. We provide evidence that improved equity financing and enhanced
managerial incentives are likely the underlying mechanisms. Specifically, the EDGAR
implementation leads to an increase in a firm’s stock liquidity, a decrease in the cost of equity
capital, and an increase in the level of equity financing. Consistent with the monitoring effect of
broad information dissemination, the EDGAR implementation leads to an increase in a firm’s
operating performance. Our findings suggest that it is important to consider information
dissemination beyond information production when examining the real effects of corporate
disclosures.
Itay Goldstein Luo Zuo
The Wharton School National University of Singapore
University of Pennsylvania Mochtar Riady Building, BIZ 1 # 07-25
3620 Locust Walk 15 Kent Ridge Drive
Philadelphia, PA 19104 Singapore 119245
and NBER luozuo@nus.edu.sg
itayg@wharton.upenn.edu
Shijie Yang
School of Business
Southern University of Science and Technology
1088 Xueyuan Avenue
Shenzhen, Guangdong 518055
China
yangsj6@sustech.edu.cn

1. Introduction
One of the most important developments in financial markets over the years is the greater
availability of information to various market participants. Much of the information originates from
firms themselves, as disclosures are enhanced and information technologies for their dissemination
improve. Aside from understanding the financial-market implications, a fundamental and perhaps
more important question is about the effects on the real economy (Goldstein and Yang 2017;
Goldstein 2023). After all, the main function of financial markets is to assure the efficient
allocation of capital. To understand this question, a large literature in accounting and finance has
developed to examine the effects of financial reporting and disclosure on corporate investment
(Roychowdhury, Shroff, and Verdi 2019; Kothari, Zhang, and Zuo 2023). In this paper, we build
on this literature and examine how a significant reduction in disclosure processing costs, brought
by technological advances, affects corporate investment decisions.
Traditionally, corporate disclosures are often viewed as public information that is costless
for investors to process and is fully reflected in stock prices (Fama 1970). This notion is challenged
by recent evidence showing that investors face frictions in using corporate disclosures and that it
can be very costly, even for professional investors, to obtain, extract, and understand a disclosure
(Blankespoor, deHaan, and Marinovic 2020). The existence of disclosure processing costs implies
that investors who choose to process firms’ disclosures must expect a competitive return that more
than offsets the cost. It also means that stock prices cannot fully reveal the information in corporate
disclosures; otherwise, no investors would process these disclosures in the first place (Grossman
and Stiglitz 1980). Thus, disclosure processing costs can have important implications for capital
market outcomes and corporate actions. Modern information technologies have significantly
reduced investors’ costs to monitor for, acquire, and analyze firm disclosures. While it is intuitive
1

that these technological advances often make at least some investors better off by reducing their
information processing costs (Gao and Huang 2020), whether and how these technologies affect
the real economy is less clear.
In this paper, we exploit the implementation of the Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis,
and Retrieval (EDGAR) system from 1993 to 1996 as a shock to information dissemination
technologies that alter the costs of accessing firm disclosures (Gao and Huang 2020; Chang,
Ljungqvist, and Tseng 2023). Before the EDGAR implementation, in order to access firm
disclosures, investors had to subscribe to a commercial data vendor or physically visit a public
reference room of the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). On February 23, 1993, the
SEC specified a phase-in schedule for registered firms to start electronic filing on EDGAR in ten
discrete groups (SEC Release No. 33-6977). Firms in the first and last groups became EDGAR
filers in April 1993 and May 1996, respectively. This mandatory implementation of the EDGAR
system reduces potential endogeneity concerns caused by unobserved firm-, industry-, or market-
level shocks or reverse causality (Leuz and Wysocki 2016). For an omitted variable to confound
our findings, it would need to affect different groups of firms at discrete points in time as specified
in the phase-in schedule.
The enhancement of information dissemination from firms to the market through the
EDGAR system reduces investors’ costs of accessing corporate filings. Following prior theoretical
literature, we argue that this reduction in investors’ accessing costs can affect the level of corporate
investment through two non-mutually exclusive channels: the equity financing channel and the
managerial incentive channel. First, making corporate disclosures more easily available levels the
playing field in the market and mitigates information asymmetry among investors. Before EDGAR,
most retail investors and a large number of institutional investors likely chose not to access the
2