NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CONFLICTING INTERESTS AND THE EFFECT OF FIDUCIARY DUTY — EVIDENCE
FROM VARIABLE ANNUITIES
Mark L. Egan
Shan Ge
Johnny Tang
Working Paper 27577
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27577
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2020, Revised November 2021
We are grateful for comments and suggestions by Vivek Bhattacharya (discussant), Stephen
Karolyi (discussant), Ralph Koijen, Andrei Shleifer, Richard Rosen, Annette Vissing-Jorgensen,
Motohiro Yogo, and the seminar participants at Berkeley, Duke University, the FDIC, Harvard
Business School, HEC Paris, University of Hong Kong, Ohio State University, MIT Sloan School
of Management, NBER Insurance Meeting, New York University, the SEC, the Stanford Institute
for Theoretical Economics Financial Regulation Workshop, Stanford University, Temple
University, the Vienna Graduate School of Finance, Washington University in St. Louis, the
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, the WFA Early Career Women in Finance Conference,
and NFA. Shan Ge acknowledges financial support of the Center for Global Economy and
Business at NYU. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Mark L. Egan, Shan Ge, and Johnny Tang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Conflicting Interests and the Effect of Fiduciary Duty — Evidence from Variable Annuities
Mark L. Egan, Shan Ge, and Johnny Tang
NBER Working Paper No. 27577
July 2020, Revised November 2021
JEL No. D18,D22,G22,G24,G28
ABSTRACT
We examine the drivers of variable annuity sales and the impact of a proposed regulatory change.
Variable annuities are popular retirement products with over $2 trillion in assets in the United
States. Insurers typically pay brokers a commission for selling variable annuities that ranges from
0% to over 10% of investors’ premium payments. Brokers earn higher commissions for selling
inferior annuities, in terms of higher expenses and more ex-post complaints. Our results indicate
that variable annuity sales are roughly four times as sensitive to brokers’ financial interests as to
investors’. To help limit conflicts of interest, the Department of Labor proposed a rule in 2016
that would hold brokers to a fiduciary standard when dealing with retirement accounts. We find
that after the proposed fiduciary rule, sales of high-expense variable annuities fell by 52% as
sales became more sensitive to expenses and insurers increased the relative availability of low-
expense products. Based on our structural model estimates, investor welfare improved as a result
of the fiduciary rule under conservative assumptions.
Mark L. Egan Johnny Tang
Harvard Business School Littauer Center
Baker Library 365 Harvard University
Soldiers Field Cambridge, MA 02138
Boston, MA 02163 johnny.jt.tang@gmail.com
and NBER
megan@hbs.edu
Shan Ge
New York University
44 West 4th Street, 9-81
New York, NY 10012
sge@stern.nyu.edu

1 Introduction
Variable annuities are one of the most popular retirement products in the United States. As of
2018,Americanhouseholdsheldover$2.2trillionofassetsinvariableannuityaccounts. However,
despitetheirpopularity,variableannuitieshavebeencriticizedforhavinghighexpensesandarethe
most commonly cited financial products in brokerage customer complaints (Egan et al. (2019)).1
Part of the criticism pertains to the distribution of variable annuities.2 Variable annuities are sold
through brokers who are typically paid a commission by the insurance company for selling its
products. There is substantial heterogeneity in commissions, ranging from 0 to over 10% of the
investment, which provides strong incentives for brokers to sell certain variable annuities over
others and potentially creates conflicts of interest between brokers and their clients.
Concerns over conflicts of interest in these types of retirement products prompted the United
States Department of Labor (DOL) to propose a rule imposing fiduciary duty on brokers, which
was announced in 2015 and issued in 2016. The rule would obligate brokers to act in their clients’
best interests when selling retirement products such as variable annuities. Although the rule was
ultimatelyvacated in2018, the annuityindustryunderwentmany changestocomplywith therule
starting around 2016.
This paper has two goals. First, we study the drivers of variable annuity sales and examine
howsales respondtobrokerand investorincentives. While investorincentivesmatter, wefindthat
broker incentives play a more important role in determining sales. Moreover, brokers’ incentives
conflict with those of their clients: brokers earn higher commissions for selling inferior annuities
that have higher expenses, as well as fewer and worse-performing investment options. Second,
we examine how the proposed fiduciary rule, which was intended to limit conflicts of interest,
impacted the variable annuity market in the United States. We examine how the composition of
variable annuities both offered by insurers and sold by brokers changed in response to the DOL
rule. We find that the rule helped reduce conflicts of interest. In response to the rule, brokers
stopped selling high-expense annuities (i.e. annuities ranked in the top quartile of expenses) as
sales of such annuities fell by 52%. Similarly, insurers responded by updating their product suite
1Examples: https://www.wsj.com/articles/how-to-avoid-paying-high-fees-for-variable-annuities-14
57001002[accessed7/30/2020]
2See e.g. FINRA (https://www.finra.org/sites/default/files/InvestorDocument/p125846.pdf [accessed
7/30/2020])
1

and by increasing the availability of low-expense annuities to comply with the rule.
We study the variable annuity market using a panel data set that we construct from Morn-
ingstar and regulatory filings. A key novel feature of our data set is that we observe data on the
commission rates that insurers pay to brokers for selling variable annuities. This variable allows us
to separate the effect of brokers’ preferences from those of investors. Conditional on the risks and
return characteristics of a variable annuity, investors should be indifferent towards the associated
brokeragecommissions. Inadditiontocommissions,wealsoobservedetailedcharacteristicsofthe
variable annuity products(e.g. expense ratios, investment options, and benefits/riders). We match
commission rates and product characteristics with quarterly product sales data.
Our analysis consists of four parts. First, we study what factors drive the sales of variable
annuities by analyzing how sales are related to product expense ratios, brokerage commissions,
and other product characteristics. We find a strong negative relationship between expense ratios
andsales,consistentwiththenotionthatinvestorsdislikehigh-expenseproducts. Wealsofindthat
brokerage commissions play a critical role in driving investment flows. Our estimates suggest that
a one standard deviation increase in brokerage commissions is associated with a 38% increase in
variable annuity sales. Our baseline estimates suggest that variable annuity sales are roughly four
times as sensitive to broker incentives as to investor incentives. These results remain robust after
accounting for a wide range of product characteristics including investment options and returns,
the availability of benefits and riders, and the insurance companies underwriting the products. We
alsoexploitvariationwithinthesameproductacrossshareclasses,whereaninsureroffersthesame
variableannuitywithdifferentexpenseratiosandcommissionrates,whichhelpsmitigateconcerns
about omitted variables. We find similar patterns across share classes of the same variable annuity.
Thesepatternsalsoholdwhenusinginstrumentalvariablestoaddressthepotentialendogeneityof
commissions and expenses.
Second, we present evidence of conflicts of interest in the variable annuity market. We start
by examining the types of variable annuities that brokers are incentivized to sell. We document
that there is substantial heterogeneity in brokerage commissions. The average commission rate is
6% of the principal invested and the standard deviation is 2.4%. The level and heterogeneity in
commissionscouldcreateconflictsofinterestiftheyincentivizebrokerstosellproductsthatarenot
desirable for investors. Indeed, consistent with commissions creating conflicts of interest, we find
2