NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
OUT OF SIGHT NO MORE? THE EFFECT OF FEE DISCLOSURES ON 401(K)
INVESTMENT ALLOCATIONS
Mathias Kronlund
Veronika K. Pool
Clemens Sialm
Irina Stefanescu
Working Paper 27573
www.nber.org/papers/w27573/
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2020
We thank Jeff Brown, Monika Buetler, Kevin Crotty, Francesco Franzoni, Jeff Harris, Christine
Laudenbach, Lisa Kramer, Iwan Meier, Olivia Mitchell, Diane Pierret, Yang Sun, Alan Zhang,
and seminar and conference participants at the 2019 Cherry Blossom Financial Education
Institute Conference, the 2019 ESMT Berlin Asset Management conference, the 2019 SFS
Cavalcade, the 2019 European Finance Association, the 2019 Financial Management Association,
Asset
the 2019 ERMAS, the 2019 Luxembourg Asset Management Summit, the 2019 Northern Finance
Association, the 2019 CEAR-RSI Household Finance conference, American University,
Australian National University, Bocconi University, Georgetown University, Michigan State
University, Purdue University, Rice University, Texas A&M University, Tulane University, the
Universita della Svizzera Italiana in Lugano, the University of Cincinnati, the University of
Colorado, the University of Illinois at Chicago, the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
the University of Kansas, the University of Melbourne, the University of Notre Dame, the
University of Oklahoma, the University of St. Gallen, the University of Technology Sydney, the
University of Texas at Austin, and Vanderbilt University for many helpful comments and
suggestions. Sialm is an independent contractor with AQR Capital Management. The research
reported herein was performed pursuant to a grant from the TIAA Institute through the Pension
Research Council/Boettner Center of the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania
(PRC). The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not reflect the views of
AQR, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Boettner Center, or TIAA. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27573.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Mathias Kronlund, Veronika K. Pool, Clemens Sialm, and Irina Stefanescu. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Out of Sight No More? The Effect of Fee Disclosures on 401(k) Investment Allocations
Mathias Kronlund, Veronika K. Pool, Clemens Sialm, and Irina Stefanescu
NBER Working Paper No. 27573
July 2020
JEL No. G11,G18,G23,G28,G41,G51,H31,H55
ABSTRACT
We examine the effects of a 2012 regulatory reform that mandated fee and performance
disclosures for the investment options in 401(k) plans. We show that participants became
significantly more attentive to expense ratios and short-term performance after the reform. The
disclosure effects are stronger among plans with large average contributions per participant and
weaker for plans with many investment options. Additionally, these results are not driven by
secular changes in investor behavior or sponsor-initiated changes to the investment menus. Our
findings suggest that providing salient fee and performance information can mitigate participants'
inertia in retirement plans.
Mathias Kronlund Clemens Sialm
Freeman School of Business University of Texas at Austin
Tulane University McCombs School of Business
7 McAlister Dr 2110 Speedway; B6600
New Orleans, LA 70118 Austin, TX 78712-1276
mkronlund@tulane.edu and NBER
clemens.sialm@mccombs.utexas.edu
Veronika K. Pool
Vanderbilt University Irina Stefanescu
401 21st Avenue South Federal Reserve Board
Nashville, TN 37203 Washington, DC 20551
Veronika.pool@vanderbilt.edu irina.stefanescu@frb.gov

1 Introduction
Defined contribution (DC) pension plans, such as 401(k) plans, have become an important
investment vehicle for households saving for retirement.1 In DC plans, employees have the
responsibility to decide how much to save and how to allocate their savings across different
investment options. However, many retirement savers may not be sufficiently aware of all
relevant information to make optimal financial decisions. Individual investors often ignore
information that is “out of sight” and react to salient attention-grabbing information, as
discussed by Barber, Odean, and Zheng (2005).
In this paper, we examine whether the 2012 participant-level disclosure reform by the
Department of Labor (DOL) affects investment decisions in 401(k) plans. Aiming to increase
participants’ awareness of the key features of the investment menu, DOL rule 404(a)(5)
requires fiduciaries to provide expense- and performance-related summary statements directly
to participants. While the information contained in these disclosures was publicly available
before the reform, it was often buried in long fund prospectuses or regulatory filings. Hence,
the new rule increased the salience of fees and prior performance and brought this information
more “in sight.”
To investigate whether participants become more attentive to fund fees and investment
performance after the regulatory reform, we hand-collect information on the menu of options
offered in a large sample of 401(k) plans using plan-level annual filings from 2010 to 2013,
along with participants’ allocations to each of these options. We augment these plan-option-
year-level data with information on plan- and fund-level characteristics. Based on the timing
of the regulation, the pre-reform observations in our experiment are the years 2010 and 2011,
while the post-reform years are 2012 and 2013.
Our data have several advantages. For example, a given fund often contemporaneously
appears on several 401(k) menus. Menus offer a different set of investment options, as sponsors
and plan providers select different choices for participants in each plan. In addition, some
mutual funds are not included in 401(k) plans, allowing us to contrast the impact of the
new disclosures on funds that appear on our 401(k) menus to those that do not. These data
features guide our identification strategy.
We begin by examining whether investors become more attentive to fund fees in their
allocation decisions after the disclosure reform. There are several reasons why one may expect
1401(k) plans held $6.2 trillion in assets as of December 31, 2019, on behalf of more than 58 million active
participants according to the ICI (https://www.ici.org/401k).
1

to see no change in allocations following the new disclosures. Participants may already be
aware of the fees and performance of their investment options since this information is publicly
available. Alternatively, they may not read the new disclosures or may be overwhelmed by
this information. A tepid response to the new regulation would be consistent with prior
studies that show that retirement savers are often passive and rarely change their investment
allocations (Madrian and Shea (2001), Agnew, Balduzzi, and Sund´en (2003), and Sialm,
Starks, and Zhang (2015)).
We find that participants’ sensitivity to fees increases after the reform. This result
holds using several different measures of fund flows: For example, funds with a one-standard-
deviationhigherexpenseratio(i.e.,0.36percentagepoints)experienceastatisticallysignificant
reduction in their plan share of 0.17 percentage points per year after the regulatory change.
This annual portfolio reallocation is also economically significant, as it corresponds to around
6% of the median fund plan share of 2.9%.
We then ask whether our findings are driven by participants merely allocating more money
to cheaper funds, or whether they are also actively withdrawing from the funds that are
more expensive. We find that investors actively move money away from expensive funds: a
one-standard-deviation increase in the expense ratio is associated with an eight percentage
points higher probability that a fund experiences negative flows after the reform.
To better understand the effect of the reform on fee-sensitivities, we examine whether
the disclosure makes the cheapest and the most expensive options more salient, thus helping
participants to identify these ‘extreme-fee’ options in the plan. Consistent with the rank
effect of Hartzmark (2015), we find that the impact of the reform is non-linear: participants
become especially sensitive to the lowest-fee funds. These extreme funds receive abnormally
high flows after the regulatory change, beyond what can be explained by the linear expense
ratio.
Index funds may benefit disproportionately from the reform, as these funds tend to
be among the cheapest options in many plans. Thus, at least part of the heightened fee
sensitivity in our baseline results may be a result of investors switching from more expensive
active funds toward cheaper passive funds. We confirm that investors allocate significantly
more flows toward index funds after the reform. Yet, we find that flows become more
sensitive to fees within both actively-managed funds as well as within the set of passively-
managed funds. Taken together, these results suggest that the regulation implicitly promotes
passively-managed funds and thus contributes to the popularity of indexing.
2