NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
AGE DISCRIMINATION ACROSS THE BUSINESS CYCLE
Gordon B. Dahl
Matthew M. Knepper
Working Paper 27581
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27581
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2020, Revised January 2022
We are grateful to Ron Edwards and the EEOC for their guidance and provision of the EEOC
charge microdata and to Henry Farber, Chris Herbst, Dan Silverman, and Till von Wachter for
generously sharing their correspondence study data. We would also like to thank Kate
Antonovics, David Balan, Eli Berman, Aislinn Bohren, Benjamin Bridgman, Julie Cullen, Abe
Dunn, Roger Gordon, Alex Imas, Yousra Khan, David Neumark, Devesh Raval, Dan-Olof Rooth,
Ian Schmutte, Brett Wendling, and seminar participants at several universities and conferences
for valuable feedback and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Gordon B. Dahl and Matthew M. Knepper. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Age Discrimination across the Business Cycle
Gordon B. Dahl and Matthew M. Knepper
NBER Working Paper No. 27581
July 2020, Revised January 2022
JEL No. J23,J64,J71
ABSTRACT
We test whether age discrimination rises during recessions using two complementary analyses.
Confidential EEOC microdata reveal that age-related firing and hiring charges rise by 3.3% and
1.6%, respectively, for each percentage point increase in a state-industry’s monthly
unemployment. Though the opportunity cost of filing falls, the fraction of meritorious claims
increases—a sufficient condition for rising discrimination under plausible assumptions. Second,
we repurpose data from hiring correspondence studies conducted across different cities and time
periods during the recovery from the Great Recession. Each percentage point increase in local
unemployment reduces the callback rate for older versus younger women by 15%.
Gordon B. Dahl
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive #0508
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
gdahl@ucsd.edu
Matthew M. Knepper
Terry College of Business
University of Georgia
Athens, GA 30602
mknepper@uga.edu

1 Introduction
Age discrimination in the workplace is a serious concern, especially since a large and growing
fraction of the U.S. labor force is older (Maestas et al., 2016). In 1990, 11.9% percent of the
labor force was age 55 or older, and this fraction has steadily increased to 23.4% percent by
2019 (Bureau of Labor Statistics). The consequences of age discrimination are sizeable, as
late-in-life involuntary job loss affects not only financial well-being and retirement readiness
(Coile and Levine, 2010), but also physical and mental health (Gallo et al., 2000). In the
aftermath of the Great Recession older workers have had a particularly difficult time getting
rehired, potentially resulting in a costly long-term reduction in the labor force (Johnson,
2012; Neumark and Button, 2014). Likewise, evidence from the Displaced Worker Survey
shows a large negative age gradient in the likelihood of re-employment and earnings losses
following displacement (Farber, 2017).
Against this backdrop, we examine how age discrimination varies with the business cy-
cle.1 This is a challenging question, as measuring age discrimination, and indeed any type of
workplace discrimination, is difficult. Direct, objective measures of discrimination are scarce
and so scholarship has tended to lean on indirect ones, such as wage and employment gaps.
Such outcomes, while likely to be adversely impacted by increases in discrimination, could
also be due to productivity or costs which differ across age groups (Scott et al., 1995). This
measurement challenge is complicated further by the presence of turbulent labor market con-
ditions such as those engendered by the Great Recession. While unemployment spells lasted
longer and hiring rates fell further for older workers during the Great Recession (Johnson
and Butrica, 2012), the attribution of these adverse outcomes to discrimination is called
into question by early claiming of Social Security (Hutchens, 1999) and early retirement
(Bosworth, 2012).2
Ourpaperovercomesthesechallengesusingtwocomplementaryanalyses. Thefirstinves-
1Related papers on discrimination and the macroeconomy include Thurow (1975); Ashenfelter (1970);
Freeman (1973); Shulman (1987); Neumark and Button (2014); Knepper (2018); Boulware and Kuttner
(2019).
2Neumark and Button (2014) recognize this complication in their work: “Of course we do not actually
knowwhetheragediscriminationwasorisoccurring. Butwecanaskwhetherthesestateprotectionsreduced
the adverse effects of the Great Recession on older workers relative to younger workers.”
1

tigation leverages novel and direct measures of employment discrimination: individual-level
ADEA (Age Discrimination in Employment Act) charges filed with the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission (EEOC). In concert with these confidential microdata, we use
state×industry×month variation in exposure to the Great Recession to test whether em-
ployers discriminate more against older workers when the labor market is weak. For each
one percentage point increase in the unemployment rate, we find the volume of ADEA firing
and hiring charges increases by 3.3% and 1.6%, respectively. The increase in the number of
ADEA firing charges does not arise from the mechanical increase that might be expected
given a surge in discharged workers and a constant charge filing rate among those displaced.
Controlling for the number of layoffs and discharges in a state-month leaves the headline es-
timates materially unchanged, which suggests that a larger share of displaced older workers
file discrimination charges during downturns.3
While these results point to an increase in the reported level of discrimination, they do
not distinguish genuine employer misconduct from elevated employee incentives to file a
case. The reason is that as outside labor market opportunities recede, the opportunity cost
of pursuing a claim will fall, and hence more marginal cases will be filed with the EEOC
even if actual discrimination has remained constant.
We address this potential confound by taking advantage of the EEOC’s determination
of whether a discrimination case has “merit” – a decision which involves a lengthy follow-up
investigation as needed. Using this proxy for claim quality, we find the fraction of ADEA
discrimination cases with merit rises in response to deteriorating labor market conditions.
For each one percentage point increase in the unemployment rate, the probability a case has
merit increases by a statistically significant 0.7%. With some assumptions, a sufficient con-
dition to conclude that actual (as opposed to merely reported) age discrimination increased
during the Great Recession is that the merit rate did not fall.4 The small and statistically
3Only a small fraction of discriminatory employment actions result in a formal EEOC charge, and these
are likely to be the more serious instances of age discrimination. Our estimates capture the effects for these
more serious cases, and therefore may not reflect unreported discrimination more broadly.
4Specifically,weassumethatholdingconstantthelevelofactualdiscrimination,thequalityofmarginally
added cases falls during a recession. We also require the merit variable to only vary with the business cycle
due to changes in the true quality of cases. We note that EEOC charges capture just a small fraction of all
2