NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
UNDERSTANDING THE GERMAN CRITICISM OF THE TARGET SYSTEM AND
THE ROLE OF CENTRAL BANK CAPITAL
Roberto Perotti
Working Paper 27627
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27627
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2020
I thank Francesco Giavazzi, Marco Maffezzoli and Luca Paolazzi for very useful comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Roberto Perotti. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Understanding the German Criticism of the Target System and the Role of Central Bank capital
Roberto Perotti
NBER Working Paper No. 27627
July 2020
JEL No. E58,E63,F33
ABSTRACT
Criticism of the Target system by a group of central European scholars has become a widespread
argument against the policies of the European Central Bank and even the integrity of the
monetary union, and even standard fare in the media and in the political debate in Germany. Most
academics and practitioners that have participated in the debate have been dismissive of the
German preoccupations. In this paper, I first try and clarify the many remaining
misunderstandings about the workings and implications of the Target system. I propose a unified,
systematic and simple approach to the study of the workings of the Target system in response to
different shocks and in comparison with different alternative regimes. I then argue that the
German criticism of the Target system is not so unfounded after all, and should be taken
seriously, both on theoretical grounds and for its political implications.
Roberto Perotti
IGIER Universita' Bocconi
Via Roentgen 1
20136 Milano
ITALY
and CEPR
and also NBER
roberto.perotti@unibocconi.it

1 INTRODUCTION
The monetary union, and in particular the European Central Bank, are the object of harsh criticism from
several quarters. The reasons for these criticisms vary, but in Germany and other countries the Target
system is among the most salient. That system is often cited as a serious threat to the very integrity of
the monetary union, and its critique by a group of central European scholars has even become standard
fare in the media and in the political debate of those countries1.
The scholarly debate itself started almost ten years ago, and despite some heated exchanges (at
least by the standards of academia) the views of the participants do not seem to get any closer. The
earlier debate was particularly active during the sovereign and banking crisis of 2011-2012, which led to
an accumulation of Target claims by Germany peaking at 730bn euros in the summer of 2014. At the
time, a series of papers by academics, including De Grauwe and Ji (2012) and Whelan (2014), together
with several contributions particularly on VoxEu.org, argued that most of the criticisms had no basis. It
is fair to say that to many academics these contributions appeared to have conclusively shown that the
criticisms of the Target system as such were theoretically unfounded.
After declining considerably, Target imbalances came back with a vengeance with the start of
Quantitative Easing in January of 2015: the German net Target claims reached a peak of €932bn at the
end of 2018, and with the end of QE in 2019 they declined only slightly to €804bn as of end-February
2020. With the resumption of QE in November 2019 and its subsequent enlargement under the
Pandemic Emergency Purchase Program, the net Target claims of Germany are likely to increase further,
all the more so should there be a new flight to safety from some country hit by a government debt crisis.
Predictably, the increase in Target claims associated with QE has reignited criticism of and worries
about the Target system. The arguments used in this new wave of criticism are identical to those of the
earlier debate (see e.g. Sinn 2018). Either the critics have not read carefully the earlier academic
contributions that purportedly had proved them wrong, or the arguments of the critics’ critics were not
so self-evident after all.
There are several reasons why the debate does not seem to be anywhere nearer to being settled
than it was five years ago. The criticism of the Target system was rarely formalized exactly, and it was not
easy to understand exactly what it consisted of. In particular, it was rarely clear whether it was the Target
system per se that was being criticized, or rather Target imbalances were seen only as the manifestation
of problems created by specific choices of monetary policy. Most critics of the Target system would have
claimed that it was both: see for instance Westermann (2014). It was also not always clear what realistic
arrangements the Target critics had in mind as alternatives. On the other hand, in their defense of the
Target system the critics of the critics went too far, and refused to concede some valid points of the latter.
The purpose of this paper is twofold. First, to try and clarify the many remaining
misunderstandings about the workings and implications of the Target system. I propose a unified,
systematic and simple approach to the study of the workings of the Target system in response to different
shocks: in particular (i) a current account shock; (ii) capital flight or a capital repatriation shock (iii) and
Quantitative Easing (QE). Also, I argue that the Target system can only be evaluated (and its criticism can
1 It even found a way in the internal debate of the European Central Bank when in March 2012 the Bundesbank’s
president Jens Weidmann wrote a letter to the then President of the ECB Mario Draghi demanding guarantees for
Germany’s Target claims (see Reuters 2012).
2

only be understood) against carefully specified alternatives: I will consider a monetary union without a
Target system, in which transfers of reserves between banks occur though the ECB directly and not via
national central banks; a Target system with periodic settlement of balances; and a fixed exchange rate
system.
In the process of clarifying the working of the Target system, I point out two results. First, Target
balances are irredeemable and, in equilibrium, carry no effective remuneration. A private company
subject to accounting standards might well have to value them at 0. Yet they appear in the conventional
balance sheets of the national central banks at face value. This in turn has led to persistent
misunderstanding on the interpretation of the whole Target system. I show that (to a first approximation)
this is not a mistake, as the creation of a Target balance is always accompanied by a change in reserves
of an equal amount but an opposite sign.
Second, I point out that one alternative variously advanced by both critics and defenders of the
Target system, the settlement of Target balances, is nearly impossible to implement in the Eurozone. The
parallel with the much cited Interdistrict Settlement Account of the Federal Reserve banks does not hold,
for reasons that have gone previously unnoticed.
The second goal of this paper is to use this more systematic approach to reconsider the German
criticism of the Target system. I argue that there are two types of criticisms that should be taken more
seriously than the academic literature and many policymakers have been willing to do so far. First, the
Target system is not just a reflection of monetary policy, but it could amplify the macroeconomic
responses to monetary policy and other shocks. Second, the system does increase the risks to the
German taxpayer in case of a Eurozone breakup.
I reach several conclusions. First, and contrary to what has been argued by some commentators,
a default on the German Target claims is a loss of real resources to the German taxpayer, relative to what
would have happened in alternative monetary regimes, like a fixed exchange rate or a Target system
with settlement.
Second, and again contrary to a widely held position, this conclusion holds regardless of what is
the cause of the accumulation of Target claims, whether they are the results of capital flows (which in
themselves do not change the net foreign asset position of a country) or of current account surpluses.
Third, if it causes conventional capital to go very negative, a large default on its Target claims
could force a post-breakup Bundesbank to face a trilemma: either accept an immediate recapitalization
by the government, or accept a delayed recapitalization via a stream of subsidies over a long period of
time, or else increase seigniorage and miss the inflation target. The first two options would jeopardize
the independence of the central bank, the third would force it to adopt an undesired monetary policy
stance.
Fourth, it is well known that in a world of fiat money a central bank could continue its business
as usual even with a mildly negative capital, which does not force it to face the trilemma above. However,
in practice central bankers and most politicians would simply find it inconceivable to work with negative
capital: the central bank will be recapitalized. In the case of Germany the principle has even been affirmed
by the constitutional court, and the ECB itself has taken a strong stance on the issue.
Sixth, a Target default , and the ensuing negative equity of the Bundesbank, could easily be much
larger than nearly all the cases of negative equity studied in the literature. This would simply be
unexplored territory, both for central bankers and for the public, where psychology could play a bigger
role than economics.
Seventh Target balances and the associated default risk could easily influence the monetary
policy of the Eurozone, contrary to what many have argued. It is true that the monetary policy of the
3