NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TWO TALES OF DEBT
Amir Kermani
Yueran Ma
Working Paper 27641
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27641
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2020, Revised November 2020
We thank Douglas Baird, Bo Becker, Mitchell Berlin, Doug Diamond, Jason Donaldson, Andrea
Eisfeldt, Victoria Ivashina, Steve Kaplan, Anil Kashyap, John Moore, Justin Murfin, Giorgia
Piacentino, Raghu Rajan, Michael Roberts, José Scheinkman, Per Stromberg, Amir Sufi, Harald
Uhlig, seminar participants at BIS, Chicago Booth, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Columbia
GSB, LSE, Maryland, NYU Stern, Philadelphia Fed, Swedish House of Finance, University of
Hawaii, Virtual Finance Workshop, and WashU Olin, and conference participants at Red Rock
for insightful comments and discussions. We also thank finance professionals John Coons and
Doug Jung for sharing their knowledge. We are grateful to Fatin Alia Ali, Leonel Drukker, Abbas
Rezaei, and Julien Weber for outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Amir Kermani and Yueran Ma. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Two Tales of Debt
Amir Kermani and Yueran Ma
NBER Working Paper No. 27641
August 2020, Revised November 2020
JEL No. G32,G33
ABSTRACT
We analyze the heterogeneous nature of corporate debt contracts, some focusing on liquidation
values of discrete assets whereas others on going-concern values of the business. Using hand-
collected data on firm attributes, we present several findings. First, firms on average have limited
liquidation values. Second, companies with lower liquidation values have more debt backed by
going-concern values and more intensive monitoring of firm performance. They have higher
interest rates only for debt against discrete assets. Third, secured debt is not always tied to
liquidation values of discrete assets. We present a model that matches the empirical findings,
which demonstrates how creditor monitoring and covenants facilitate borrowing well beyond
liquidation values.
Amir Kermani
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
545 Student Services Building #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
kermani@berkeley.edu
Yueran Ma
The University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Ave.
Chicago, IL 60637
Yueran.Ma@chicagobooth.edu

1 Introduction
Debt is one of the most widely used contracts for financing companies around the
world. The nature and enforcement of debt contracts have long been key questions in
economics research. Broadly speaking, there are two general approaches of debt en-
forcement (Djankov, Hart, McLiesh, and Shleifer, 2008; Diamond, Hu, and Rajan, 2020).
In one approach, creditors lend against the liquidation value of discrete assets, namely
separable and often tangible assets that can be evaluated (and if needed repossessed) on
a standalone basis. For this type of debt, lenders mainly focus on assessing liquidation
valuesoftheassetspledgedtothem, whichcanbereliedonevenifthefirmisgone, and
set borrowing limits accordingly. In another approach, creditors lend against the value
of the firm as an operating business (i.e., going-concern value)—this value may benefit
from human capital, organizational structure, and business relations, and may not be
captured by discrete or tangible assets. For this type of debt, lenders’ payoffs are tied
to the value created by the business, and the allocation of control rights (over business
decisions) between firms and creditors can play an important role.
These two approaches of debt enforcement are also reflected in the rich collection of
corporate debt contracts in the US.1 In particular, firms’ debt contracts can be backed
by different aspects of the firm, as exemplified by the priority rules in bankruptcy. For
instance, in Chapter 11 a debt contract secured by a piece of equipment has the highest
priority claim against the value of the equipment (i.e., it obtains a senior claim up to the
transaction or liquidation value of the equipment). On the other hand, a debt contract
secured by a blanket lien on the firm as a whole has the highest priority claim against
the going-concern value of the firm (i.e., it obtains a senior claim up to the firm’s going-
concern value, minus the liquidation value of any discrete assets pledged separately).
These different types of debt can also differ substantially in creditor monitoring and
represent lending technologies that require different creditor expertise. The multiple
forms of debt contracts and multifaceted priority rules echo the observation of debt
heterogeneity emphasized by Rauh and Sufi (2010), and paint a more intricate picture
than classic benchmarks such as Townsend (1979).
Why do firms use different types of debt, some of which focus on the liquidation
valueofdiscreteassetswhileothersfocusonthegoing-concernvalueofthecompanyas
a whole? What determines the prevalence of each type? What ultimately shapes firms’
total debt capacity? We address these questions using a new hand-collected dataset that
1Commercial mortgages, equipment loans, and loans against working capital are standard examples
oflendingagainstdiscreteassets,whileasubstantialportionofbusinessloansandmostcorporatebonds
intheUSarebackedbythecashflowvalueofthefirmasawhole(LianandMa,2020).
1

documents the liquidation values of discrete assets and going-concern values of firms in
different industries. We use these variations in firm attributes to demonstrate how the
focusofdebtenforcementshiftsandwhy. Empirically, weshowthatthetwoapproaches
of debt enforcement account for a number of debt features, including debt composition,
monitoring mechanisms, interest rates, and creditor recovery rates in default. We then
present a model that explains the usage of different types of debt, their contractual
provisions, and why they take priority against different aspects of the firm. Overall,
the empirical evidence and the theory point towards an integrated view of debt contract
features where the multifaceted priority rules, combined with provisions like covenants,
strengthen creditors’ incentives to monitor firm performance and help firms borrow
beyond the liquidation value of discrete assets.
Measuring the liquidation values of various types of assets across industries is an
essential but challenging task. We hand collect this information from one of the most
systematic disclosure sources, based on Chapter 11 filings between 2000 and 2016. We
obtain estimated liquidation recovery rates (i.e., liquidation value as a fraction of net
book value) for each main asset category (fixed asset, inventory, receivable, etc.), which
reflect projected liquidation values if the firm were to cease operations and liquidate
its assets in a piecemeal manner.2 We take the average liquidation recovery rate of
each asset class in each two-digit SIC industry to reduce noise. We then estimate the
liquidation values of Compustat firms using the liquidation recovery rates of each type
of asset in their industry, and the book value of assets they have. In addition, we also
use the Chapter 11 cases to collect firms’ going-concern values in restructuring. We use
firms’ market values (or acquisition values) after emergence if available, and firm value
estimates in Chapter 11 plans otherwise. We normalize the going-concern value by total
book assets at filing to compute the going-concern recovery rate, and take the average
for each two-digit SIC.
We perform extensive checks about the informativeness of the data. For liquidation
valuesofdifferentassets, wecrosscheckwithpriorworkthatdocumentsequipmentliq-
uidation values using auctions data in a particular industry (Ramey and Shapiro, 2001)
and with realized liquidation proceeds in Chapter 7 cases. These checks verify that our
data is consistent with market-based transactions. We also cross check with liquidation
value benchmarks that creditors use in ex ante lending decisions for non-financial firms
2These estimates commonly derive from appraisals by specialists in asset valuations and conducting
liquidations, who perform on-site field exams and simulate live liquidations. Later we also analyze
default recovery rates of debt from Moody’s, which do not directly measure liquidation values of firms’
assets because most cases in Moody’s data are restructurings not liquidations, payments to non-debt
stakeholders (e.g., tax claims, trade creditors) are often not included, and payments to debt also depend
onseniorityetc.
2