NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE RISK OF BEING A FALLEN ANGEL AND THE CORPORATE DASH FOR
CASH IN THE MIDST OF COVID
Viral V. Acharya
Sascha Steffen
Working Paper 27601
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27601
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2020
We thank editors Andrew Ellul, Isil Erel, and Uday Rajan (the editors). We also thank Ed
Altman, Yakov Amihud, Tobias Berg, Ruediger Fahlenbrach, Max Jager, Daniel Streitz, and
Josef Zechner and seminar participants at Bank of England, CFA Society – New York, NYU
Stern School of Business, and Standard & Poor’s. Christian Schmidt provided excellent research
assistance. Send correspondence to Sascha Steffen, s.steffen@fs.de. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2020 by Viral V. Acharya and Sascha Steffen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Risk of Being a Fallen Angel and the Corporate Dash for Cash in the Midst of COVID
Viral V. Acharya and Sascha Steffen
NBER Working Paper No. 27601
July 2020
JEL No. G01,G14,G32,G35
ABSTRACT
Data on firm-loan-level daily credit line drawdowns in the United States expose a corporate “dash
for cash” induced by the COVID-19 pandemic. In the first phase of the crisis, which was
characterized by extreme precaution and heightened aggregate risk, all firms drew down bank
credit lines and raised cash levels. In the second phase, which followed the adoption of
stabilization policies, only the highest-rated firms switched to capital markets to raise cash.
Consistent with the risk of becoming a fallen angel, the lowest-quality BBB-rated firms behaved
more similarly to non-investment grade firms. The observed corporate behavior reveals the
significant impact of credit risk on corporate cash holdings.
Viral V. Acharya
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-65
New York, NY 10012
and CEPR
and also NBER
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu
Sascha Steffen
Frankfurt School of Finance & Management
Adickesallee 32-34
60322 Frankfurt
Germany
s.steffen@fs.de

A large literature highlights the importance of financial constraints for corporate cash holdings
(Opler et al. 1999; Almeida, Campello, and Weisbach 2004; Bates, Kahle, and Stulz 2009).
Researchers usually focus on the precautionary motive of financially constrained firms to hoard
cash. Acharya et al. (2012) show that cash holdings are also likely endogenous to a firm’s credit
risk and that even some high-rated firms behave qualitatively similar to lower-rated firms that
are likely more financially constrained. During economic boom periods, the determinants of
cash holdings are thus difficult to isolate, particularly in the presence of abundant credit supply
even for riskier firms. An important example is the case of BBB-rated firms. Since the 2008 to
2009 global financial crisis, the volume of BBB-rated debt has more than quadrupled.1 Within
this rating class, credit has geared toward riskier customers with high leverage, in turn raising
concerns about their possible future downgrades to non-investment-grade (nonIG) status and
the associated "cliff" risk of losing access to or facing heightened costs of financing in bond
and equity markets.2
The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic induced governments globally to shutter
major parts of their economies, an action intended to curb the spread of infectious disease but
that could potentially plunge a vast majority of firms into an impending liquidity crisis. COVID-
19 thus exogenously increased the default risk for many firms by directly affecting firms’
stream of future cash flows and simultaneously increasing their rollover risk (He and Xiong
2012).3 This impact was particularly felt by BBB-rated firms, who experienced a sudden
increase in the risk of being downgraded to nonIG and to become the so-called “fallen angels.”
1 Dealogic data suggest that during the 2015 to 2019 period alone, U.S. firms issued about US$4.5 trillion in
corporate bonds. BBB-rated firms issued US$1.4 trillion in bonds, or about 31% of the total corporate bond
volume.
2 Altman (2020) estimates that about 34% of BBB-rated firms can be classified as nonIG firms based on their z-
score. Downgrading a significant number of firms to nonIG status also might arouse concerns about financial
stability, because both banks (through loans) and insurance companies (through corporate bond holdings) are
largely exposed to downgraded firms (e.g., Ellul, Jotikasthira, and Lundblad 2011; Chodorow-Reich, Ghent, and
Haddad 2020).
3 Haddad, Moreira, and Muir (2020) document that the default risk of riskier firms, but not that of safer firms,
increased in early March 2020.
1

The COVID-19-induced shock thus provides an interesting setting in which to probe the impact
of credit risk on corporate cash holdings and the role of financial markets in providing
immediate liquidity.
Using a novel data set of daily credit line drawdowns at the firm-loan-level during the
pandemic as well as quarterly capital structure data, we study the resultant “dash for cash”
among publicly listed nonfinancial firms in the United States. Do riskier firms increase cash
holdings more than safer firms? How intense was the initial “dash for cash” and when did it
reverse; specifically, how did the monetary and fiscal response of the Federal Reserve (Fed)
and the U.S. government affect the “dash for cash”? Was the stabilization impact of these
policies felt uniformly across firms of different ratings? Equally importantly, how did firms
raise cash (through credit lines drawdowns, term loans, bond issuances, or equity issuances)?
And, did the stock market differentially price firms based on their ex ante balance sheet and
off-balance sheet liquidity relative to short-term debt? These are some of the questions on
corporate and market behavior that we investigate in this paper.
[Figure 1]
Panel A of Figure 1 shows quarterly cash-to-assets ratios of U.S. nonfinancial firms
since January 1, 2018, for different rating categories (AAA-A-rated, BBB-rated, nonIG, and
unrated firms). Panel B of Figure 1 shows the time series of cash over cash plus undrawn credit.
In both panels, we document that upon the onset of the pandemic the overall cash levels—and
the preference for cash relative to bank lines of credit—rose for the whole corporate sector, and
especially so for lower-rated (BBB-rated and nonIG) firms, signifying the primacy of cash in
corporate liquidity management during times of heightened aggregate risk.
We show in a regression framework that, consistent with Figure 1, BBB-rated and
nonIG firms increased their cash holdings between January 1 and 31 March 31, 2020 (a period
we usually refer to as Q1 2020 throughout the paper), significantly more than AAA-A-rated
and unrated firms, even after controlling for determinants of corporate cash holdings frequently
2