NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE RETURN TO CAPITAL IN CAPITAL-SCARCE COUNTRIES
Anusha Chari
Jennifer S. Rhee
Working Paper 27675
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27675
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2020
We thank Wayne Landsman, Tim Schmidt-Eisenlohr, Francesco Caselli, Pierre-Oliver
Gourinchas, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Alwyn Young, Peter Blair Henry, Ju Hyun Kim, Simon
Alder, Patrick Conway, and Lutz Hendricks for helpful discussions. We thank conference and
seminar participants at 2020 AEA Meetings, UNC-Chapel Hill and the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation. Opinions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the FDIC or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2020 by Anusha Chari and Jennifer S. Rhee. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Return to Capital in Capital-Scarce Countries
Anusha Chari and Jennifer S. Rhee
NBER Working Paper No. 27675
August 2020
JEL No. E13,F21,G15,G32,O16
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we use firm-level data to investigate the link between the marginal product of
capital and financial rates of return across countries. Computed estimates from financial
statement data show that capital-scarce countries display higher marginal products of capital.
However, inflation-adjusted financial returns are roughly equal across capital-scarce and capital-
abundant countries. The divergence between the marginal products of capital and financial
returns implies that there may be little incentive for capital to flow to capital-scarce countries. We
suggest that domestic capital-accumulation frictions such as sufficiently large capital adjustment
costs can decouple financial rates of return from the marginal product of capital across countries.
Anusha Chari
301 Gardner Hall
CB#3305, Department of Economics
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
and NBER
achari@unc.edu
Jennifer S. Rhee
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
550 17th Street NW, Rm #2005
Washington, DC 20429
jrhee@fdic.gov

1 Introduction
The neoclassical model predicts that poor countries (capital-scarce) will have a higher rate
of return to capital than rich countries (capital-abundant). Accordingly, scholars expend
considerable effort trying to understand why capital does not flow from rich to poor nations
(Lucas, 1990; Alfaro, et al., 2008; and Reinhart and Rogoff, 2004). An emerging body of
empirical work based on national income accounts suggests that the neoclassical predictions
about capital scarcity and higher rates of return do not hold up in the macro data. The
marginal product of capital is apparently no higher in poor countries than it is in rich ones
(Caselli and Feyrer, 2007, and Gourinchas and Jeanne, 2013). If recent empirical studies are
accurate then it is unsurprising that capital does not flow from rich to poor countries; with
equalized marginal products, it has little incentive to do so.
Inthispaper,weinvestigatethelinkbetweenthemarginalproductofcapitalandfinancial
rates of return in emerging and developed economies. In a one-sector neoclassical model,
a firm’s first-order condition states that the marginal product of capital (MPK ) and the
t
financial return (r ) should differ only by the depreciation rate (δ), which is often assumed
t
constant across countries (r = MPK −δ). Therefore, theory predicts that high financial
t t
returns and high marginal products of capital should go hand in hand. If this link breaks
down (i.e., if a high marginal product of capital does not turn into high financial returns),
it is not clear that capital ought to flow to countries with high marginal products of capital.
Notwithstanding the significance of this first-order condition that lies at the heart of
the Lucas Paradox, aggregate data pose limitations for testing its validity. In this paper,
we use firm-level accounting and stock market data from a set of developed and emerging
countriesbetween1997and2014toexaminethelinkbetweenthemarginalproductofcapital
and financial returns. Much of the international macro literature imputes an aggregate
marginalproductofcapitalusingcalibrationtechniques. Theimputationsrelyonunderlying
assumptions about functional form, such as technology, capital shares, and elasticities of
substitution.
The innovation in Caselli and Feyrer (2007) is to measure the aggregate return on cap-
ital using national income accounts instead of relying on calibration. In general, however,
delivering the finding that marginal products of capital are essentially the same across rich
and poor countries requires adjustments for (i) the capital per effective worker and a hu-
man capital externality (Lucas, 1990), (ii) non-reproducible capital and the price of capital
goods (Caselli and Feyrer, 2007), or (iii) technology catch-up and distortions in saving and
investment decisions (Gourinchas and Jeanne, 2013).
Our paper offers an alternative approach to measuring the return to capital using micro
2

data. In contrast to previous literature about the return to capital that uses (i) calibrated
estimates, or (ii) aggregate data, we directly compute rates of return at the firm level,using
market and accounting data.1 Despite the centrality of firm productivity in macroeconomic
modelling, the link between accounting earnings and the macroeconomy remains relatively
unexplored (Konchitchki and Patatoukas, 2014). Our paper therefore contributes to a recent
body of literature that uses firm-level accounting data to draw macroeconomic insights.
Our main finding is that the link between the marginal product of capital and the finan-
cial return, which is often assumed in the international capital flows literature, does not hold
for a sample of developed and emerging countries between 1997 and 2014.2 Consistent with
predictions from the neoclassical framework, the results show that firm marginal products
of capital are indeed higher in emerging countries relative to their developed market coun-
terparts. The evidence suggests an inverse correlation between marginal products of capital
and output per capita3 The pattern is robust to controlling for firm- and industry-specific
effects and remarkably consistent across different sample periods and countries.
The neoclassical model also implies that the higher marginal product of capital should
translatetohigherfinancialreturnsinemergingmarkets. Contrarytothisprediction, wefind
that inflation-adjusted financial returns are roughly equal between developed and emerging
countries. The result is significant as it casts new light on the use of differences in the
marginal products of capital to explain international capital flow patterns. The firm-level
evidence using computed estimates suggests that the marginal product of capital might not
be a valid proxy for financial returns. The divergence between marginal products of capital
and investment returns is consistent with the capital wedge documented in Gourinchas and
1It is worth noting that the measurement of investment and capital in corporate balance sheets and
national income accounts can vary across countries and depends on the firms in the formal economy, a
fractionthatriseswitheconomicdevelopment. Thereforethe"coverage", i.e. thefractionofoutputorvalue
added covered by corporate balance sheets can vary with income per capita. However, it is precisely the
firms in the formal economy that are the beneficiaries of foreign capital flows. We suggest that focusing on
this subset of firms provides a salient snapshot to address the shortfalls in capital flows to capital scarce
countries.
2While,somecross-countrystudiesuselong-terminvestmentreturns,weuseannualreturnstoinvestigate
the relationship between the marginal product of capital and investment returns. To account for aggregate
and idiosyncratic shocks, we include country, industry and time fixed effects. We also control for firm fixed
effects and find that the main results are robust.
3FollowingBanerjeeandDuflo(2005)andGourinchasandJeanne(2013)weuseweusepercapitaoutput
as the main explanatory variable. The literature also uses alternative measures, such as output per worker.
However, these measures can suffer from the drawback that they do not account for productive activities
thatdonotfallunderthepurviewofthemarketeconomysuchashomeproduction. Furthertherearecross-
country variations in definitions of employment, such as the definitions of working age populations that can
differ across countries, that make direct cross-country comparisons difficult. Hussmanns (2004) provides
a detailed discussion of the technical challenges with respect to cross-country differences in employment
measures. Evenso,werunrobustnesschecksusingthesealternativemeasuresofoutputperworkertowhich
our main results are robust.
3