NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ASSESSING THE QUALITY OF ILLEGAL COPIES AND
ITS IMPACT ON REVENUES AND DISTRIBUTION
Anthony Koschmann
Yi Qian
Working Paper 27649
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27649
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2020, Revised February 2025
The authors would like to thank Fred Feinberg, Chris Forman, Shane Greenstein, Avi Goldfarb,
Xixi Hu, Ginger Jin, Josh Lerner, Xiaolin Li, Julie Mortimer, Kevin Ryan, Marie Thursby, Hui Xie,
Ying Xie, Zining Wang, Joel Waldfolgel, and Chuck Weinberg for helpful comments. Yi would
like to acknowledge grant support from the Canadian SSHRC IG 435-2018-0519, and thank Bowen
Zhang for excellent RA work. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Anthony Koschmann and Yi Qian. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Assessing the Quality of Illegal Copies and its Impact on Revenues and Distribution
Anthony Koschmann and Yi Qian
NBER Working Paper No. 27649
August 2020, Revised February 2025
JEL No. K42, M21, M31, O3
ABSTRACT
Conventional wisdom holds that illegal copies cannibalize legitimate sales, even though previous
research has found mixed effects, with illegal copies acting as both a substitute and a complement.
The impact of the quality of illegal copies on the legal market remains unclear. Building on product
uncertainty and production quality, we propose that higher quality copies benefit (hurt) sales when
product uncertainty is higher (lower), during product launch (post-launch). Using motion picture
and online piracy data, we estimate piracy quality by applying a latent item response theory (IRT)
model based on keyword signals in the illegal copies. An interdependent system jointly estimates
movie screens, revenues, downloads, and available illegal copies with piracy quality in both the
launch and post-launch periods. We find that at launch, when less information is known about a
movie, higher quality illegal copies demonstrate a positive sampling effect on revenues. In the
post-launch period, however, higher quality illegal copies exhibit a negative substitution effect on
revenues. The findings suggest producers can alleviate product uncertainty through higher quality
samples at product launch while diluting piracy quality post-launch.
Anthony Koschmann
Eastern Michigan University
121 Hill Hall
College of Business
Ypsilanti, MI 48178
akoschma@emich.edu
Yi Qian
Sauder School of Business
University of British Columbia
2053 Main Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z2
and NBER
yi.qian@sauder.ubc.ca

1. Introduction
Piracy, or illegal copies of information goods such as movies, music, and books, pose a considerable
threat to content creators’ revenues. According to media trade group IBC, the cost of global online piracy
as lost revenue would double from $26.7 billion in 2016 to an estimated $51.6 billion in 2022 (IBC,
2017); for movie and television content creators, lost revenues from online piracy was estimated at 72%
of real revenues ($37.0 billion) in 2016. Citing entertainment technology experts, the IBC report notes
that digital rights management (DRM) and anti-piracy measures can only do so much to lower the quality
of pirated copies, but providing a better legal consumer experience can reduce piracy losses. For example,
a high-quality version of The Expendables 3 surfaced prior to the film’s launch; the film’s under-
performance at the box office was attributed to this piracy quality (Spangler, 2014), even though some
competing films had more illegal downloads yet saw higher revenues. Together, these indicate that piracy
quality presents an important facet regarding the effects of piracy.
Although piracy poses a threat to almost any information good, prior empirical research of piracy
quality has encountered three key limitations. First, the quality of pirated copies has been assessed using
subjective user ratings, such as the video and audio quality of pirated films (Ma et al., 2014). While useful
in thinking about the effect of piracy quality, subjective interpretations encounter validity concerns.
Second, even non-subjective measures, like the binary coding of a high-definition (HD) keyword (Lu et
al., 2020; Ackermann et al. 2020) treats piracy quality as an either-or proposition. Albeit helpful in
understanding the impact of piracy quality, illegal copies convey more information beyond just its source
type (e.g., camcorder, film reel, or digital copy). Indeed, product quality – both legal and illegal – is
composed of many attributes that send signals to consumers (e.g., Zeithaml, 1988). Third, missing from
prior studies is the impact of consumer activity (i.e., downloads and uploads) of pirated copies in relation
to piracy quality, particularly its effect on distribution (i.e., both legal and illegal supply).
To address these gaps, we use objective measures to define piracy quality and its effect on supply
and demand in both the legal and illegal markets using the context of motion pictures. Motion pictures are
a focal area in marketing research (e.g., Dhar & Weinberg, 2016; Packard et al., 2016, McKenzie, 2023)
for several reasons. First, the effects of piracy may be clearer in movies than in other information goods
(Lu et al., 2020); few movies are seen by a consumer multiple times in theaters but illegally downloaded
music or software may be consumed repeatedly at home. Second, while makers of durable products are
also concerned about the quality of illegal copies, social or aspirational elements can stimulate illegal
consumption (Wilcox et al., 2009) typically not seen in information goods. Third, data collection on
illegal activity is difficult to observe; physical products require finding markets with physical
2

transactions. Piracy transactions, however, have some visibility online where users transact with less fear
of being caught. Finally, movie piracy is an area that allows us to build on prior theories and findings.
Although piracy quality is of interest to producers and presents a need for understanding, it faces
similar measurement challenges as quality of legal goods. Piracy quality, like product quality, is an
important product aspect that affects consumer choice, but quality is often treated subjectively as
consumers perceive certain signals (Zeithaml, 1988). Indeed, piracy quality is rooted in “any valued
attribute of a product” (Chellappa & Shivendu, 2005, p.402), even though attribute valuation lends itself
to open interpretation arising from heterogeneous tastes. Building on prior piracy research and production
quality, we propose that high-quality piracy provides information to consumers when product uncertainty
is high, such as during new product launch. Piracy that is of higher quality should provide more
information to consumers by more closely resembling the original good; this reduces uncertainty and
stimulates sales, particularly among enthusiastic customers who seek out product information. Post-
launch, however, more information is available (such as word of mouth) and product uncertainty is lower.
The most willing consumers have likely purchased, leaving more consumers who are less interested and
willing to pay, making high-quality piracy more substitutable for the original good.
Since product quality can be treated in two ways, perceived and objective (Monroe & Krishnan,
1985), and reflects the underlying product attributes, we model piracy quality using the visible piracy file
keywords to assemble the various aspects of quality into a unidimensional index. We estimate this piracy
quality using item response theory (IRT). IRT models estimate the relation of items on a latent spectrum,
where piracy quality is estimated from the relative ideal points (mean values) of piracy keywords across
illegal files. An advantage here over prior methods is the treatment of quality as a continuous measure by
utilizing common, observable piracy attributes rather than one or two salient features; this creates a
measure more concise and precise for the main estimations.
The dataset consists of movies in wide release in the United States and Canada. Correspondingly,
a daily panel tracks those movies’ search results and activity on Pirate Bay while the films are first-run in
theaters. The data includes box office revenues, screen availability, piracy, advertising, and movie
characteristics. Since most research studies on piracy do not account for illegal supply, we use seemingly
unrelated regressions (SUR) to jointly estimate the effects of piracy quality on both the legal and illegal
sides of the market, using copulas to account for endogeneity.
We find that a 1% increase in the quality of the pirated copies, conditioned on piracy downloads
(leechers, or downloads of the illegal file), corresponds on average to a 0.143% increase in revenues in
the launch period. Upon market introduction, movies lack some information for consumers, so higher
quality copies act more like a sampling mechanism. Post-launch, however, our findings show that a 1%
increase in the quality of illegal copies, conditioning on a level of leechers, yields a -0.075% decrease in
3