NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A QUANTITY-DRIVEN THEORY OF TERM PREMIA AND EXCHANGE RATES
Robin Greenwood
Samuel G. Hanson
Jeremy C. Stein
Adi Sunderam
Working Paper 27615
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27615
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2020
We are grateful to John Campbell, Wenxin Du, Ken Froot, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Gordon Liao,
Hanno Lustig, and Matteo Maggiori and seminar participants at Dartmouth Tuck, the ECB,
Harvard, the NBER Asset Pricing Summer Institute, Oxford Said, SITE 2019, Wharton, and
Warwick Business School for helpful comments. Greenwood, Hanson, and Sunderam gratefully
acknowledge funding from the Harvard Business School Division of Research. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27615.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2020 by Robin Greenwood, Samuel G. Hanson, Jeremy C. Stein, and Adi Sunderam. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Quantity-Driven Theory of Term Premia and Exchange Rates
Robin Greenwood, Samuel G. Hanson, Jeremy C. Stein, and Adi Sunderam
NBER Working Paper No. 27615
July 2020
JEL No. F31,G12
ABSTRACT
We develop a model in which specialized bond investors must absorb shocks to the supply and
demand for long-term bonds in two currencies. Since long-term bonds and foreign exchange are
both exposed to unexpected movements in short-term interest rates, a shift in the supply of long-
term bonds in one currency influences the foreign exchange rate between the two currencies, as
well as bond term premia in both currencies. Our model matches several important empirical
patterns, including the co-movement between exchange rates and term premia, as well as the
finding that central banks' quantitative easing policies impact exchange rates. An extension of our
model sheds light on the persistent deviations from covered interest rate parity that have emerged
since 2008.
Robin Greenwood Jeremy C. Stein
Harvard Business School Department of Economics
Baker Library 267 Harvard University
Soldiers Field Littauer 209
Boston, MA 02163 Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER and NBER
rgreenwood@hbs.edu jeremy_stein@harvard.edu
Samuel G. Hanson Adi Sunderam
Harvard Business School Harvard Business School
Baker Library 361 Baker Library 359
Soldiers Field Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163 Boston, MA 02163
and NBER and NBER
shanson@hbs.edu asunderam@hbs.edu
An Online Appendix is available at dl=0
https://www.dropbox.com/s/hoscjn80wx5ua8t/GHSS_FX_IA_FINAL.pdf?dl=0

1 Introduction
Thereisagrowingrecognitionthat…nancialintermediariesplayanimportantroleindetermining
foreign exchange (FX) rates (Kouri [1976], Evans and Lyons [2002], Froot and Ramadorai [2005],
Gabaix and Maggiori [2015], Itskhoki and Mukhin [2019]). When there are frictions in …nancial
intermediation, exchange rates move in response to shifts in the supply and demand for assets
in di¤erent currencies, which intermediaries must absorb. Since the wealth of intermediaries in
FX markets need not be closely tied to aggregate consumption or conditions in broader …nancial
markets (e.g., equities), this approach can explain the disconnect of exchange rates from macro-
economic fundamentals (Obstfeld and Rogo¤ [2000]) and the predictability of currency returns
(Fama [1984]).
Inthispaper,weprovideaframeworkforunderstandinghowthedetailedstructureof…nancial
intermediation impacts foreign exchange rates and show that this approach can shed light on
numerous puzzles in the exchange rate literature. We start by assuming that global bond and
FX markets are integrated with one another but segmented from other …nancial markets. We
make this assumption for two reasons. First, foreign exchange is conceptually similar to long-
term bonds in that both are “interest-rate sensitive”assets: they are heavily exposed to news
about future short-term interest rates. Thus, the physical and human capital needed to trade
long-term bonds can also be used to trade FX. Indeed, at most major dealer-banks and hedge
funds, interest-rate and FX trading are tightly integrated.
Second, concrete empirical motivation for our paper comes from recent work showing that
quantitativeeasing(QE)policies—i.e.,large-scalepurchasesoflong-termbondsbycentralbanks—
signi…cantly impacted foreign exchange rates and not just long-term bond yields, suggesting im-
portant linkages between the two markets For example, Neely (2011), Bauer and Neely (2014),
and Swanson (2017) show that the Fed’s long-term bond purchases were associated with a large
depreciation of the U.S. dollar vis-a-vis other major currencies.
Aquantity-driven, supply-and-demandapproachinthespiritofTobin(1958, 1969)providesa
natural explanation for bond price movements stemming from QE.1 According to this “portfolio
balance”view, holding …xed the expected path of future short-term rates, a reduction in the
supply of long-term bonds—such as QE—leads to a fall in long-term bond yields because it
reduces the total amount of interest rate risk borne by specialized …nancial intermediaries. Since
the …xed-income market is assumed to be partially segmented from other parts of the broader
capital markets, these intermediaries cannot diversify away the interest rate risk they bear and
mustbepaidtoabsorbshockstothesupplyanddemandforlong-termbonds. Thissegmentation
explainswhyQEpolicies—which, whilelargerelativetonationalbondmarkets, aresmallrelative
to global markets for all …nancial assets—have a large impact on long-term yields.
Our paper shows that this same quantity-driven, supply-and demand approach can also ex-
plain many empirical facts about exchange rates, including their response to QE. The key insight
is that, as noted above, foreign exchange and long-term U.S. bonds are exposed to the same
primary risk factor—unexpected movements in short-term U.S. interest rates. Thus, if the global
1See, for example, Greenwood and Vayanos (2014), Vayanos and Vila (2019), Hamilton and Wu (2012),
D’Amico and King (2013), and Greenwood, Hanson, and Vayanos (2016).
1

bond and FX markets are integrated with one another, a shift in the supply of long-term U.S.
bonds like QE a¤ects the risk premium on both types of assets.
Our baseline model is a straightforward generalization of the Vayanos and Vila (2019) term
structure model to a setting with two currencies. Speci…cally, we consider a model with short-
term and long-term bonds in two currencies, which we label the U.S. dollar (USD) and the euro
(EUR). Short-term interest rates in each currency are exogenous and evolve stochastically over
time. We assume that short rates in the two currencies are positively, but imperfectly, correlated.
The key friction in the model is that the marginal investors in global bond and FX markets—
who we call “global bond investors”—are specialized. These investors must absorb exogenous
shocks to the supply and demand for long-term bonds in both currencies, as well as demand
shocks in the foreign exchange market. Since these specialists have limited risk-bearing capacity,
they will only absorb these shocks if the expected returns on long-term bonds in both currencies,
as well as foreign exchange, adjust in response.
To solve the model, we must pin down three equilibrium prices: the long-term yield in each
currency and the exchange rate between the two currencies—the number of dollars per euro.
Equivalently, the equilibrium pins down expected returns on three long-short trades: a “yield
curve trade”in each currency—which borrows short-termand lends long-termin that currency—
and an “FX trade”—which borrows short-term in dollars and lends short-term in euros.
We …rst show that this baseline model predicts that shifts in the supply of long-term bonds
impact not only term premia, but also the expected returns on the FX trade and hence exchange
rates. For instance, an increase in the supply of long-term U.S. bonds raises both the expected
excess return on long-term U.S. bonds and the expected return on the borrow-in-dollar lend-in-
euro FX trade, leading to a depreciation of the euro versus the dollar.
The key intuition is that the U.S. yield curve trade and the borrow-in-dollar lend-in-euro
FX trade have similar exposures to U.S. short rate risk. First, when the U.S. short rate rises
unexpectedly, long-term U.S. yields also rise through an expectations hypothesis channel: the
expected path of U.S. short rates is now higher, so long-term U.S. yields must rise for long-term
U.S. bonds to remain attractive to investors. As a result, the price of long-term U.S. bonds falls,
so investors in the U.S. yield curve trade lose money. The borrow-in-dollar lend-in-euro FX trade
is also exposed to U.S. short rate risk. When the U.S. short rate rises unexpectedly, the euro
depreciates through an uncovered-interest-rate-parity (UIP) channel: since future short rates are
now expected to be higher in the U.S. than in Europe, the euro must fall and then be expected
to appreciate for short-term euro bonds to remain attractive. Thus, the FX trade su¤ers losses
at the same time as the U.S. yield curve trade.
Nowconsiderthee¤ectofanincreaseinthesupplyoflong-termU.S.bonds—e.g., becausethe
Federal Reserve announces it is going to unwind its QE policies. Following this outward supply
shift, global bond investors will be more exposed to future shocks to short-term U.S. interest
rates. As a result, the price of bearing U.S. short rate risk must rise. Since long-term U.S. bonds
are exposed to U.S. short rate risk, this leads to a rise in the term premium component of long-
term U.S. yields. It also leads to a rise in the risk premium on the borrow-in-dollar lend-in-euro
FXtrade, which is similarly exposed to U.S. short rate risk. As a result, the euro must depreciate
2