NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
STRUCTURING MORTGAGES FOR MACROECONOMIC STABILITY
John Y. Campbell
Nuno Clara
João F. Cocco
Working Paper 27676
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27676
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2020
We thank Nick Roussanov, Amit Seru, Joel Shapiro, Alexei Tchistyi and participants at the AFA
meetings (Atlanta), Tenth Macro Finance Society Workshop (Boston College), the Second
London Financial Intermediation Workshop (Bank of England), NBER Summer Institute (Capital
Markets and the Economy, Real Estate), and at the European Central Bank seminar series for
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27676.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2020 by John Y. Campbell, Nuno Clara, and João F. Cocco. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Structuring Mortgages for Macroeconomic Stability
John Y. Campbell, Nuno Clara, and João F. Cocco
NBER Working Paper No. 27676
August 2020
JEL No. E32,E52,G21
ABSTRACT
We study mortgage design features aimed at stabilizing the macroeconomy. We model
overlapping generations of mortgage borrowers and an infinitely lived risk-averse representative
mortgage lender. Mortgages are priced using an equilibrium pricing kernel derived from the
lender's endogenous consumption. We consider an adjustable-rate mortgage (ARM) with an
option that during recessions allows borrowers to pay only interest on their loan and extend its
maturity. We find that this maturity extension option stabilizes consumption growth over the
business cycle, shifts defaults to expansions, and is welfare enhancing. The cyclical properties of
the maturity extension ARM are attractive to a risk-averse lender so the mortgage can be
provided at a relatively low cost.
John Y. Campbell João F. Cocco
Morton L. and Carole S. London Business School
Olshan Professor of Economics Regent's Park
Department of Economics London
Harvard University NW1 4SA, UK
Littauer Center 213 jcocco@london.edu
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
john_campbell@harvard.edu
Nuno Clara
London Business School
Regent's Park
London
NW1 4SA, UK
nunoclara@london.edu
An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27676

1 Introduction
Events in the last decade have shown that adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) have advan-
tages over fixed-rate mortgages (FRMs) in stabilizing the economy, at least when the central
bank has monetary independence and can lower the short-term interest rate in a recession
(Eberly and Krishnamurthy (2014)). A lower short rate provides automatic budget relief for
ARM borrowers and helps to support their spending while reducing the incidence of mortgage
default. A lower short rate can also provide some relief to FRM borrowers, but this requires
both a decline in the long-term mortgage rate and refinancing, which may be constrained by
declining house prices and tightening credit standards. Barriers to FRM refinancing in the
aftermath of the Great Recession were an important concern of US policymakers and moti-
vated the introduction of the Home Affordable Refinance Program (HARP) (Di Maggio et al.
(2017)).
We argue that the stabilizing properties of plain-vanilla ARMs can be enhanced by adding
an interest-only option that applies only during recessions, and that allows borrowers to
extend loan maturity. This option is included in the contract ex-ante and is available to all
borrowers.1 During a recession, any borrower who decides to take advantage of the option
pays only loan interest, with principal loan repayments restarting after the recession ends, and
with loan maturity extended. This proposal provides additional budget relief to distressed
borrowers.
We use a quantitative model to evaluate our proposal and to compare it with other mort-
gage designs considered in the recent literature (Eberly and Krishnamurthy (2014), Guren
et al. (2020)). Our model has several important features. First, the demand for mortgage
loans comes from households who use them to purchase houses or to refinance existing mort-
gages. Borrowers can default on their mortgages and do so if their income and house prices
fall substantially. Household income is subject to both economy-wide and individual specific
shocks, as in Guvenen et al. (2014). Recessions are characterized by lower expected income
growth, a higher probability of a large decline in income, and a higher probability of a decline
in house prices. Therefore, the fundamental drivers of mortgage risk increase in recessions,
and mortgages originated in recessions are riskier than those originated in expansions.
1The inclusion of the option in the original contract avoids barriers to ex-post renegotiation of the sort
documented by Piskorski et al. (2010) and Adelino et al. (2013). Piskorski and Seru (2018) emphasize
the tradeoff between the flexibility of ex-post mortgage modification and the barriers that can inhibit its
implementation.
1

Second, loans are provided by an infinite-horizon risk-averse representative lender that
chooses consumption to maximize expected utility, subject to a borrowing constraint. In
addition to the cash flows from the mortgages, the lender receives a risky income stream. We
use the equilibrium consumption choices of the lender to derive the stochastic discount factor
that we use to price the mortgages. The lender’s income process is parameterized so that our
modelgeneratesreasonableassetpricingmoments, includinghigherSharperatiosinrecessions
than in expansions. This, combined with the fact that mortgages originated in recessions are
riskier, leads to increases in loan premia for loans originated in bad times, similar to those
in the data. Since the choices of borrowers and the cash flows from the mortgages depend on
loan premia, and the consumption choices of the representative lender depend on mortgage
cash flows, the equilibrium solution of our model requires that we solve for a fixed point in
the borrowers’ and lender’s problems.
There is evidence that credit standards are looser in expansions than in recessions (for
example Keys et al. (2010) and Corbae and Quintin (2015)). With this evidence in mind, a
third feature of our model is that mortgage lending criteria are tighter in bad times. Specifi-
cally, the maximum loan-to-value ratio declines during recessions, which constrains borrowers’
ability to refinance during bad times.
It is equally important for our model to capture what happens in the years prior to a
recession. During the boom years of the mid-2000s, high levels of mortgage cash-out refinanc-
ing increased household leverage at the onset of the financial crisis (Khandani et al. (2013),
Chen et al. (2020)). A fourth feature of our model is that it allows cash-out refinancing. In
each period households can prepay their existing loan and take out a new loan with a higher
principal value, subject to current loan-to-value constraints. These debt market dynamics
affect the benefits to borrowers of an option to extend loan maturity, the impact that the
option has on lender cash flows, and mortgage rates.
Finally, our model abstracts from inflation dynamics. To economize on state variables,
we consider a real economy in which either all mortgages are inflation-indexed, or the price
level is constant. While this is an obvious limitation of our analysis, we believe our results
are empirically relevant given the limited variability in realized and expected inflation over
the last 15 years.
Our model delivers the following results about an interest-only option added to a standard
adjustable-rate mortgage. Not all borrowers exercise the option. Some borrowers keep on
making loan principal repayments during bad times, motivated by precautionary motives and
a desire to deleverage. However, because some borrowers do exercise the option, it leads to a
2