NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
REPURCHASE OPTIONS IN THE MARKET FOR LEMONS
Saki Bigio
Liyan Shi
Working Paper 27732
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27732
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2020
We would like to thank Andrew Atkeson, Jack Bigio, Simon Board, Patrick Bolton, Andres Drenik,
Andrea Eisfeldt, Piero Gottardi, Veronica Guerrieri, Barney Hartman-Glaser, Pablo Kurlat, Ken Miyahara,
Facundo Piguillem, Joao Ramos, Pablo Ottonoello, Tano Santos, Joseph Stiglitz, Victoria Vanasco,
Moritz Meyer-ter-Vehn, and William Zame for useful conversations. We are especially thankful to
Florian Scheuer, whose sharp questions helped us clarify important features of this paper. Bigio thanks
the hospitality of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. Also, we would like to thank seminar
participants at EIEF, Stanford, and UCLA. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2020 by Saki Bigio and Liyan Shi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Repurchase Options in the Market for Lemons
Saki Bigio and Liyan Shi
NBER Working Paper No. 27732
August 2020
JEL No. D82,G23,G32
ABSTRACT
We study repurchase options (repo contracts) in a competitive asset market with asymmetric
information. Gains from trade emerge from a liquidity need, but private information about asset
quality prevents the full realization of trade. We obtain a unique equilibrium, which features a
pooling repo contract and full participation among borrowers. The equilibrium repo contract
resolves adverse selection: the embedded repurchase option prevents the market unraveling that
occurs in asset-sale markets. However, the contract is inefficient due to cream skimming.
Competition to attract high-quality borrowers through the terms of the repurchase option
inefficiently lowers liquidity. The equilibrium contract has a closed form and is portable to many
applications.
Saki Bigio
Department of Economics
University of California at Los Angeles
8283 Bunche Hall
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
sbigio@econ.ucla.edu
Liyan Shi
EIEF
Via Sallustiana 62
Rome
Italy
liyan.shi@eief.it
An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27732

1 Introduction
Many financial contracts such as collateralized debt, bridge loans, factoring, and loan discounts
are de facto asset-sale contracts that embed a repurchase option. Strip away legal differences
and all of these contracts have a common structure: they all specify a collateral security, a loan
amount, and a loan principal.1 Because these contracts are non-recourse or rarely settled in
court, borrowers have the option to default. The option to default is, de facto, an option to
repurchase the asset. We refer to contracts embedding repurchase options broadly as repos.
Why do so many financial contracts take the form of repos? Why don’t borrowers simply sell
securities and buy them back later?
This paperarguesthat, inany assetmarketwhere asymmetric informationis prevalent, repos
emerge as a natural market response to adverse selection. We consider a market where borrowers
needfundstocarryoutinvestmentprojects. Borrowersraisefundsbytradingpre-existingassets.
The issue is that only borrowers know the assets’ payoffs. If borrowers can only sell assets, as
in the classic lemons market, the ones with good assets desist from selling because the price is
too low. Adverse selection ensues (Akerlof, 1970). Lenders can resolve this adverse selection by
offering a repurchase option. Indeed, any borrower who is unwilling to sell an asset at a low
price will change her mind if she is also offered the option to repurchase the asset at a price
below its worth, even if this repurchase price has a slight premium (an implicit interest charge).
Of course, the borrowers with bad assets will take advantage by selling their lemons and never
returning for them, implicitly defaulting. If rightly set, the premia can compensate lenders for
default losses and induce good borrowers to participate, thereby resolving adverse selection.
By virtue of resolving the adverse selection problem, repos can possibly increase the funding
of investment projects. However, lender competition brings about another problem, cream skim-
ming. Theissuewithreposisthattheirbidimensionalpricenatureenableslenderstopoachgood
borrowers, by lowering the repurchase premium of their contracts. Ultimately, cream skimming
is detrimental to liquidity to the point that it can even offset the advantages of repos.
To understand the contribution of this paper, consider the example in Table 1. A set of
borrowers have investment opportunities that yield a 20% return.2 Among the borrowers, half
own assets worth $40, and the other half own assets worth $80. If only asset sales are possible,
owners of the $80 asset would not sell at the average price of $60: A 20% return on $60 yields
$72 whereas the asset is worth $80. Thus, selling the $80 asset leads to a loss of $8 and the
1These contracts are not a modern financial innovation. In fact, an early form of collateralized debt contract,
the Pignus, was already stipulated in Roman Law. Holmstrom (2014) considers pawning dating back to Tang-
dynasty China, circa 650 AD, as the precursor of these contracts.
2In the original Akerlof (1970) setup, buyers (hereafter lenders) have higher valuations for assets than sellers
(hereafter borrowers), but we can equivalently think of gains from trade arising from borrowers having a higher
needforcashthanlenders,albeitbothhavingthesamevaluationfortheasset. Whatiscriticalfortheimpediment
to trading is that borrowers have private information about the asset.
1

Table 1: Illustrative Example
Collateral Value
Low Quality $40
High Quality $80
Sales Repurchase Average
Added Value
Price Price Funds Lent
Sale $40 ∞ $20 $4
Repo $50 $60 $50 $10
market therefore unravels. Things change if a lender offers a repo where the borrowers are paid
$50 for the asset, but can repurchase it for $60. A 20% return on $50 yields $60 so the good
borrower breaks even. The example illustrates how repos attract all borrowers, lenders break
even,3 and the total funding liquidity more than doubles.
Although the example illustrates the advantages of repos, it does not describe an actual
marketoutcome. Intheexample,anewentrantlendercouldofferarepofor$45witharepurchase
price of $50. Because the implicit rate is much lower, the offer would attract the $80 borrower.4
This cream skimming would in turn lead to less funding. The example is therefore silent about
which contracts we should expect to emerge. The rest of the paper is devoted to the study
of market competition for repos in this lemons market. The paper characterizes the set of
equilibrium contracts, distills the operating forces, and characterizes conditions under which
repos increase investment funding.
To conduct the analysis, the paper adopts a modern approach to competitive markets with
private information. Asset qualities can be drawn from any arbitrary continuous distribution.
WeconsiderthetiminginNetzerandScheuer(2014), inwhichlenderscanpostcontractsbutcan
withdrawthemafterobservingthecontractspostedbytheircompetitors. Thisisafoundationfor
the well-known Miyazaki-Wilson-Spence equilibrium (henceforth MWS). The positive analysis
of the environment reveals that the equilibrium is unique and features a single pooling contract
that induces full participation.
A key result is that any possible equilibrium features a default threshold quality—borrowers
with collateral worse than the threshold quality default. This property narrows the set of traded
contracts in any possible equilibrium to two traded contracts at most: a highest sales-price con-
tractthatattractsthedefaultborrowersandahighestnondefaultvaluecontractthatattractsthe
3We know that low-quality borrowers will not exercise the repurchase option so each low-quality borrower
costs the lender $10: the lender pays $50 and ends with a $40 asset. However, lenders make $10 on high-quality
borrowers offsetting this loss.
4Low-quality borrowers would prefer the original {$50,$60} contract; they will default regardless of the con-
tract. The new contract would attract high-quality borrowers, who obtain an investment payoff of $54 dollars.
The deviation is profitable to the lender and would cannibalize the original contract.
2