NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DOES INCREASING ACCESS TO FORMAL CREDIT REDUCE PAYDAY BORROWING?
Sarah Miller
Cindy K. Soo
Working Paper 27783
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27783
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2020
The authors thank seminar participants at the University of Michigan and the NBER Summer
Institute Corporate Finance meeting and Christopher Palmer for their helpful feedback. We also
thank Cathleen Kelmar for assistance with the provision of the Experian credit report data, and
Heather Lamoureux for assisting with the provision of the alternative credit data from Clarity
Services, Inc. Thanks also to Peter Choi for his excellent research assistance. The results
presented in this paper do not reflect the opinions of the aforementioned institutions, nor do they
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Sarah Miller and Cindy K. Soo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Does Increasing Access to Formal Credit Reduce Payday Borrowing?
Sarah Miller and Cindy K. Soo
NBER Working Paper No. 27783
September 2020
JEL No. G5,G51
ABSTRACT
The use of high cost “payday loans” among subprime borrowers has generated substantial
concern among policymakers. This paper provides the first evidence of substitution between
“alternative” and “traditional” credit by exploiting an unexpected positive shock to traditional
credit access among payday loan borrowers: the removal of a Chapter 7 bankruptcy flag. We find
that the removal of a bankruptcy flag on a credit report results in a sharp increase in access to
traditional credit and raises credit scores, credit card limits, and approval rates. However, despite
meaningful increases in access to traditional credit, we find no evidence that borrowers reduce
their use of payday loans, and our confidence intervals allow us to rule out even very small
reductions in payday borrowing. Furthermore, we find evidence that flag removals increase the
use of other alternative credit products such as online subprime installment loans. These results
indicate that marginally improving access to less expensive formal credit is insufficient to
meaningfully shift borrowers away from high cost subprime products. We discuss likely
explanations for this including increased marketing of subprime products associated with the flag
removal, the imperfect substitutability between cash and credit for low income borrowers, and an
insufficiency in the size of the increase in credit access associated with the flag removal.
Sarah Miller
Ross School of Business
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
mille@umich.edu
Cindy K. Soo
University of Michigan,
Ross School of Business,
701 Tappan Street,
Ann Arbor MI 48109-1234
csoo@umich.edu

I. Introduction
The use of high-cost “payday” loans by low income borrowers has generated substantial con-
cern among policymakers. Some regulators point to studies that show payday loan borrowers are
extremely credit constrained and argue subprime borrowers are driven to use payday loans because
their access to traditional credit products is limited. These regulators view policies to encourage
banks and credit unions to extend credit to low income, high risk clientele as a way to reduce the
use of these payday loan products.1 At the same time, other studies find that some borrowers
puzzlingly take out high-interest payday loans even when they have less expensive credit card liq-
uidity available. If borrowers are taking out payday loans for other reasons than credit constraints,
improving access to traditional credit may not actually change payday loan borrowing behavior.2
Identifying the causal impact of improved credit access is challenging, as those with higher credit
scores or credit card limits likely vary on unobservable dimensions such as delinquency risk, finan-
cial knowledge, or other characteristics that may affect the propensity of these borrowers to use
payday loan products. Addressing this question has also been difficult empirically because the use
of subprime products such as payday loans are not reported on standard credit reports. Analyzing
the impact of credit access on payday borrowing behavior requires linking information on subprime
credit behavior with information on traditional credit activity, as well as a source of exogenous
variation in traditional credit access.
In this paper, we address this empirical challenge by linking a new administrative panel of
payday loan and other “alternative” credit borrowers with their traditional credit reports. Using
this linked panel, we are able to implement an identification strategy that exploits an exogenous
positive “shock” to traditional credit access: the removal of a bankruptcy flag from a borrower’s
creditreport. TheFairCreditReportingActrequirescreditbureaustoremoveChapter7flagsafter
10 years, generating a sharp increase in credit scores at the date of the flag removal. We analyze
Chapter 7 rather than Chapter 13 filings in order to focus on low income borrowers who are more
likely to take up alternative lending products.3 Previous research has found that the removal of
1See, for example, “Banks Urged to Take On Payday Lenders With Small, Lower-Cost Loans” https://www.
nytimes.com/2018/02/16/your-money/banks-payday-loans.html.
2For example, studies find some borrowers use payday loans even when they are able to borrow on their credit
cardatmuchlowerrates,andpointtopossibleexplanationsoflackofknowledgeorself-control(PagelandOlafsson
(2016), Agarwal, Skiba, and Tobacman (2009), Melzer (2011)).
3The Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention Act imposed income means testing for Chapter 7 filings in 2005, in order
2

theseflagsimmediatelyincreasescreditscoresandresultsinhighercreditlimitsandhigherapproval
rates (Gross, Notowidigdo, and Wang (2018); Dobbie et al. (2017); Dobbie, Goldsmith-Pinkham,
Mahoney, and Song (2019); Musto (2004)).4 Studies have also found that bankruptcy flag removals
have a precise zero impact on labor market outcomes (Dobbie et al. (2019)), allowing us to rule
out income effects. Thus with this newly linked panel, our work provides the first evidence as to
whether improving access to “traditional” credit reduces payday borrowing.
We obtain payday and alternative credit outcomes from an “alternative” credit bureau, Clarity
Services (“Clarity”), that specializes in provides underwriting services for the subprime consumer
population, including those with typically thin or no file credit reports.5 We link individuals in the
Clarity database from 2013 to 2017 with their standard credit reports from Experian, one of the
three major credit reporting agencies. These linkages allow us to see changes in both traditional
and non-traditional credit product use that occurs around the time a bankruptcy flag is removed.
Our data follows borrowing behavior through 4 years following the flag removal, allowing us to see
longer term outcomes. Our final sample includes 30,246 alternative credit users who have had a
Chapter 7 removal over our sample period. Our population of alternative credit users has limited
credit access and faces higher credit constraints relative to the average borrower. The average
alternative credit user in our sample has a total revolving credit limit of less than $2000 and has
used over 80 percent of their available credit, whereas the typical credit card borrower has an
average total limit of $18,000 and has only used approximately 54 percent.
Using data from the traditional credit reports, we first confirm that bankruptcy flag removal
did create a positive shock to credit access among our sample. Credit scores jump sharply by
approximately 7 points upon flag removal, and continue to be approximately 6 to 7 points above
pre-flag removal trends at the end of four years. Consistent with prior studies, we find that this
jump in credit scores results in a corresponding increase in credit limits and credit approvals. The
total amount of credit available on credit cards increases to $63 immediately upon the removal
of a bankruptcy flag and to about $500 higher than the pre-flag removal mean by the end of four
to shuttle higher income borrowers into Chapter 13 filings instead. While prior studies such as Dobbie, Keys, and
Mahoney (2017) have used both Chapter 7 and Chapter 13 filings, their data filings are pre-2005, and thus before
the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention Act would have been imposed.
4Due to the obscurity of bankruptcy flags on credit reports, survey evidence has demonstrated that the removal
of these flags are unexpected by borrowers (Gross et al., 2018).
5Clarity Services is now a subsidiary of Experian, our standard credit bureau data source.
https://www.clarityservices.com/about-us/
3