NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE COSTS OF EMPLOYMENT SEGREGATION:
EVIDENCE FROM THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT UNDER WOODROW WILSON
Abhay Aneja
Guo Xu
Working Paper 27798
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27798
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2020, Revised August 2021
We are grateful to the UC Berkeley Institute for Research on Labor and Employment (IRLE) and
the Hellman Foundation for generously providing financial assistance needed for data collection.
We thank Junxi Liu and John Friedman for excellent research assistance. We thank Daniel
Aaronson, Anna Aizer, Leah Boustan, Bill Collins, Ernesto Dal B´o, Ellora Derenoncourt,
Camilo Garcia Jimeno, Claudia Goldin, Lawrence Katz, Desmond King, Jonathan Leonard,
Trevon Logan, Bob Margo, Bhash Mazumder, Conrad Miller, Claire Montialoux, Marty Olney,
Gavin Wright, and four anonymous referees for their valuable comments. We also thank
numerous seminar participants at Harvard, Northwestern, UC Berkeley, RIDGE, NBER, and the
Chicago Federal Reserve Bank. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Abhay Aneja and Guo Xu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Costs of Employment Segregation: Evidence from the Federal Government under Woodrow
Wilson
Abhay Aneja and Guo Xu
NBER Working Paper No. 27798
September 2020, Revised August 2021
JEL No. J15,J45,M5,N4
ABSTRACT
We link newly-digitized personnel records of the U.S. government for 1907-1921 to census data
to study the segregation of the civil service by race under President Woodrow Wilson. Using a
difference-in-differences design around Wilson’s inauguration, we find that the introduction of
employment segregation increased the black-white earnings gap by 3.4-6.9 percentage points.
This increasing gap is driven by a reallocation of existing black civil servants to lower-paid
positions, lowering their returns to education. Importantly, the negative effects extend beyond
Wilson’s presidency. Using census data for 1900-1940, we show that segregation caused a
relative decline in the home ownership rate of black civil servants. Moreover, by comparing
children of black and white civil servants in adulthood, we provide evidence that descendants of
black civil servants who were exposed to Wilson’s presidency exhibit lower levels of education,
earnings, and social mobility. Our combined results thus document significant short and long-run
costs borne by minorities during a unique episode of state-sanctioned discrimination.
Abhay Aneja
University of California at Berkeley
School of Law
225 Bancroft Way
Berkeley, CA 94720
aneja@berkeley.edu
Guo Xu
Haas School of Business
University of California at Berkeley
2220 Piedmont Avenue
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
guoxu@haas.berkeley.edu

1 Introduction
OutcomegapsbetweenblackandwhiteAmericansinhealth, wealth, andemploymenthavebeenapersistent
featureoftheUnitedStatessincethenation’sfounding. Understandingtherootsofracialinequalityiscrucial
to choosing the appropriate policy remedies. The U.S. has implemented an array of policies to respond to
persistentpolitical,social,andeconomicdisparitiesalongracialandethniclines.Theserangefrompoliciesthat
promoteracialintegration(Guryan,2004)tothestrengtheningofanti-discriminationlawspreventingdisparities
inaccesstohealthcare(Chayetal.,2014),housing(Massey,2015)andemployment(DonohueandHeckman,
1991;Collins,2003;Chay,1998).
The idea that past discrimination can have persistent, deleterious effects on minorities lies behind even more
ambitious policies. Majority-minority districts, for example, ensure that minority groups are adequately rep-
resentedwithinlocal,state,andfederallegislatures(Washington,2012). Affirmativeactionprogramsprovide
set-asides for underrepresented groups within schools, employment, and other public institutions (Holzer and
Neumark, 2012; Miller, 2017; Bleemer, 2020). The case for such ameliorative policies, however, hinges on
thedegreetowhichpastepisodesofdiscriminationpersist. Ifpastdiscriminatorypoliciesdonottranslateinto
contemporaneousoutcomegaps,group-basedentitlementsmayevenintroduceadditionaldistortionsintheac-
cumulationorallocationoftalent(Welch,1981;FryerandLoury,2005;Durlauf,2008).Whilealargerliterature
hasdocumentedtheimpactsofrace-consciouspolicies(Johnson,2011;Miller,2017),micro-levelevidenceon
howpersistentthesepastepisodesofdiscriminationareinthefirstplaceremainsscarce.
Inthispaper,weassesstheeconomiccosttoblackAmericansintermsofearnings,wealth,andintergenerational
mobility of one of the modern era’s most far-reaching episodes of discriminatory government policy – the
segregation of the U.S. government under Woodrow Wilson’s administration. In 1913, Wilson sanctioned a
policytosegregateblackandwhitecivilservantsacrossthefederalbureaucracy. Introducedwiththedeclared
intent of improving bureaucratic efficiency by removing “frictions” between black and white civil servants
(Lunardini,1979;Cell,1982), segregationhaddevastatingeffectsonblackcivilservants’employmentstatus.
Qualitativeaccountssuggestthatsegregationwascarriedoutthroughdemotionsandfirings–creatingdefacto
ceilings on black workers’ mobility within the government (King, 1995), and reducing their earnings. Given
these potentially damaging effects on black civil servants’ livelihoods, this episode of discrimination likely
echoedacrossotherdomainsoflife,andevenacrossgenerations. Yet,thereremainsnoquantitativeassessment
ofhowcostlytheAmericangovernment’sdiscriminatorysegregationregimewasforblackcivilservants.
Underpinning our study is a large-scale data digitization effort covering the careers of over 1.3 million U.S.
2

federal employees. We digitize each volume of the Official Register of the United States series (the “Official
Register,” or “Registers”), also known as the Biennial Register of All Officers and Agents, between the years
1907-1921. Issuedeverytwoyearsduringthetimeperiodwestudy,theRegistersareagovernmentpublication
series that provide a detailed list of every person who worked for the federal government, including their de-
partment,bureau,jobtitle(i.e.,occupation),andsalary. TheRegistersthusprovidehigh-qualitypersonneldata
forahistoricalperiodwherehigh-frequencyearningsdataisrarelyavailable.1 Ourstudyisthefirsttoleverage
thisuniquedatasourceforthestudyoftheearly20thcenturybureaucracyandlabormarketintheU.S.
A major challenge for the study of racial differences in the U.S. federal civil service during the early 20th
centuryistheabsenceofinformationonaperson’sraceinthepersonnelrecordswedigitize. Toovercomethis
barrier,welinkournewly-digitizedadministrativepersonnelrecordstothecompletecountDecennialCensuses.
Toquantifytheeffectoffederalsegregation, wethenemployamatcheddifference-in-differencesdesign. We
usecoarsenedexactmatchingtoidentifyforeachblackcivilservantawhitecounterpartwho–attheonsetof
Wilson’spresidency–was(i)ofthesamesexandcomparableage,(ii)workedinthesameCabinetdepartment
and bureau, and (iii) earned a comparable salary for a similar employment contract. We then compare these
matchedblackandwhitecivilservantsaroundWilson’sinauguration,assessinghowtheblack-whiteearnings
gapamongcomparablecivilservantsevolvedbeforeandafterWilson’s1913mandatetosegregate.
OurmainfindingisthatPresidentWilson’ssegregationpolicyhadpersistentlynegativeconsequencesforblack
civil servants. For civil servants who worked in the same department, were of comparable age, and earned a
comparable salary before the segregation order, black civil servants earned approximately 3.4-6.9 percentage
points(p.p.)lessoverthedurationofWilson’sterm.Thispenaltyholdswithindividualfixedeffects,suggesting
thatthenegativeeffectisdriveninpartbydifferencesincareerprogression. Consistentwithourfindingsbeing
causedbythepresidentialpolicyratherthanlatentdiscriminatoryattitudesthroughoutthefederalgovernment,
the negative effect is largest for the Department of the Navy, the Post Office, and the Treasury Department –
departmentsknownforhavingimplementedthesegregationorderearliestandmostaggressivelyatthebehest
ofPresidentWilson(King,1996). Bycontrast,thepenaltyfacedbyblackcivilservantswasmoremutedwithin
theAgricultureandLaborDepartments,whichwereknownforinitiallyresistingthesegregationorder.
An empirical challenge during the “Jim Crow” period is the presence of strong race-specific career dynamics
(Wright, 1986). If a “glass ceiling” for black civil servants was already in place within the federal govern-
mentbeforeWilson,ablack-whitegapincareerprogressioncouldappearovertimeevenintheabsenceofthe
1Muchworkfocusedonthisperiodrelyoncoarse,imputedsalariesbasedontheoccupationaltitlesfromthedecadalcensus.
3