NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INTERBANK NETWORKS IN THE SHADOWS OF
THE FEDERAL RESERVE ACT
Haelim Anderson
Selman Erol
Guillermo Ordoñez
Working Paper 27721
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27721
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2020
We thank participants at the 2019 Barcelona Summer GSE Forum, the 2019 NBER SI Monetary
Economics Workshop, the 2019 Yale Financial Stability conference, the 2020 Philadelphia
Federal Reserve’s conference on “The Impact of Post-Crisis Regulation on Financial Markets",
and the 2020 Western Finance Association annual meeting. We also thank seminar participants at
the IMF and FDIC. We thank Mark Carlson, Gary Gorton, Jeffrey Miron, Gary Richardson,
Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, and Kathy Yuan for comments and suggestions and Dillon McNeill,
Andrew Orr, David Eijbergen, and Andrew Vizzi for excellent research assistance. Views and
opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent official positions or
policy of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Ordonez received financial support by NSF
Grant 1919351 and Erol by NSF Grant 1919029 and the CMU Berkman Faculty Development
Fund. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Haelim Anderson, Selman Erol, and Guillermo Ordoñez. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Interbank Networks in the Shadows of the Federal Reserve Act
Haelim Anderson, Selman Erol, and Guillermo Ordoñez
NBER Working Paper No. 27721
August 2020
JEL No. D53,D85,E02,E44,G11,G21,G23,N21
ABSTRACT
Central banks provide public liquidity to traditional (regulated) banks with the intention of
stabilizing the financial system. Shadow banks are not regulated, yet they indirectly access such
liquidity through the interbank system. We build a model that shows how public liquidity
provision may change the linkages between traditional and shadow banks, increasing systemic
risk through three channels: reducing aggregate liquidity, expanding fragile short-term
borrowing, and crowding out of private cross-bank insurance. We show that the creation of the
Federal Reserve System and the provision of public liquidity changed the structure and nature of
the U.S. interbank network in ways that are consistent with the model and its implications. We
provide empirical evidence by constructing unique data on balance sheets and detailed
disaggregated information on payments and funding connections in Virginia.
Haelim Anderson Guillermo Ordoñez
Center for Financial Research University of Pennsylvania
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Department of Economics
550 17th St NW PCPSE - Room 505
Washington, DC 20429 133 South 36th Street
handerson@fdic.gov Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
Selman Erol ordonez@econ.upenn.edu
Carnegie Mellon University
Tepper School of Business
5000 Forbes Ave
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
erol@cmu.edu

1 Introduction
The recent large infusions of public liquidity by the Federal Reserve System (and several
other central banks around the world) during the financial crises of 2007-2009 and the 2020
COVID-19 pandemic revitalized the discussion about the role that such infusions play in
financial markets. If public liquidity needs were exogenous and its provision costless, its
social desirability would be clear. Neither of those conditions, however, is likely to be met.
This is the reason central banks grant access to public liquidity only to traditional banks
that abide by several regulations. Yet the provision of public liquidity affects not only the
behavior of individual banks but also the manner in which banks - regulated (traditional
banks) and nonregulated (shadow banks) - interact with each other. The critical question,
therefore, is: how does public liquidity affect financial fragility when some banks can avoid
regulations and still obtain such liquidity indirectly from regulated banks?
This question is quite relevant, but also challenging, in modern times. In itself, though,
the question is not new. It was also prominent during the early years of the Federal Reserve
System, createdbythe1913FederalReserveActtoofferliquiditytomemberbanksthrougha
discount window, with the precondition that members would accept stricter regulation. The
Act made membership compulsory for national banks but voluntary for state banks, under
the presumption that most state banks would choose to join. Most of them did not. Indeed,
and perhaps inadvertently, the Federal Reserve Act may have created what we call a shadow
banking system: asystemofbanks, commercialorother, thatarenotunderfederalregulation
and do not have direct access to liquidity facilities or bailout promises. In the 1920s, this
shadow banking system consisted of nonmember banks that operated under more-relaxed
state regulations (relative to the ones imposed on member banks), yet had indirect access
to public liquidity through correspondent banks that were members of the Federal Reserve
System (CQ Researcher (1923)).1
In this paper, we first build a model to understand how introducing public liquidity affects
the extent and intensity of banks’ interactions, in particular between regulated members and
unregulatednonmembers. Westartbyconsideringafinancialsystemwithoutpublicliquidity,
which is motivated by the banking structure during the National Banking Era, the period
preceding the introduction of the Federal Reserve System. We consider a peripheral country
bank with access to liquidity and investment opportunities but also facing the possibility of
sudden withdrawals. In response to the possibility of those shocks, the bank may choose to
diversify its portfolio by placing deposits in a reserve-city bank - a core bank - that also has
1Banks placing deposits in other banks were called respondents and banks receiving deposits were called
correspondents. Correspondent banks were generally located in financial centers.
2

investment opportunities and that serves as a hub to insure across regions (receiving deposits
from several country banks, as New York banks did during the National Banking Era).
In the model we then introduce access to public liquidity by the core bank (now a member
bank), motivated by the Federal Reserve Act. We show that as a response, the periphery
bank (now a shadow nonmember bank) relies less on cash and deposits to insure against
liquidity shocks and more on borrowing short-term funds from the member bank. In this
way, the endogenous reaction of shadow banks to the public liquidity to which they lack
direct access is not only to reduce cash holdings but also to accumulate more risks in their
own portfolios. In short, the role of financial - center banks was transformed, as they went
from being a provider of productive diversification to being a nonproductive pass - through
conduit for shadow banks accessing cheaper liquidity without facing costlier regulations.
Beyond the fragility implied by the accumulation of risk in a single unregulated bank, the
increase in interbank short-term borrowing between member and nonmember banks makes
the overall network more complex and thereby strengthens the possibility of contagion. The
system’s vulnerability to shocks increases (without public liquidity ex-post, there would be
more inefficient project liquidations ), even though fragility (actual liquidations) declines by
the umbrella provided by public liquidity. Naturally if public liquidity is not for free (an
aspect we do not discuss in this paper), the reduction in fragility comes at the cost of an
increase in vulnerability and effective use of public liquidity.
Finally, our simple model also shows that the provision of public liquidity can change the
structure of the interbank system by decentralizing it geographically and thereby crowding
out private insurance. Although during the National Banking Era the concentration of re-
serves in New York City had been deemed a source of financial instability, it had also allowed
banks to smooth local liquidity shocks: since New York City banks pooled the reserves of a
large number of banks across different regions, the interbank network was able to diversify
regional shocks that were not correlated (Gilbert (1983)). With the introduction of public
liquidity, however, country banks were induced to rely more on their local correspondents
at lower costs (the costs were lower because distances were shorter, information was better,
relations were stronger, and so forth), but the emergence of decentralized interbank relation-
ships made the overall banking system more vulnerable to regional liquidity shocks. In short,
the role of financial-center banks was transformed, as they went from being a provider of
private liquidity insurance to being a conduit for public liquidity insurance.
The advantage to grounding the model on a counterfactual without central banks is the
possibility of testing its implications against historical data. The challenge, however, is
overcoming a lack of detailed balance sheet information on financial networks and banking
3