NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SOCIAL FINANCE: CULTURAL EVOLUTION, TRANSMISSION BIAS AND MARKET
DYNAMICS
Erol Akcay
David Hirshleifer
Working Paper 27745
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27745
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2020, December 2020
We thank participants at the Conference on Evolutionary Models of Financial Markets, MIT
Laboratory for Financial Engineering (virtual, June 2020), Siew Hong Teoh, Sheridan Titman,
Jeffrey Zwiebel, and especially the discussant, Simon Levin and an anonymous referee for
insightful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2020 by Erol Akcay and David Hirshleifer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Social Finance: Cultural Evolution, Transmission Bias and Market Dynamics
Erol Akcay and David Hirshleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 27745
August 2020, Revised December 2020
JEL No. D03,D15,D21,D25,D53,D8,D82,D83,D84,D85,D9,D91,D92,G02,G1,G11,G12,G14,G28, G35,G4,G41,G5,G51,G53,O31
G3,G31,G32,G34, G35,G4,G41,G5,G51,G53,O31
ABSTRACT
The thoughts and behaviors of financial market participants depend upon adopted cultural traits,
including information signals, beliefs, strategies, and folk economic models. Financial traits
compete to survive in the human population, and are modified in the process of being transmitted
from one agent to another. These cultural evolutionary processes shape market outcomes, which
in turn feed back into the success of competing traits. This evolutionary system is studied in an
emerging paradigm, social finance. In this paradigm, social transmission biases determine the
evolution of financial traits in the investor population. It considers an enriched set of cultural
traits, both selection on traits and mutation pressure, and market equilibrium at different
frequencies. Other key ingredients of the paradigm include psychological bias, social network
structure, information asymmetries, and institutional environment.
Erol Akcay
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
eakcay@sas.upenn.edu
David Hirshleifer
The Paul Merage School of Business
University of California, Irvine
4291 Pereira Drive
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
david.h@uci.edu

1 Introduction
Financial market participants employ a variety of learning strategies and heuristics,
andaresubjecttodifferentbiasesinjudgementsanddecisions. Thesedispositionsare
shaped by the cultural traits that people adopt from others. These include macrocul-
tural traits, such as national, religious, ethnic and political beliefs; and more specific
informationsignals,beliefs,financialstrategies,andfolkmodelsofhowtheeconomy
orfinancialmarketswork. Asfinancialtraitsspreadfrompersontoperson,theycom-
peteforsurvivalinthepopulation. Financialtraitsarealsomodifiedintheprocessof
beingtransmitted—intensifying,lessening,orchangingqualitatively.
The resulting population distribution of investor traits determines financial out-
comes, such as project choices, market prices and trading profits. These market out-
comesfeedbackintotheevolutionarysuccessofcompetingculturaltraits. Sofinancial
marketsandtraitsarepartsofadualculturalevolutionaryandmarketsystem.
Wearguehereforanewparadigmforunderstandingfinancialmarketswhichwe
call social finance. Social finance studies the cultural evolution of financial traits, the
transmission biases that shape this process, and resulting market dynamics. It draws
upon concepts from classical and behavioral finance, evolutionary finance, and cul-
tural evolutionary theory. We review the cultural evolution of beliefs, investment,
and price-setting in financial markets, in the context of social network structure and
institutional environment. We also highlight connections between general evolution-
arytheoryandfinancialapplications,andsuggestdirectionsforfutureresearch.
Cultural evolution is a shift in the distribution of cultural traits in a population
over time (Mesoudi et al., 2006). Cultural traits increase or decrease in frequency,
and are modified through individual and social learning. Financial economics has
longstudiedlearningbyobservingmarketprice. Evolutionaryfinancerecognizesthat
beliefsandbehaviorsarealsotransmittedviasocialinteractionandobservation. Social
financeisdistinguishedbyanexplicitandbroaderexaminationofsocialtransmission
processes,culturaltraits,andevolutionarydynamics.
Thereisgrowingevidencethatculturally-transmittedinvestorideasorfolkmodels
affecttradingbehaviorandpriceoutcomes. Thisincludesbothmacroculturaltraits,as
mentioned above, and microcultural traits, such as a belief in Bitcoin as a trading op-
portunity. Marketparticipants,suchasmanagersandinvestors,acquireandtransmit
understandingsabouthowtheeconomyandmarketswork—whatHirshleifer(2020)
refers to as folk economic and financial models. Folk financial models often reflect shal-
2

lowcognition,asencapsulatedincatch-phrasessuchas‘dead-catbounce’and‘Don’t
fight the Fed.’ Folk models are also sometimes attached to vivid narratives that help
themspreadfrompersontoperson(Shiller,2017).
Despitealonghistoryofevolutionaryapproachestoeconomicsandfinance(Alchian,
1950),evolutionaryfinance,including“econophysics”(surveyedby(Slanina,2014)),
has largely remained separate intellectual lineage from the rest of the finance field.
However,agrowingnumberof‘callstoarms’endorsethestudyofsocialinteractions
and,insomecases,evolutionaryprocessesinfinancialmarkets(FarmerandLo,1999;
Lo,2017;Shiller,2017;Hirshleifer,2020).
Existingevolutionaryandagent-basedapproachestofinancialmarkets,including
the econophysics literature, typically derive or simulate the aggregate consequences
of zero-intelligence rules for how agents behave. These approaches provide valuable
insights, but do not address the effects of having agents how thoughtfully seek to
optimize (even if imperfectly). Social finance encompasses agent-based modeling of
transmissionbiases,butgoesfurthertoallowfortheeffectsoftransmissionbiaswhen
agentsformbeliefsandchooseactionsthoughtfully.
Buildingonpreviousadvancesinevolutionaryfinanceandotherdisciplines,social
financeoffersseveraldistinctivefeaturesandpotentialcontributions.
1. Socialfinancenestsclassicalandbehavioralfinanceasspecialcases,andendog-
enizestraitsthataretypicallytakenasgiven.
Social transmission helps explain how private signals are distributed across in-
vestors; in classical finance this distribution is often taken as given. Furthermore, so-
cialtransmissionoffinancialtraits,includingfinancialfolkmodels,shapestheheuris-
ticsandbiasestakenasgiveninbehavioralfinance(asreviewedin(Hirshleifer,2015)),
andshapeshowthesetraitsvaryacrossagentsandovertime.
For example, in behavioral finance investor belief in continuation or reversal of
pricetrendsistakenasgiven,asintheliteratureonpositivefeedbacktrading(DeLong
et al., 1990). The new evolutionary perspective seeks to explain how investors come
to possess such beliefs or decision rules. In this approach, investors acquire trend-
chasingorcontrariantraitsfromothersinaprocessofculturaltransmission. Thefolk
model that return trends tend to continue competes for investor attention and belief
withthe“buyonthedips”folkmodelthatreturnstendtoreverse. Similarly,empirical
behavioralfinanceresearchoftentakesinvestorsentimenttobeanexogenousdriverof
behavior (Lee et al., 1991; Baker and Wurgler, 2007). Social finance regards shifts in
3