NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANK SYNDICATES AND LIQUIDITY PROVISION
Joao A. C. Santos
S.Vish Viswanathan
Working Paper 27701
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27701
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2020
We thank Manuel Adelino, Teodora Paligorova and Murillo Campello for valuable comments.
The views stated herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Joao A. C. Santos and S. Vish Viswanathan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Bank Syndicates and Liquidity Provision
Joao A. C. Santos and S. Vish Viswanathan
NBER Working Paper No. 27701
August 2020
JEL No. G21,G23,G3
ABSTRACT
We provide evidence that credit lines offer liquidity insurance to borrowers. Borrowers are able
to extensively use their credit lines in recessions and ahead of credit line cuts. In fact drawdowns
and changes in drawdowns predict internal credit rating downgrades and credit line cuts,
suggesting substantial liquidity access before credit line cuts. Credit line cuts are concentrated on
borrowers who do not use credit lines, and when they occur they still leave borrowers with funds
to draw down. Building on this evidence, we develop a model where syndicates faced with
liquidity shocks continue to support credit line commitments due to the continuation value of
their relationship with borrowers. Our model yields a set of predictions that find support in the
data, including the substantial increase in the lead bank's retained loan share and in the
commitment fees on the credit lines issued during the financial crisis of 2008-09. Consistent with
the model, credit lines with higher expected drawdown rates pay higher commitment fees, and
lead banks often increase their credit line investments in response to the failure of syndicate
members, reducing borrowers' risk exposure to bank failures.
Joao A. C. Santos
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty St
New York, NY 10045
joao.santos@ny.frb.org
S. Vish Viswanathan
Duke University
Fuqua School of Business
100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
viswanat@duke.edu

1 Introduction
Do credit line commitments by syndicates provide liquidity to firms that need it? Or
does liquidity evaporate when firms need it the most? These questions have been the
subject of an intense debate in the academic world. Starting with Roberts and Sufi
(2009), a literature has emerged that shows that covenant violations lead to substantial
reductions in credit line commitments, suggesting that credit lines offer only limited
liquidity insurance. A related literature going back to Sufi (2009) arrives at a similar
conclusion by investigating firms’ choices between cash and credit lines. However, this
body of research takes an ex post view of loan commitments and does not answer the key
question as to whether credit lines actually provide liquidity insurance. The key insight
from this literature raises a puzzle: why did firms not raise liquidity in a precautionary
way by drawing down credit lines before reporting the information that will trigger the
covenant violations leading to liquidity cuts? Is it possible that these firms did draw
down their credit lines preemptively? Further, these studies do not consider the supply
channel and investigate why and when banks keep their credit line commitments.
These questions gained additional prominence with the wave of corporate draw-
downs following the Covid-19 outbreak in the US. Between March 12 and April 9, 2020,
452 corporations drew $218 billion on their credit lines according to S&P LCD. 110 of
those corporations experienced a credit downgrade or were put on rating agencies’ watch
list. Among these, the drawdown rate was 0.77 for those that accessed their credit lines
before or on the day of rating agencies’ action (downgrade or inclusion in the watch list)
and 0.75 for those that did it afterwards (Figure 1).1 While this is not a statistical test,
it is related to the key point we want to make in the paper, that substantial liquidity is
available to firms that need it via credit lines.
Specifically, in this paper, we contribute to the literature on the liquidity insur-
1Forthe342borrowersthatwerenotdowngradedorwerenotintheratingagencies’watchlist,theaveragedrawdown
ratewas0.62.
1

ance role of credit line commitments. We begin by investigating a set of questions that
speak to the liquidity insurance role of credit commitments from an ex ante point of
view. Do borrowers accelerate drawdowns in a precautionary way anticipating events
that may impede them from accessing their credit lines? Do syndicates allocate credit
line cuts in a way to preserve credit lines to those firms that need them? We then
develop a theory of optimal syndicate formation in which syndicates receive liquidity
shocks but still provide liquidity insurance to firms. We end by testing some predic-
tions of our model about (i) the pricing of credit lines,(ii) the structure of credit line
syndicates, and (iii) the effect of shocks that inhibit syndicate members to meet their
liquidity commitments.
We capitalize on data from the Shared National Credit (SNC) program to in-
vestigate the liquidity insurance role of credit lines. This program tracks credit lines
annually. This allows us to observe if and when borrowers draw down on their credit
lines, and when credit commitments experience cuts. Since our sample covers the 1998
to 2013 time period we are able to analyze credit lines’ drawdowns and cuts over the
course of three recessions. Further, since our data contains comprehensive information
on credit line syndicates we are able to investigate lead banks’ loan share decisions and
how shocks to syndicate members affect credit lines.
We show that in aggregate firms draw down credit lines substantially more in
recessions and while credit lines experience cuts, these tend to occur towards the end of
recessions; suggesting that cuts occur subsequent to drawdowns. The drawdown result
is robust in a regression where we saturate our specification with borrower-, loan- and
bank-specific controls and allow for both bank and firm fixed effects. This shows that
firms are able to utilize their credit lines when they likely need them the most. While
the poor performance of firms leads to cuts in credit lines, these cuts appear to lag and
emerge after substantial liquidity has already been provided to firms. Indeed, we show
using a regression specification with controls that drawdowns and changes in drawdowns
2