NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DOES VOTE TRADING IMPROVE WELFARE?
Alessandra Casella
Antonin Macé
Working Paper 27743
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27743
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2020
When citing this paper, please use the following: Casella, A, Macé, A. 2020. "Does Vote Trading
Improve Welfare?" Annu. Rev. Econ. 13: Submitted. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-
economics-081720-114422. We are grateful to the institutions that, throughout the years, have
supported the works discussed in this survey, in particular the National Science Foundation,
through its grants SES-00214013 and SES-0617934, the Agence Nationale de la Recherche,
through its grants ANR-17-CE26-0003 and ANR-17-EURE-001, the Guggenheim Foundation,
the Institute for Advanced Studies, the Straus Institute at the NYU Law School, and finally the
Alliance Program at Columbia and Université Paris 1 that made our collaboration possible. We
are also very grateful to the colleagues, friends, and students who have worked with us, in
particular Tom Palfrey, whose collaboration shaped both specific papers and broad ideas, Jean
François Laslier, who brought us together and whose teachings and moral compass helped to
keep us straight, and Rafael Treibich for fruitful discussions and in particular comments on this
survey which opened new perspectives. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Alessandra Casella and Antonin Macé. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Does Vote Trading Improve Welfare?
Alessandra Casella and Antonin Macé
NBER Working Paper No. 27743
August 2020
JEL No. D6,D7,D71,D72
ABSTRACT
Voters have strong incentives to increase their influence by trading votes, a practice indeed
believed to be common. But is vote trading welfare-improving or welfare-decreasing? We review
the theoretical literature and, when available, its related experimental tests. We begin with the
analysis of logrolling – the exchange of votes for votes, considering both explicit vote exchanges
and implicit vote trades engineered by bundling issues in a single bill. We then focus on vote
markets, where votes can be traded against a numeraire. We cover competitive markets, strategic
market games, decentralized bargaining, and more centralized mechanisms, such as quadratic
voting, where votes can be bought at a quadratic cost. We conclude with procedures allowing
voters to shift votes across decisions – to trade votes with oneself only – such as storable votes or
a modified form of quadratic voting. We find that vote trading and vote markets are typically
inefficient; more encouraging results are obtained by allowing voters to allocate votes across
decisions.
Alessandra Casella
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118 Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
ac186@columbia.edu
Antonin Macé
Paris School of Economics
48 boulevard Jourdan
75014 Paris
antonin.mace@gmail.com

1 Introduction
Voting is a fundamental procedure for discovering collective preferences, cod-
ified in democratic political institutions, but in fact used, more or less for-
mally,inallassociationsofpeoplewithaninterestinconsensualgroupaction.
The observation that voting lends itself to deals and trade is as common as
the act of voting itself. Exchanging favors by supporting each other’s favorite
proposals or extracting immediate compensation in return for voting as a fel-
low group member desires are behaviors that do not surprise us. They may
be described as unsavory but they are essential to the practice of politics:
“Logrolling is [..] the most characteristic legislative process... It is com-
promise, [..] in the practical form with which every legislator who gets results
through government is acquainted. It is trading. It is the adjustment of in-
terests. ..There never was a time in the history of the American Congress
when legislation was conducted in any other way.”
Bentley (1908), The Process of Government, (pp. 370–371)
Given the prominence of vote trading in all groups’ decision-making, it
is very surprising how little we know and understand about it. Collecting
rigorous data is difficult, but the theory itself remains underdeveloped to this
day. The problem has attracted prominent scholars and some indeed have
put vote trading at the center of politics, as Arthur Bentley advocated more
than a century ago, but disagreements about both the mechanics and the
effects of vote trading have never been fully resolved. Are trades of votes
for votes different from trades of votes for more flexible compensation, like
money or favors? Are trades most commonly decentralized, voter-to-voter,
or are they coordinated by group leaders or others? Are they mostly one-
to-one, or do they involve larger coalitions? Most fundamentally, are vote
trades beneficial or welfare reducing?
It is not difficult to see why the answer to this last, crucial question
is not a priori clear. Vote trades allow a voter to modulate her influence,
increasing it on her highest priorities by acquiring additional votes, at the
cost of reducing it on less important issues by give one’s votes away. If voters
differ on their priorities, the reallocation of voting power resulting from their
trades should be beneficial. The difficulty, however, is that a vote trade
affects all voters, not only those directly trading. The externalities will be
both positive and negative, and there is no immediate reason why the net
effect should be positive.
2

Research thrives on questions whose answer is not obvious. Why has
vote trading remained relatively unexplored? One possible reason is that
the difficulty here is deeper, and has to do with the very nature of the good
traded – a vote. Imagine, as a fully abstract exercise, an egalitarian society
where no-one is budget constrained and votes can be bought and sold on
a market in exchange for a numeraire. The value of a vote is not in the
consumption utility it provides; it is in the influence it grants its holder. But
such influence does not depend only on the number of votes the voter holds;
given the voting rule, it depends on the full distribution of votes among
all other voters. As a result, standard economic concepts like competitive
equilibrium or the core fail: in a market for votes, competitive equilibrium
does not exist and the core is empty. The intuitive parallel between a vote
and a tradable economic good is misleading.
As we will show in what follows, progress has been made in recent works,
in part by defining alternative equilibrium concepts or focusing on the stabil-
ity of the system, in part by proposing and studying alternative institutions.
The overall message invites to be humble: neither logrolling (trading votes
for votes) nor markets for votes (trading votes for a numeraire) are found to
have properties that are both positive and robust: welfare gains relative to
no-traderequirestrongandtypicallyspecialassumptions. Otherinstitutions,
allowing voters to reallocate a given total budget of votes across multiple de-
cisions without trading with others, seem more promising–both the theory
and the existing experiments suggest gains, without requiring fine-tuning the
design to the details of the environment. A realistic goal is a modest but re-
liable improvement over majority rule. It is with this objective in mind that
practically implementable schemes, inspired by but crucially different from
vote trading, are most likely to be successful.
We highlight results that we believe can be useful going forward but of
course the survey is limited and neglects important related topics. First,
because we consider the lack of a common theoretical approach the first
challenge to understanding vote trading, we focus exclusively on theoretical
contributions, and, when they exist, on their experimental tests, neglecting
the empirical literature on vote trading.1 Second, the survey does not discuss
1In the absence of direct measures of vote trading, the empirical literature is partic-
ularly creative in drawing insights from the data that can be observed. Cohen & Malloy
(2014)andGuerrero&Matter(2016)andthereferencescitedtherearegoodentrypoints
for the interested reader.
3