NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MEASURING THE EFFECTS OF FIRM UNCERTAINTY ON ECONOMIC ACTIVITY:
NEW EVIDENCE FROM ONE MILLION DOCUMENTS
Kyle Handley
J. Frank Li
Working Paper 27896
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27896
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2020
We have received helpful comments from Nick Bloom, Cheng Chen, Steve Davis, Doireann
Fitzgerald, Davide Furceri, Tarek Hassan, E. Han Kim, Yao Lu, Indrajit Mitra, John Rogers,
Simon Sheng, Jagadeesh Sivadasan, Steven Terry, and Toni Whited; our discussants Scott Baker,
Erica X. N. Li and Xinyan Yan; and seminar participants at Michigan, RIETI (Japan), the
Conference on Uncertainty and Economic Activity at Renmin University, NBER Summer
Institute, Stanford SITE, Stanford Hoover, CAED, Econometric Society Summer Meeting,
Tsinghua PBC, and CICF. This research was conducted while the authors were Special Sworn
Status researchers at the Michigan Census Research Data Center. Any opinions and conclusions
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S.
Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is
disclosed. We thank Clint Carter for assistance and timely disclosure review of all results. Rohit
Singla at Michigan provided invaluable assistance with computing resources. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Kyle Handley and J. Frank Li. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Measuring the Effects of Firm Uncertainty on Economic Activity: New Evidence from One
Million Documents
Kyle Handley and J. Frank Li
NBER Working Paper No. 27896
October 2020
JEL No. D81,E22,E32
ABSTRACT
We construct a new measure of firm-level uncertainty from analyzing the text of mandatory
reports filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. Using firm and establishment
level panel data on investment margins and employment dynamics, we find our uncertainty
measure has large effects on investment even after controlling for industry and time-varying
shocks. Periods of high firm uncertainty (1) reduce investment rates by 0.5% and attenuate the
response to positive sales shocks by about half and (2) reduce employment growth rates by 1.4%
and the response to positive sales shocks by 30%. Firms are less responsive to demand shocks at
the firm level and across establishments within the firm. Consistent with “wait and see”
dynamics, uncertainty affects new investment activity, e.g. plant births and acquisition, more than
disinvestment margins.
Kyle Handley
Ross School of Business
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
handleyk@umich.edu
J. Frank Li
Stanford University
210 Panama Street
Stanford, CA 94305
jfli@stanford.edu

1 Introduction
Uncertainty can be defined in theory to carefully and specifically encompass aggregate, industry,
or firm-level shocks. But measuring uncertainty, especially at the firm-level, is difficult in practice,
both for firms and the economists who study them. Our approach to quantifying firm uncertainty
rests on a simple hypothesis: if firms say they are uncertain, then we can take their word for it —
literally. To test this, we measure how frequently firms use variations of the word “uncertainty”
in mandatory reports filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). We sum-
marize about one million documents from 1994-2016 and build a new panel database of firm-level,
time-varying uncertainty measures. With these measures in hand, we then ask three important
questions: (1) should we take firm declarations of “uncertainty” at face value; (2) how important
are fluctuations in firm-level uncertainty for investment activities; and (3) does the firm-level varia-
tion in uncertainty explain micro fluctuations independently of aggregate and industry uncertainty
measures?
A growing body of recent work investigates the effects of uncertainty on economic activity.
The dynamics of uncertainty and investment have been theoretically understood for some time
(cf. Bernanke, 1983; Dixit, 1989; Abel and Eberly, 1994). In the presence some form of partially
irreversible costs, firms will delay projects and be less responsive to shocks when uncertainty about
future business conditions is high. Some research links reduced investment to realized or forecasted
stock return volatility using firm-level data (Leahy and Whited, 1996; Bloom et al., 2007). Re-
sponses to uncertainty can extend beyond capital investments to affect hiring decisions when labor
adjustment or search and matching costs are high (Bloom, 2009; Schaal, 2017). It can also affect
aggregate export dynamics (Novy and Taylor, Forth.) or firm decisions to enter and invest in new
export markets (Handley, 2014; Handley and Limão, 2017).
Understanding and measuring uncertainty at the firm-level is important. Recent theory and
evidence suggest that idiosyncratic shocks to particular firms play an important role in observed
aggregate fluctuations (Gabaix, 2011), but evidence on uncertainty shocks is limited and mixed.
Bachmann and Bayer (2013; 2014) suggest that small shocks to firm productivity are important to
explaining pro-cyclical productivity dispersion using German firm-level data, but are not a driver
ofmajorbusinesscycles. Incontrast, Bloometal. (2018)findevidencethatmicrouncertaintyrises
1

in recessions and that uncertainty shocks lead to reductions in GDP, productivity and reallocation
in a heterogeneous firms DSGE model. To better understand these dynamics, we build firm-level
measures of uncertainty from textual analysis of company reports that we can use to explore
both firm and industry investment dynamics. Thus, we can explore firm-specific fluctuations in
uncertainty in a long panel against performance outcomes that include investment, employment
growth, andestablishmentdynamicsusingdatafrombothCOMPUSTATandtheU.S.Censusfirm
and establishment microdata.
Constructing quantitative measures of uncertainty, even at the aggregate level, is fraught with
difficulty. This complication was recognized by Keynes (1937), who noted that firms must carry
on with investment and employment decisions despite the difficulty in quantifying their uncertain
knowledge of the future.1 More recently, Jurado et al. (2015) show that many common proxies for
uncertainty may reflect a mixture of first moment shocks and other sources of variation unrelated
to fundamental uncertainty. For example, aggregate proxies such as the CBOE Volatility Index
(VIX) measure the volatility of the S&P 500 index implied by equity call options on its underlying
components. But the prices of these options and their implied volatility can move substantially
even if the underlying fundamentals of the business enterprise are unchanged. Nevertheless, these
derived uncertainty proxies operate like uncertainty measures in some empirical work. Barrero et
al. (2017) and Stein and Stone (2013) find that increases in implied volatility derived from equity
options reduces hiring and investment. Unfortunately, traded equity options for large number of
public firms simply don’t exist, including components of the S&P 500 Index.
Othermeasuresatthefirmlevelarequalitativeandderivedfromsurveysoffirmsorprofessional
forecasters. What these measures lack in quantitative precision is offset, at least partially, by the
fact that they are sourced from managers, insiders, and professionals with a detailed knowledge
of specific companies or industry sectors. For example, the Federal Reserve Board’s Greenbook
and other proprietary professional forecasts contain significant narrative components. Sharpe et
al. (2017) show the tonality of Fed Board forecasts has predictive power for GDP growth and
1Writing about uncertainty over the prospect of war, copper prices, and product obsolescence, Keynes (1937)
remarked: “About these matters there is no scientific basis on which to form any calculable probability whatever.
We simply do not know. Nevertheless, the necessity for action and for decision compels us as practical men to do
our best to overlook this awkward fact and to behave exactly as we should if we had behind us a good Benthamite
calculation of a series of prospective advantages and disadvantages, each multiplied by its appropriate probability,
waiting to be summed.” (p. 214)
2