NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FIFTY SHADES OF QE:
COMPARING FINDINGS OF CENTRAL BANKERS AND ACADEMICS
Brian Fabo
Martina Jan oková
Elisabeth Kempf
uboš Pástor
Working Paper 27849
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27849
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2020, Revised April 2021
The paper previously circulated under the title "Fifty Shades of QE: Conflicts of Interest in
Economic Research." The views in this paper are those of the authors and do not represent the
views of the European Central Bank, the National Bank of Slovakia, any other institution, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research. Pástor is a member of the bank board of the National
Bank of Slovakia. We are grateful for comments from Wenxin Du, Mara Faccio, Pavel Gertler,
Daniel Gros, Urban Jermann, Sujit Kapadia, Anil Kashyap, Luc Laeven, Ludovít Ódor,
Raghuram Rajan, Kasper Roszbach, Martin Šuster, and Tomasz Wieladek, as well as to seminar
participants at the European Central Bank, Košice Economic Forum, National Bank of Slovakia,
Purdue University, Toulouse School of Economics, University of Chicago, University of Geneva,
and University of Miami. We are also grateful to Livia Amato, Yuliia Kazmina, Fulin Li, Eva
Štulrajterová and, especially, Bianca He for excellent research assistance. This research was
supported by the Fama-Miller Center for Research in Finance at Chicago Booth.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2020 by Brian Fabo, Martina Jan oková, Elisabeth Kempf, and uboš Pástor. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Fifty Shades of QE: Comparing Findings of Central Bankers and Academics
Brian Fabo, Martina Jan oková, Elisabeth Kempf, and uboš Pástor
NBER Working Paper No. 27849
September 2020, Revised April 2021
JEL No. A11,E52,E58,G28
ABSTRACT
We compare the findings of central bank researchers and academic economists regarding the
macroeconomic effects of quantitative easing (QE). We find that central bank papers find QE to
be more effective than academic papers do. Central bank papers report larger effects of QE on
output and inflation. They also report QE effects on output that are more significant, both
statistically and economically, and they use more positive language in the abstract. Central bank
researchers who report larger QE effects on output experience more favorable career outcomes. A
survey of central banks reveals substantial involvement of bank management in research
production.
Brian Fabo Elisabeth Kempf
Narodna banka Slovenska Booth School of Business
Imricha Karvasa 1 University of Chicago
Bratislava 81325 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Slovakia Chicago, IL 60637
brian.fabo@nbs.sk elisabeth.kempf@chicagobooth.edu
Martina Jan(cid:0)oková (cid:0)uboš Pástor
European Central Bank University of Chicago
Sonnemannstraße 20 Booth School of Business
Frankfurt am Main 60314 5807 South Woodlawn Ave
Germany Chicago, IL 60637
martina.jancokova@gmail.com and NBER
lubos.pastor@chicagobooth.edu

1. Introduction
Since the 2008 financial crisis, central banks around the world have deployed unconven-
tional monetary policy tools such as quantitative easing, forward guidance, and long-term
refinancing operations. The popularity of these tools has grown since the outbreak of the
COVID-19 pandemic. For example, the Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank, and
the Bank of England all announced new large-scale asset purchases in March 2020.
The effectiveness of unconventional monetary policy (“QE”) has been a subject of intense
debateinbothacademicandpolicycircles. AsignificantpartoftheresearchonQEoriginates
incentralbanks(MartinandMilas(2012)). Thisresearch, whichiswidelycitedinthemedia,
often finds QE to be effective.1 However, it has an aspect of self-assessment: when central
banks evaluate QE, they are judging their own policy. Whether this aspect has any bearing
on research output is an empirical question that we address in this paper.
We compare the findings of central bank researchers (“central bankers”) and academic
economists (“academics”) regarding the effectiveness of QE. We construct a dataset com-
prising 54 studies that analyze the effects of QE on output or inflation in the U.S., UK, and
the euro area. For each study, we record its baseline estimates of the effects of QE on the
level of GDP and the price level, along with their significance. We also collect a variety of
other study-specific information, such as publication status and methodology used, as well as
detailed biographical information of the 116 different authors. We then compare the findings
of studies written by central bankers with those written by academics.
We find that central bank papers report larger effects of QE on both output and inflation.
Central bank papers are also more likely to report QE effects on output that are significant,
both statistically and economically. For example, while all of the central bank papers report
a statistically significant QE effect on output, only half of the academic papers do. In
addition, central bank papers use more favorable language—more positive adjectives and, to
a lesser extent, fewer negative adjectives—in their abstracts. Overall, central bank papers
find QE to be more effective than academic papers do.
1For example: “The good news is that, by most accounts, QE appears to have succeeded at boosting
growth and lifting inflation. Martin Weale, a member of the BoE’s interest-rate setting Monetary Policy
Committee,foundassetpurchasesworth1%ofnationalincomeboostedUKgrossdomesticproductbyabout
0.18% and inflation by 0.3%. A study by John Williams, president of the San Francisco Federal Reserve,
concluded that asset purchases had reduced the US unemployment rate by 1.5 percentage points by late
2012 and helped the economy avoid deflation.” The Financial Times (2015).
1

We also uncover differences in methodological choices. For example, central bank papers
are more likely to use dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models rather than
vector autoregression (VAR) models. Yet our main result—that central bankers are more
optimistic than academics in their assessments of QE—continues to hold even when we
control for model choice. Differences in research quality are also unlikely to explain our
results because the gap between central bankers and academics is very similar when we
condition on published papers only, as well as when we weight each paper by its citations.
Our results are robust to the inclusion of various controls, and they are not driven by central
bankers from any single country, nor by QE programs in any single country.
To explore one possible mechanism, we relate central bankers’ research findings to their
subsequent career outcomes. We collect employment histories for all central bank authors
and convert their job titles to numerical ranks on a six-point scale. For each author-paper
pair, we measure the author’s subsequent career outcome by the first change in the author’s
rank following the paper’s first public release. We find that authors whose papers report
larger effects of QE on output experience more favorable career outcomes. A one standard
deviation increase in the estimated effect is associated with a career improvement of about
half a rank, such as moving halfway from Economist to Senior Economist. This evidence
suggests a potential role for career concerns in explaining our results.
These concerns appear to be stronger for senior central bankers because for them, we
find a stronger relation between the estimated QE effects and subsequent career outcomes.
Motivated by this finding, we look whether the gap between the findings of central bankers
and academics is larger for papers whose authors are more senior. We find that it is, though
only marginally so. Our results are consistent with the idea that senior central bankers
report larger effects of QE because they have a stronger incentive to do so.
Not all central bankers face the same incentives. Top management of the German Bun-
desbank has taken a critical view of QE, especially in the context of the European Central
Bank (ECB). Former Bundesbank officials Axel Weber and Ju¨rgen Stark reportedly quit
their ECB positions in protest over QE, and the current Bundesbank president, Jens Weid-
mann, has also publicly opposed it. Mindful of their bosses’ views, Bundesbank researchers
could potentially face career concerns very different from those of their colleagues at other
central banks. Indeed, we show that studies co-authored by Bundesbank employees find QE
to be less effective at raising output compared to academic studies. While this evidence is
weak statistically, it is suggestive of managerial influence on research outcomes.
2