NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LONG-RUN RETURNS TO PRIVATE EQUITY IN EMERGING MARKETS
Shawn Cole
Martin Melecky
Florian Mölders
Tristan Reed
Working Paper 27870
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27870
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2020, revised October 2024
This paper previously circulated as 'Long-run Returns to Impact Investing in Emerging Markets
and Developing Economies.' We thank Mohan Manem especially for providing an understanding
of the data. Seminar participants in the Harvard Business School Finance Unit, International
Finance Corporation, World Bank Development Research Group, and IMF African Department
provided helpful comments and questions, along with Paddy Carter, Adam Fegan, Penny
Goldberg, Neil Gregory, Oghale Ighoavodha, Victoria Ivashina, Jessica Jeffers, Kostas Kollias,
Josh Lerner, Ita Mary Mannathoko, Fanele Mashwama, Paolo Mauro, Camilo Mondragón-Vélez,
Jacob L. Otto, Tommaso Porzio, Raghuram Rajan, Thomas Rehermann, Roberto Rigobon,
Antoinette Schoar, and Jesse Schreger. Anshul Maudar provided excellent research assistance.
Shawn Cole gratefully acknowledges support from the Division of Research and Faculty
Development at Harvard Business School. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no
confidential information is disclosed. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of the World Bank Group or the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27870
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Shawn Cole, Martin Melecky, Florian Mölders, and Tristan Reed. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Long-run Returns to Private Equity in Emerging Markets
Shawn Cole, Martin Melecky, Florian Mölders, and Tristan Reed
NBER Working Paper No. 27870
September 2020, revised October 2024
JEL No. G15,O1
ABSTRACT
We provide the first evidence on the long-run returns to private equity in emerging and frontier
markets using the cash flows from every equity investment made by the International Finance
Corporation across 130 countries over 58 years. Risk-adjusted returns are comparable to the S&P
500, at least from 1961 until 2010. Returns improve with economic growth, but decline as
banking systems deepen and countries relax capital controls. These results are consistent with the
thesis that financial frictions have prevented the flow of capital from rich to poor countries, and
that the persistence of impact investors’ performance may rely on identifying or creating new
markets that lack access to capital.
Shawn Cole Florian Mölders
Harvard Business School International Finance Corporation: IFC
Baker Library 271 2121 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Soldiers Field Washington, DC 20007
Boston, MA 02163 fmoelders@ifc.org
and NBER
scole@hbs.edu Tristan Reed
The World Bank
Martin Melecky Development Research Group
1818 H St NW 1818 H Street NW
Washington, DC 20007 Washington, DC 20433
USA treed@worldbank.org
mmelecky@worldbank.org

1 Introduction
This paper provides the first evidence on returns to private equity investment in emerging markets
using consistent data for a long period of time. Specifically, we analyze the cash flows associated
with every equity investment made by the International Finance Corporation (IFC), a member of
the World Bank Group, which invests across 130 emerging markets including the poorest and most
neglected by private investors. Founded in 1956 with a mandate to “further economic development
byencouragingthegrowthofproductiveprivateenterpriseinmembercountries, particularly in less
developed areas,” the IFC’s charter includes the goal of achieving market rate returns in markets
“where suﬀicient private capital is not available on reasonable terms.” The portfolio is free of
sampling problems, such as survivorship bias, and is much more diversified across countries than
either foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows or the MSCI Emerging Market (MSCI EM) index of
publicly-listedequities, bothofwhicharehighlyconcentratedonlargeremergingmarketeconomies
like China and Brazil. This unique dataset enables us to address long-standing questions relevant
to international finance and development economics.
First,whatistheperformanceofadiversifiedinvestmentstrategyfocusedonemergingmarkets?
There is broad divergence in priors over whether this strategy can achieve returns comparable
to those in advanced economies. Because we observe the timing of cash flows, we are able to
measure returns in terms of a public market equivalent (PME) that accounts for both the absolute
level of return and correlation of return with a global risk factor, as in the capital asset pricing
model (Kaplan and Schoar 2005, Sorensen and Jagannathan 2015, Korteweg and Nagel 2016).
Benchmarking the IFC’s complete equity investment portfolio to the S&P 500 index (available for
our entire sample period of six decades), we calculate that the complete portfolio has obtained a
PME of 1.15, indicating that it has returned 15 percent more over its life than an equivalently
timed investment in the public index.
Given that these data represent the portfolio of a single investor, we do not claim the reported
performancetoberepresentativeoftheuniverseofemergingmarketprivateequityinvestments. Nor
is it clear that any other asset owner could replicate the IFC’s strategy and returns. Nonetheless,
ourresultsmayofferanupperboundestimateforwhatdiversifiedinvestorscanachieveinemerging
markets.
The IFC makes equity investments primarily through the direct purchase of a minority stake in
a company, but also through participation as a limited partner in a fund. Direct investments (2,029
of 2,509) predominate in the sample. The academic literature on private equity almost exclusively
focusesonreturnstolimitedpartners(LPs)aftergeneralpartners(GPs)chargemanagementfees—
typically 1-2% of assets per year, and 20% of profit known as “carry.”2 Our finding of a PME of
2For a survey of the U.S. literature on LP performance see Kaplan and Sensoy (2015). We venture the
focusonLPperformanceisforthreereasons: (i)thesearetheonlydataacademicshavebeenabletoobtain,
(ii) a lot more money in the world can be used as LP money than GP money, and (iii) the GP is a very
specific skill set.
1

0.96 for investments in funds indicates that LP returns to investors in private equity funds in the
IFC portfolio, net of management fees, have performed almost as well as the S&P 500. Though less
than 1.00, a PME of 0.96 implies only 4 percent difference in long run returns, which is quite small
in annualized terms. This return is within the range of those reported by Harris et al. (2014) for
venture capital and leveraged buyout funds in the U.S. market. In contrast, the PME of the IFC’s
portfolio of direct investments, which are gross of fees, is 1.19. After subtracting a hypothetical
management fee and carry, the PME of this portfolio is 0.96. Our interpretation of this result is
that over the long run the IFC’s portfolio of emerging market private equity has done about as well
as the S&P 500 index.3
Second, to what extent can country conditions predict future returns, particularly from private
investments? International capital markets may be segmented, restricting access to finance for
firms in certain economies. Consistent with this hypothesis, we find that returns are lower when
economies relax capital controls and deepen the banking sector. These results are inconsistent
with the hypothesis of a perfectly integrated international capital market in which expected finan-
cial returns are equalized across economies, and suggest that the greatest returns are available in
economies transitioning from closed to open. These findings constitute the most comprehensive
microeconomic evidence available on this long-standing question (see Feldstein and Horioka 1980,
Lucas 1990, Caselli and Feyrer 2007, Alfaro et al. 2008, Gourinchas and Jeanne 2013, Chari and
Rhee 2020).
We also measure the relationship between realized returns and macroeconomic conditions more
generally. One percent greater cumulative annualized real GDP growth over the life of the average
investment (eight years) is associated with an additional 6.62 percentage points of return. Local
currency depreciation, on the other hand, worsens performance, whereas local inflation (controlling
forthedepreciation)isassociatedwithhigherreturns. Thereissomeevidencethatreturnsimprove
withreductionsinsovereignriskduringtheinvestmentperiod. Theseresultsareconsistentwiththe
intuition that strong macroeconomic fundamentals are important for countries seeking to attract
capital investment (Mauro 2003), although this effect could diminish over time as incomes converge
(Kremer et al. 2021, Patel et al. 2021). Quantitatively, however, less integrated markets appear
to be more important than economic growth. A decrease in financial openness or banking system
depth by one standard deviation is associated with a larger increase in returns than a one percent
rise in average annual real GDP growth over the investment period.
Third, how does private equity performance vary with other investment characteristics not
3This result sheds light not only on returns to LP investors, but also on returns more similar to what
a closed-end sovereign wealth fund might obtain (Bernstein et al.’s 2013 examination of the investment
strategies of sovereign wealth funds lacks data on returns). Although the IFC invests on a large scale
(total estimated fair value of equity investments in fiscal year 2020, ending June 30, was $10.4 billion), a
few other funds (e.g., SoftBank, Temasek, Norges) deploy on an even larger scale, but few papers provide
the perspective afforded by employing data on the complete portfolio of a single private equity investor.
Gompers and Lerner (1997) study the portfolio of Warburg Pincus, and Kerr et al. (2014) the portfolio of
two prominent angel investment groups, Tech Coast Angels and CommonAngels.
2