NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE AGGREGATE DEMAND FOR BANK CAPITAL
Milton Harris
Christian Opp
Marcus Opp
Working Paper 27858
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27858
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2020
We are grateful for feedback from our discussants Bengt Holmstrom, Guido Lorenzoni, Balint
Horvath and Frederic Boissay, as well as comments by Juliane Begenau, Peter DeMarzo, Jason
Donaldson, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Ernst-Ludwig von Thadden. In addition, we thank
participants at the NBER Summer Institute 2019 (Risks of Financial Institutions; Capital Markets
and the Economy), the EFA 2019, the Chicago Booth Asset Pricing Conference, Bocconi BAFFI
CAREFIN, European Central Bank, HKU, HKUST, University of Oregon, University of
Mannheim, University of Rotterdam, NUS, and Tilburg University. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Milton Harris, Christian Opp, and Marcus Opp. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Aggregate Demand for Bank Capital
Milton Harris, Christian Opp, and Marcus Opp
NBER Working Paper No. 27858
September 2020
JEL No. G12,G21,G23,G28
ABSTRACT
We propose a novel conceptual approach to transparently characterizing credit market outcomes
in economies with multi-dimensional borrower heterogeneity. Based on characterizations of
securities' implicit demand for bank equity capital, we obtain closed-form expressions for the
composition of credit, including a sufficient statistic for the provision of bank loans, and a novel
cross-sectional asset pricing relation for securities held by regulated levered institutions. Our
framework sheds light on the compositional shifts in credit prior to the 07/08 financial crisis and
the European debt crisis, and can provide guidance on the allocative effects of shocks affecting
both banks and the cross-sectional distribution of borrowers.
Milton Harris Marcus Opp
Graduate School of Business Stockholm School of Economics
University of Chicago Drottninggatan 98
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue 111 60 Stockholm
Chicago, IL 60637 Stockholm
milt@chicagobooth.edu Sweden
marcus.opp@hhs.se
Christian Opp
Simon Business School
University of Rochester
3-110N Carol Simon Hall
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
opp@rochester.edu

1. Introduction
Recent empirical evidence highlights the diverse cross-sectional implications of shocks af-
fecting bank capital. In particular, the empirical literature has documented how banks affect
real activity not only by alleviating credit rationing but also by reaching for yield in risky
asset classes.1 This rich evidence reveals that the allocative effects of various shocks affect-
ing banks and the real economy depend on which types of lending to the cross-section of
borrowers are affected. That is, compositional effects are of first-order importance, not just
aggregatequantities.
Yet understanding how the composition of credit is determined is generally complex,
since firms in practice exhibit heterogeneity along multiple relevant dimensions and simul-
taneously demand credit from heterogeneous banks. Correspondingly, each bank-borrower
pair has effectively a separate demand and supply curve for credit, and this multitude of
demand and supply curves are interdependent. For instance, one borrower experiencing a
positive shock to her investment opportunities — a canonical credit demand shock — may
implyanegativesupplyshockforanotherborrower,sincebanksmightreallocatefundstothe
former borrower.2 Moreover, banks face regulatory constraints and deposit subsidies, which
appear to be of first-order importance for their decisions (see, e.g., Jiang, Matvos, Piskorski,
andSeru(2020)forrelatedevidence). Thesefrictionsintroducenon-linearitiesimplyingthat
banksoptimallyaccountforthecorrelationstructureofinvestmentsintheirportfolio,inpar-
ticularintailriskstates. Giventheassociatedcomplexityofequilibriumaggregation,existing
theoretical frameworks feature only limited notions of borrower heterogeneity. Yet hetero-
geneityiskeytounderstandingthecross-sectionaldispersioninfirms’creditelasticitieswith
respecttofinancialandrealshocks.
In this paper, we aim to bridge this gap by offering a novel approach to transparently
characterizing the credit market equilibrium in economies with rich borrower heterogeneity.
Our main conceptual contribution is to depart from the conventional focus on demand and
supply curves for credit, and to instead determine loans’ implicit reservation prices for bank
1For evidence consistent with a bank lending channel, see, e.g., Kashyap et al. (1993, 1994), Gertler and
Gilchrist(1994),PeekandRosengren(2000),KhwajaandMian(2008),Jime´nezetal.(2012),Iyeretal.(2014),
Chodorow-Reich (2014). For evidence on risk taking, see, e.g., Acharya et al. (2014), Jime´nez et al. (2014),
Iannottaetal.(2018).
2Theempiricalliteraturehasrecognizedthecomplexityassociatedwithseparatecreditdemandandsupply
curvesforeachborrower-bankpair. Asaresult,theliteraturenowtypicallyreliesonidentificationapproaches
thatusevariationwithinborrowers(see,e.g.,KhwajaandMian,2008),whichprovideslimitedinsightsonthe
determinantsofcompositionalchangesattheaggregatelevel.
1

capital. This metric is essential for the composition of credit, since banks’ lending decisions
are governed by the objective to maximize shareholder value, and because banks’ equity
capital is a key scarce resource in the presence of financial frictions. We show that applying
this approach delivers precise predictions for the pricing and the composition of credit, even
inthepresenceofmulti-dimensionalborrowerheterogeneity.
The presented framework can serve as a laboratory to examine the cross-sectional al-
locative effects of policy interventions and shocks affecting the economy. It reveals how the
borrowerrankingbasedonreservationpricesidentifiesthegroupofbanks’marginalborrow-
ers, the set borrowers whose access to bank credit responds most elastically to small shocks.
As a result, even focused policy interventions that exclusively increase the risk weights of
(infra-marginal) high-risk borrowers may locally only cause credit rationing of (marginal)
safeborrowers. Moregenerally,ourformulaforborrowers’reservationpricesprovidessharp
predictionsfortheimplicationsoflargeshocksaffectingboththefinancialsectorandthereal
economy. As example applications, we discuss how our framework can coherently integrate
various stylized facts that have been linked to the 07/08 financial crisis and the European
debt crisis. Moreover, we highlight potential unintended consequences on bank risk-taking
of policies aiming to improve public market access for firms, such as the EU’s MIFID II
initiative.
An essential feature of our analysis is that asset prices are determined in equilibrium by
marginalinvestorsthatendogenouslydifferacrossassets. Despitethiscomplexity,weobtain
a unifying asset pricing relation for the cross-section of securities held by regulated levered
institutions. This relation reveals how securities’ expected returns reflect premia that are not
only increasing in assets’ implicit demand for scarce regulatory capital, but also decreasing
in their contribution to levered institutions’ portfolio tail risk. As a result, risky securities
withlowregulatory“riskweights”maycommandnegativepremia,consistentwithempirical
evidence on inflated prices in asset classes typically held by levered financial institutions,
including insurance companies.3 Counter to conventional wisdom, this asset pricing relation
also unveils the logic for why certain borrowers’ cost of capital may decrease in response to
system-wide increases of capital requirements and how borrower heterogeneity is essential
for this result. Intuitively, relatively safe firms may face lower financing costs if increases
incapitalrequirementsrenderthefundingofriskyborrowersunprofitableforbanks,thereby
freeingupcapitalanddecreasingtheequilibriumscarcitypremiumofbankcapital.
3See,e.g.,GreenwoodandHanson(2013).
2