NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
OPTIMAL FINANCIAL TRANSACTION TAXES
Eduardo Dávila
Working Paper 27826
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27826
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2020
I am very grateful to Philippe Aghion, Adrien Auclert, Robert Barro, Roland Bénabou, Markus
Brunnermeier, Eric Budish, John Campbell, Raj Chetty, Peter Diamond, Emmanuel Farhi, Xavier
Gabaix, Gita Gopinath, Robin Greenwood, Sam Hanson, Oliver Hart, Nathan Hendren, David
Laibson, Sendhil Mullainathan, Adriano Rampini, Larry Samuelson, David Scharfstein, Florian
Scheuer, Andrei Shleifer, Alp Simsek, Jeremy Stein, Adi Sunderam, Glen Weyl, Wei Xiong, and
to seminar participants at many institutions and conferences. Johnny Xu provided outstanding
research assistance. Financial support from Rafael del Pino Foundation is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Eduardo Dávila. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Optimal Financial Transaction Taxes
Eduardo Dávila
NBER Working Paper No. 27826
September 2020
JEL No. D61,G18,H21
ABSTRACT
This paper characterizes the optimal transaction tax in an equilibrium model of competitive
financial markets. As long as investors hold heterogeneous beliefs that are not related to their
fundamental trading motives and the planner calculates welfare using any single belief, a strictly
positive tax is optimal, regardless of the magnitude of fundamental trading. Under some
conditions, the optimal tax is independent of the belief used by the planner to calculate welfare.
The optimal tax can be implemented by adjusting its value until observed total volume equals
fundamental volume. Knowledge of i) the share of non-fundamental trading volume and ii) the
semi-elasticity of trading volume to tax changes is sufficient to quantify the optimal tax. A
calibration of the model consistent with empirically estimated volume semi-elasticities to tax
changes and that features a 30% share of non-fundamental trading volume is associated with a
37bps optimal tax.
Eduardo Dávila
Yale University
Department of Economics
28 Hillhouse Avenue, Room 304
New Haven, CT 06520-8268
and NBER
eduardo.davila@yale.edu
An online appendix is available at: http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27838

1 Introduction
Whether to tax financial transactions or not remains an important open question for public economics
that periodically gains broad relevance after periods of economic turmoil. For instance, the collapse
of the Bretton Woods system motivated James Tobin’s well-known 1972 speech — published as Tobin
(1978) — endorsing a tax on international transactions. The 1987 crash encouraged Stiglitz (1989) and
Summers and Summers (1989) to argue for implementing a transaction tax, while the 2008 financial
crisis spurred further public debate on the issue, leading to a contested tax proposal by the European
Commission. However, with the lack of formal normative studies of this topic, a financial transaction
tax may still seem like “the perennial favorite answer in search of a question”, per Cochrane (2013).
Inthispaper,Istudythewelfareimplicationsoftaxingfinancialtransactionsinanequilibriummodel
in which financial markets play two distinct roles. On the one hand, financial markets allow investors to
conduct fundamental trading. Fundamental trading allows the transfer of risks towards those investors
more willing to bear them. It also allows for trading on liquidity or life-cycle considerations, as well
as trading for market-making or limited arbitrage purposes. On the other hand, financial markets also
allow investors to engage in betting or gambling, which I refer to as non-fundamental trading.
I model non-fundamental trading by assuming that investors’ trades are partly motivated by
differences in beliefs, while the planner calculates welfare using a single belief. The discrepancy between
the planner’s belief and investors’ beliefs implies that corrective policies, which can involve taxes or
subsidies depending on the primitives of the economy, are generically optimal. Three main results
emerge from the optimal taxation exercise.
First, the optimal transaction tax can be expressed as a function of investors’ beliefs and equilibrium
portfoliosensitivitiestotaxchanges. Specifically,theoptimaltaxcorrespondstoone-halfofthedifference
between a weighted average of buyers’ beliefs and a weighted average of sellers’ beliefs. Beliefs are the
key determinant of the optimal tax because of the corrective nature of the policy. In general, optimal
corrective policies are designed to correct marginal distortions, which in this case arise from investors’
differences in beliefs.
Second, a simple condition involving the cross-sectional covariance between investors’ beliefs and
their status as net buyers or net sellers in the laissez-faire economy determines the sign of the optimal
corrective policy. Importantly, when investors’ beliefs are not related to their fundamental motives for
trading, this condition implies that the optimal policy is a strictly positive tax. Therefore, as long as the
planner is aware of the existence of some belief-driven trades, under the assumption that these trades
are not related to other fundamental trading motives, a positive transaction tax is optimal.1 Intuitively,
the planner perceives that a reduction in trading, starting from the laissez-faire equilibrium, generates a
first-orderwelfaregainforthoseinvestorswhoareoptimisticbuyersandpessimisticsellers.2 Whenthese
1Although independence between trading motives is a plausible sufficient condition for an optimal positive tax, it is by
no means necessary.
2Optimistic (pessimistic) investors are those who believe that the expected asset payoff is high (low) relative to other
investors.
1

are the majority of investors, their first-order welfare gains dominate the second-order welfare losses of
those investors who share the planner’s belief and the first-order welfare losses of optimistic sellers and
pessimistic buyers. When instead the economy is populated by many optimistic sellers and pessimistic
buyers, the optimal corrective policy corresponds to a trading subsidy.
Third, the optimal tax turns out to be independent of the belief used by the planner to calculate
welfare under certain conditions. This surprising and appealing result relies on two assumptions: traded
assets are in fixed supply and the planner does not seek to redistribute resources across investors.
Intuitively, because welfare losses in this model arise from a distorted allocation of risk, only the
dispersion in investors’ beliefs — but not its absolute level — determines aggregate welfare and the
optimal tax. Consequently, the planner does not need to know more than the investors’ to determine
the optimal tax.
Because optimal tax characterizations are inherently local to the optimum, I study the convexity
properties of the planner’s problem. The planner’s objective may fail to be quasi-concave, which implies
that there may exist multiple locally optimal transaction tax rates. However, this phenomenon can only
arise when the composition of marginal investors varies with the tax rate. I provide a natural sufficient
conditionunderwhichtheplanner’sproblemiswell-behavedandhasauniqueoptimum. Wheninvestors
exclusively trade for non-fundamental motives, the optimal policy is associated with an infinite tax that
eliminates all trade. This result may help explain why some jurisdictions ban or heavily tax gambling
activities.
Given the significant challenges associated with directly measuring investors’ beliefs, I provide
an implementation of the optimal tax policy that uses trading volume as an intermediate target.
Under this implementation, a planner can simply adjust the tax rate until observed volume equals
fundamentalvolume. Thisalternativeapproach, whichreliesonanoveldecompositionoftradingvolume
into fundamental volume, non-fundamental volume, and the tax-induced volume reduction, shifts the
planner’sinformationalrequirementsfrommeasuringinvestors’beliefstofindinganappropriateestimate
of fundamental volume. Building on this volume decomposition, I also derive a simple and easily
implementableapproximationfortheoptimaltaxthatreliesexclusivelyontwoobjectsofthelaissez-faire
economy: the semi-elasticity of trading volume to tax changes and the share of non-fundamental trading
volume.3 This approximation — valid when the optimal tax is close to zero — does not impose any
restrictions on investors’ trading motives.
Next, after parameterizing the distribution of fundamental and non-fundamental trading motives,
I provide explicit comparative static results for the optimal tax with respect to primitives. Consistent
with the main results, when fundamental and non-fundamental trading motives are jointly normally
distributed and uncorrelated, the optimal tax is positive. Moreover, the optimal tax is increasing in
3Givenexistingestimatesoftradingvolumeelasticitiestotaxchanges,thisapproximationimpliesanoptimaltaxofthe
same order of magnitude of the share of non-fundamental trading volume, when expressed in basis points. That is, a 10%,
20%, or 40% share of non-fundamental trading volume is associated (approximately) with an optimal tax of 10bps, 20bps,
or 40bps.
2