NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LIQUIDITY AND VOLATILITY
Itamar Drechsler
Alan Moreira
Alexi Savov
Working Paper 27959
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27959
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2020
We thank Markus Brunnermeier, Pete Kyle, Mathieu Fournier, Yunzhi Hu, David Schreindorfer,
Daniel Schmidt, Mark Westerfield, and Zhaogang Song for discussions; Kent Daniel, Greg
Duffie, Ron Kaniel, Bryan Kelly, Maureen O’Hara, and Christian Opp for their comments; as
well as participants at NBER Asset Pricing, Cornell, CBOE Derivatives Conference, European
Finance Association, Insead Finance Conference, American Finance Association, University of
Texas at Austin, Washington University at St. Louis, Toulouse School of Economics, Duke-UNC
Asset Pricing Conference, JHU-Carey Finance Conference, University of Rochester, Temple
University, Norges Bank, Federal Reserve Board, Securities and Exchange Commission, UC
Davis, and Wharton for their comments. We thank Liz Casano for excellent research assistance.
An earlier draft circulated under the title “Liquidity Creation as Volatility Risk”. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Itamar Drechsler, Alan Moreira, and Alexi Savov. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Liquidity and Volatility
Itamar Drechsler, Alan Moreira, and Alexi Savov
NBER Working Paper No. 27959
October 2020
JEL No. E44,G12,G23
ABSTRACT
Liquidity provision is a bet against private information: if private information turns out to be
higher than expected, liquidity providers lose. Since information generates volatility, and
volatility co-moves across assets, liquidity providers have a negative exposure to aggregate
volatility shocks. As aggregate volatility shocks carry a very large premium in option markets,
this negative exposure can explain why liquidity provision earns high average returns. We show
this by incorporating uncertainty about the amount of private information into an otherwise
standard model. We test the model in the cross section of short-term reversals, which mimic the
portfolios of liquidity providers. As predicted by the model, reversals have large negative betas to
aggregate volatility shocks. These betas explain their average returns with the same risk price as
in option markets, and their predictability by VIX in the time series. Volatility risk thus explains
the liquidity premium among stocks and why it increases in volatile times. Our results provide a
novel view of the risks and returns to liquidity provision.
Itamar Drechsler Alexi Savov
Wharton School Stern School of Business
University of Pennsylvania New York University
3620 Locust Walk 44 West Fourth Street, Suite 9-80
Philadelphia, PA 19104 New York, NY 10012
and NBER and NBER
idrechsl@wharton.upenn.edu asavov@stern.nyu.edu
Alan Moreira
Simon Graduate School of Business
University of Rochester
Box 270100
Rochester, NY 14627
alan.moreira@simon.rochester.edu
Presentation slides is available at
http://pages.stern.nyu.edu/~asavov/alexisavov/Alexi_Savov_files/DMS_Slides.pdf

Liquidityprovision—intermediationthatlowersthecostofbuyingandsellingassets–
is a central function of the financial system. In this paper, we show theoretically and
empirically that liquidity providers bear a negative exposure to market volatility. Since
market volatility carries a large negative price of risk in option markets (Carr and Wu,
2008),thenegativeexposureofliquidityprovidersexplainswhyliquidityprovisionearns
a substantial premium (Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2015), why this premium
increases with volatility (Nagel, 2012), and why liquidity contracts during crises (Brun-
nermeier, 2009). By integrating liquidity and volatility, our results provide a new per-
spectiveontherisksandreturnstoliquidityprovision.
Why do liquidity providers have a negative exposure to market volatility? The basic
problem liquidity providers face is adverse selection by investors with private informa-
tion. Instandardmodels(e.g.Kyle,1985),thequantityofprivateinformationinthemar-
ketisconstantandknowntoliquidityproviders. Itthereforeposesnorisktothem. While
thisisasimpleassumption,itisclearlyunrealistic. Volatility,theobservedend-productof
the flow of information, is highly time-varying, both at the level of individual assets and
for the market as a whole. Moreover, the volatilities of individual assets covary strongly
with each other and with market volatility. This suggests that flows of information, both
publicandprivate,varysubstantiallyovertimeandinasynchronousmanner.
To capture this co-movement, we extend the model of Kyle (1985) by making the
amounts of market and private information uncertain and positively correlated. Because
of this correlation, market volatility informs liquidity providers about the amount of pri-
vate information they face. In particular, an increase in market volatility leads them to
estimateagreateramountofprivateinformation.
AsinKyle(1985),liquidityproviders’estimateofprivateinformationdetermineshow
muchtheyadjustpricesinthedirectionofthenetorderflowtheyreceive. Iftheirestimate
is too low, they adjust prices too little, and because of adverse selection trade too much
with informed investors. They then accumulate long positions at prices that are too high
andshortpositionsatpricesthataretoolow.
Now consider what happens when there is a positive shock to market volatility. The
shock increases liquidity providers’ estimate of private information. Liquidity providers
learnthattheyhadnotadjustedpricesenoughandlikelytradedtoomuchwithinformed
investors. Prices immediately come to reflect this. Liquidity providers see their long
1

positionsfallandtheirshortpositionsrise,takinglossesacrosstheportfolio. Theopposite
happenswhenanegativeshockhits: liquidityproviders’estimateofprivateinformation
declines,theirlongsriseandtheirshortsfall. Insum,liquidityprovidershaveanegative
exposuretomarketvolatility.
In existing models of liquidity provision, which focus on inventory risk (e.g., Stoll,
1978; Grossman and Miller, 1988), a liquidity provider’s risk is idiosyncratic. To explain
the liquidity premium these models assume that some friction prevents the liquidity
provider from diversifying this risk away. While this may apply in some cases, partic-
ularly for small and thinly-traded assets, it is unlikely to explain the liquidity premium
amonglargeandheavily-tradedassets.
Inourmodelliquidityprovidersfaceasystematicrisk(fluctuationsinmarketvolatil-
ity)thatcannotbediversifiedaway. Wethusneedtospecifyhowthisriskispricedbythe
economy’s stochastic discount factor. Consistent with the strong evidence from option
prices,weassumethatmarketvolatilitycarriesalargenegativepriceofrisk. Thisimplies
that liquidity providers earn a positive premium for the negative volatility risk exposure
theybear. Thepremiumsforliquidityandvolatilityarethusoneandthesame.
To test the model, we need to proxy for liquidity providers’ portfolios, which are not
directly observed. As in Nagel (2012), the model shows that they are mimicked by short-
term reversals (e.g., Lehmann, 1990), a trading strategy that buys assets whose price has
fallen and shorts assets whose price has risen. The reason for this is that a large price
change reflects a large net order flow, requiring the liquidity provider to take a large
position. Wethususereversalstoproxyforthereturnstoliquidityprovision.
We build reversal portfolios using daily U.S. stock returns from 2001 to 2020 (i.e., the
periodsince“decimalization,”whenliquidityprovisionbecamecompetitive;seeBessem-
binder, 2003). Each day we sort stocks into quintiles by market cap and deciles by the
day’s return, normalized by its rolling standard deviation as implied by our model. Also
as implied by our model, we weight the portfolios by dollar volume to proxy for the size
of liquidity providers’ holdings. This gives us fifty portfolios sorted by size and return.
Wefurtherconstructlong-shortreversalstrategieswithineachsizequintilebybuyingthe
low-returndecilesandshortingthehigh-returndeciles: Lo–Hi,2–9,3–8,4–7,and5–6. The
outermost-decile strategies carry the strongest reversal signal and therefore capture the
mostintensiveliquidityprovision. Thisallowsustotestourmodelinthecrosssection.
2