NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EXTERNALITIES AS ARBITRAGE
Benjamin M. Hébert
Working Paper 27953
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27953
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2020, Revised August 2021
This paper builds on the work of and is dedicated to the memory of Emmanuel Farhi. I would
also like to thank Jonathan Berk, Eduardo Dávila, Sebastian Di Tella, Wenxin Du, Darrell Duffie,
Gary Gorton, Denis Gromb, Valentin Haddad, Barney Hartman-Glaser, Piero Gottardi, Bob
Hodrick, Jens Jackwerth, Anton Korinek, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Matteo Maggiori, Semyon
Malamud, Ian Martin, Tyler Muir, Jesse Schreger, Amit Seru, Ludwig Straub, Jeremy Stein,
Dimitri Vayanos, and seminar participants at the MIT Sloan Juniors Conference, Yale SOM,
EPFL Lausanne, Stanford, UCLA, UC Irvine, Columbia Juniors Conference, Duke Macro
Jamboree, Gerzensee ESSFM, Barcelona FIRS, LSE, Wharton, HSE Moscow, and the Virtual
Finance Seminar for helpful comments, and in particular Hanno Lustig for many useful
comments and Peter Kondor for a helpful discussion. I would like to thank Michael Catalano-
Johnson of Susquehanna Investment Group for help with bounds on American option prices,
Colin Eyre and Alex Reinstein of DRW for help understanding SPX and SPY options, and
Jonathan Wallen and Christian Gonzalez-Rojas for outstanding research assistance. All remaining
errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Benjamin M. Hébert. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Externalities as Arbitrage
Benjamin M. Hébert
NBER Working Paper No. 27953
October 2020, Revised August 2021
JEL No. E61,F31,G28
ABSTRACT
How can we assess whether macro-prudential regulations are having their intended effects? If
these regulations are optimal, their marginal benefit of addressing externalities should equal their
marginal cost of distorting risk-sharing. These risk-sharing distortions will manifest as trading
opportunities that intermediaries are unable to exploit. Focusing in particular on arbitrage
opportunities, I construct an “externality-mimicking portfolio” whose returns track the
externalities that would rationalize existing regulations as optimal. I conduct a revealed-
preference exercise using this portfolio and test whether the recovered externalities are sensible. I
find that the signs of existing CIP violations are inconsistent with optimal policy.
Benjamin M. Hébert
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
bhebert@stanford.edu

Followingthegreatfinancialcrisis(GFC),apparentarbitrageopportunitiesemerged
in financial markets. These arbitrage opportunities, such as the gap between the
federal funds rate and the interest on excess reserves (IOER) rate, or violations of
covered interest rate parity (CIP), are notable in part because they have persisted
foryearsafterthepeakofthefinancialcrisis. AuthorssuchasDuetal.(2018)have
argued that macro-prudential regulations put in place after the GFC have enabled
these arbitrages to exist and persist. If these apparent arbitrages opportunities are
made possible by macro-prudential regulations, does that imply that there is some-
thing wrong with the regulations? More generally, what can be learned from the
patternsofarbitrageacrossassetsinducedbyregulation? Canweusethesepatterns
toassesswhethermacro-prudentialregulationsarehavingtheirintendedeffects?
Supposeweobservethepriceofanassetathatistradedbybothintermediaries
andhouseholds,andthepriceofanotherasseta(cid:48)withidenticalpayoffsthatistraded
byintermediariesonly. Ifthepricesofaanda(cid:48) arenotequal,anapparentarbitrage
exists. Such an opportunity can exist in equilibrium if intermediaries are bound
by a constraint that treats a and a(cid:48) differently (say, because it treats derivatives and
cashassetsdifferently). Letusfurthersupposethatthisconstraintexistsbecauseof
regulation–itisaleverageconstraint,capitalcontrol,orsomeotherkindofpolicy.
Now imagine that a household approaches an intermediary and wishes to buy
asseta. Theintermediarycontemplatessellingassetatothehouseholdandhedging
by purchasing asset a(cid:48). If the price of a is higher than the price of a(cid:48), this arbitrage
tradeisprofitable;theintermediarywouldexecutethetradeifunconstrained. From
this we can infer, as outside observers, that regulation is constraining the extent to
whichtheintermediarycanselltheassetatothehousehold. Thatis,theregulation
1

is keeping the risks associated with asset a within the intermediary sector instead
ofallowingthoseriskstobetransferredtothehouseholdsector. Wecanthenadopt
a macro-prudential viewpoint and ask whether or not it is desirable, from a social
perspective,toshifttheholdingsofassetafromhouseholdstointermediaries.
InthispaperIdevelopaformal,multi-assetversionoftheargumentabove. The
procedureIdeveloptakestheformofarevealedpreferenceexercise. Iask: whatex-
ternalitieswouldjustifythedistortionsinrisk-sharingIinferfromvariousarbitrage
opportunities? Equivalently, what risks are pushed by regulation into the interme-
diarysectorandwhatrisksarepushedbyregulationintothehouseholdsector? The
keystepintheanalysisistheconstructionofwhatIcallthe“externality-mimicking
portfolio.” This portfolio’s returns are an estimate of the externalities that would
justify the observed patterns of arbitrage, or equivalently an estimate of the effect
ofregulationonrisk-sharingbetweenhouseholdsandintermediaries.
I construct this portfolio using CIP violations. In the context of CIP violations,
the assets a and a(cid:48) are combinations of bond and exchange rate transactions. Em-
pirically, the sign of the observed arbitrage, as documented by Du et al. (2018), is
related to the direction of the carry trade– it is more expensive for the household
to execute the carry trade than it is for the intermediary to replicate the carry trade
using currency forwards. Consequently, I infer that the relevant regulatory con-
straint(s) have the effect of keeping carry trade risk within the intermediary sector,
instead of allowing intermediaries to transfer those risks to households. This result
issurprisinggiventheriskynatureofthecarrytrade.
The basic issue is that some CIP violations (e.g. AUD-USD and JPY-USD)
have the wrong sign. That is, because JPY appreciates and AUD depreciates vs.
2