NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW DO CEOS MAKE STRATEGY?
Mu-Jeung Yang
Michael Christensen
Nicholas Bloom
Raffaella Sadun
Jan Rivkin
Working Paper 27952
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27952
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2020
Author names are in a randomized order. Financial support was provided by Harvard Business
School. We would like to thank Michael Porter and Tim Ott for helpful comments. We also thank
seminar participants at Harvard Business School, Eccles School of Business, the Empirical
Management Conference 2018, the CAED conference 2019, the Strategy Science Conference
2019, the NBER Organizational Economics Fall 2019 meeting, for their comments and Kerenssa
Kay and Tejas Ramdas for excellent research assistance. Some of the results in this paper have
been obtained while Yang was Special-Sworn Status Researcher at the Northwest Census
Research Datacenter. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been
reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Mu-Jeung Yang, Michael Christensen, Nicholas Bloom, Raffaella Sadun, and Jan
Rivkin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How Do CEOs Make Strategy?
Mu-Jeung Yang, Michael Christensen, Nicholas Bloom, Raffaella Sadun, and Jan Rivkin
NBER Working Paper No. 27952
October 2020
JEL No. L2,M1,M2
ABSTRACT
We explore the critical question of how executives make strategic decisions. Utilizing a new
survey of 262 CEO alumni of Harvard Business School, we gather evidence on four aspects of
each executive’s business strategy: its overall structure, its formalization, its development, and its
implementation. We report three key results. First, different CEOs use markedly different
processes to make strategic decisions; some follow highly formalized, rigorous, and deliberate
processes, while others rely heavily on instinct and intuition. Second, more structured strategy
processes are associated with larger firm size and faster employment growth. Third, using a
regression discontinuity centered around a change in the curriculum of Harvard Business
School’s required strategy course, we trace differences in strategic decision making back to
differences in managerial education.
Mu-Jeung Yang Raffaella Sadun
David Eccles School of Business Harvard Business School
Salt Lake City, UT Morgan Hall 233
mjyang@eccles.utah.edu Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
Michael Christensen and NBER
Harvard Business School rsadun@hbs.edu
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163 Jan Rivkin
mchristensen@hbs.edu Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall
Nicholas Bloom Boston, MA 02163
Stanford University jrivkin@hbs.edu
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
nbloom@stanford.edu

1. Introduction
A fundamental and central premise across economics, strategy, and management is that CEOs
shape the outcomes of their companies through the strategic decisions they make (Andrews, 1971;
Drucker, 1967; Porter, 1980; Tirole, 1988; Bertrand and Schoar, 2003). Yet we know remarkably
little about how CEOs actually make those strategic decisions. The strategy literature over the past
several decades has revealed much about the consequences of particular strategic decisions and
firm strategies but very little about how CEOs and their leadership teams determine those
strategies. This knowledge gap is particularly significant in light of longstanding calls to develop
a theory of strategy that better accounts for how firms ultimately arrive at their respective strategies
(Porter, 1991). Existing qualitative case studies and empirical work on small and selected samples
of managers have captured how specific management teams made particular types of choices (e.g.,
Graebner and Eisenhardt, 2004; Mintzberg, 2008), but systematic, large-sample empirical
evidence on this topic is still missing. If the particular strategies CEOs select are some of the most
important choices they make, then surely understanding how those choices are made is of similar
importance.
Understanding how CEOs make strategic choices within their firms raises a set of additional
related and foundational questions for researchers to consider. First, to what extent, if at all, do
CEOs vary in terms of their approaches to making strategic decisions? Within the popular press,
we see a potential breadth of decision-making approaches among top executives, from those who
enact consistent, proactive, and evidence-based decision-making in the spirit of Simon (1947), to
executives who rely entirely on intuition or a simple set of heuristics (Davis, Eisenhardt, &
Bingham, 2009; Eisenhardt & Sull, 2001), popularized by CEOs like Apple’s Steve Jobs.
However, it remains to be seen whether these anecdotal examples of CEOs’ decision-making
processes reflect the broader population of executives. While some empirical work has explored
this subject using qualitative case studies, both the small sample sizes and the narrow scope of
these studies do not provide us with a broader, more comprehensive view of the subject. Second,
given the potential differences in decision processes, to what extent are the process by which CEOs
make strategic decisions correlated with firm characteristics and performance? Finally, if CEOs
2

differ in their processes for making strategic decisions, what particular factors, such as education,
might drive these differences?
This paper seeks to address these questions in a new, large-scale data collection effort that aims to
measure, and explain differences in, the strategy practices of 262 CEOs of U.S., U.K., and
Canadian manufacturing firms. Utilizing a research design modeled on the World Management
Survey (Bloom & Van Reenen, 2007; Bloom, et al., 2019), we overcome many of the prior
challenges associated with studying CEOs and their strategic decision processes. The design gives
us both systematic data that allow us to examine cross-firm differences in their decision processes
and detailed information about how particular processes play out within each firm. Core to these
efforts is the development of a novel survey instrument that enables us to capture rich and
consistent data for large samples of firms.
We report several findings related to the questions raised earlier. First, chief executives vary
dramatically in terms of how structured they are as they make strategic decisions. We observe a
broad range of structures in firms’ processes for making strategic decisions, from firms that
typically implement ad hoc processes in response to changes in the external environment to firms
that instead follow highly deliberate and proactive practices. Second, we observe that more
structured strategy processes tend to occur in firms that are larger and faster growing. Third, we
find evidence that CEOs’ management education appears to influence their strategy processes,
even decades after their training.
This research connects to a long literature on strategy. This literature has focused on two major
questions: (1) which strategies do CEOs and their firms employ (e.g. Miles & Snow, 1978; Porter,
1980) and (2) what are the performance consequences of those strategies and actions, such as how
firms that pursue joint ventures differ in performance from firms which refrain from doing so.
Perhaps surprisingly, little work has been done to understand how firms and their CEOs arrive at
those strategies and make those decisions. Some work on firms’ resource allocation processes
(Bower, 1970) explores the internal processes occurring among firm executives, but this work
largely captures firms’ actions and processes after strategies are determined and strategic decisions
are made. More recent work has sought to understand how CEOs make specific strategic decisions,
3