NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HAVE EXCHANGE-LISTED FIRMS BECOME LESS IMPORTANT FOR THE ECONOMY?
Frederik P. Schlingemann
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 27942
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27942
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2020, Revised January 2021
This paper is a revision of a paper previously titled: “Has the stock market become less
representative of the economy?” We thank Leandro Sanz for excellent research assistance. We
are grateful for comments from Harry DeAngelo, Craig Doidge, Andrei Gonçalves, Andrei
Shleifer, and seminar participants at The Ohio State University and Tulane University. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Frederik P. Schlingemann and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Have Exchange-Listed Firms Become Less Important for the Economy?
Frederik P. Schlingemann and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 27942
October 2020, Revised January 2021
JEL No. E44,G23,G32,K22,L16
ABSTRACT
The firms listed on the stock market in aggregate contribute less to total non-farm employment
and GDP now than in the 1970s. A major reason for this development is the decline of
manufacturing and the growth of the service economy as firms providing services are less likely
to be listed on exchanges. A firm’s stock market capitalization is much less instructive about its
employment now than in earlier years. Listed stock market superstars account for less
employment than they did in the 1970s. Market capitalizations have not become systematically
less informative about firms’ contribution to GDP.
Frederik P. Schlingemann
Katz Graduate School of Business
University of Pittsburgh
372 Mervis Hall
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
schlinge@katz.pitt.edu
René M. Stulz
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
806A Fisher Hall
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu

1. Introduction.
In the summer of 2020, with the US economy bearing the impact of the COVID pandemic, the
unemployment rate was as high as it had been any time since 1948 and the NASDAQ and the S&P 500
indices reached their highest value ever. This dramatic difference in trajectories between unemployment
and the stock market raises the question of how much the stock market reflects the health of the US economy
and whether in recent years before the COVID pandemic it does so less than it used to. Firms listed on
national exchanges as well as indices that reflect the market capitalization of these firms receive huge
amounts of attention from the public at large, policymakers, and finance academics. If these firms contribute
less to the economy or the indices are less representative of the economy, the stock market’s signals may
be misleading about the economy as a whole. We explore this issue from 1950 to 2019 for a subset of our
data and from 1973 to 2019 for most of our data. We investigate how the direct contribution of listed firms
to employment and GDP evolves and how market capitalizations relate to a firm’s direct contribution to the
economy. We find that listed firms contribute less to employment and GDP in the 2010s than in the 1970s.
In 1953, Charles Wilson, the president of GM, the firm with the largest market capitalization, famously
uttered the sentence: “for years I thought what was good for our country was good for General Motors, and
vice versa. The difference does not exist.”1 Could it be that the firm with the largest market capitalization
is more representative of the economy then than it is now? Charles Wilson added in his response to a senator
that “Our company is too big. It goes with the welfare of the country. Our contribution to the Nation is quite
considerable.” In this paper, we measure the extent to which a firm’s market capitalization reflects its
concurrent contribution to the economy. We show a strong downward trend in the extent to which a firm’s
market capitalization reflects its concurrent contribution to employment. With value added, market
capitalizations are least instructive about firms’ contemporaneous contribution to GDP around 2000, but
market capitalizations appear to be as instructive about firms’ contribution to GDP in the 1970s as in the
2010s.
1 Hearings before the Committee on Armed Services, United States Senate, Eighty-Third Congress, First Session on
Nominee Designates, Government Printing Office, 1953, p. 26.
1

There is no compelling theoretical reason for the stock market to be highly representative of the
economy and there are many reasons for why it would not be. Firms that are listed are firms for which a
listing is valuable. Not all firms find it valuable to be listed and these unlisted firms differ from listed firms.
Further, market capitalization reflects the value of a firm for its shareholders, but this value need not be
correlated with a firm’s contribution to employment or GDP. For example, a high capitalization firm might
contribute little to the economy now but be expected to contribute much more in the future, so that its high
market capitalization reflects its future contribution. Another example is that a firm’s market capitalization
could increase even though its contribution to employment or to GDP does not change if it finds a way to
pay its workers less without affecting their performance. Because of these considerations, how much the
stock market reflects the state of the economy at a point in time is an empirical question.
Employment is a reliable benchmark for the state of the economy. Employment data for the whole
economy is available for our sample period, does not depend on accounting rules, and is collected by the
Federal government irrespective of whether a firm is public or not. For public corporations, employment is
available for most corporations annually since the early 1970s. We find that, from 1973 to 2019, the
percentage of employees working for public firms is highest at the start of the sample period and falls
sharply in the 1980s. At the beginning of that period, more than 41.4 percent of non-farm workers in the
private sector work for public firms, but in 2019, that percentage is 29.0 percent. In 2019, the percentage
of non-farm workers in the private sector working for public firms is the lowest for our sample period for
industrial firms and for all firms, including financial firms, it is the lowest except for 1989 and 1990.
We create a measure of unrepresentativeness to capture how poorly market capitalization proxies for a
firm’s contribution to employment over time. For each listed firm, we measure the absolute value of the
difference between the firm’s market capitalization as a share of the market capitalization of the stock
market and the firm’s employment share among public firms defined as the firm’s employment divided by
the employment of all stock market firms. The measure of unrepresentativeness is proportional to the sum
of these differences. Intuitively, it is the difference between a portfolio that holds the stock market and a
2