NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
GRANULAR CREDIT RISK
Sigurd Galaasen
Rustam Jamilov
Ragnar Juelsrud
Hélène Rey
Working Paper 27994
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27994
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2020, Revised December 2025
The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of Norges Bank,
the Haut Conseil de Stabilité Financière, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.We thank
our discussants Sebastian Doerr, Ralph Koijen, Shohini Kundu, José-Luis Peydró, Diane Pierret
and Daniel Paravisini, as well as Christoph Basten, Svetlana Bryzgalova, Andreas Fagereng, Julian
di Giovanni, Francisco Gomes, Refet Güurkaynak,Victoria Ivashina, Joseba Martinez, Atif Mian,
Steven Ongena, Elias Papaioannou, Anna Pavlova, Kasper Roszbach, Stephen Schaefer, Vania
Stavrakeva, Kjetil Storesletten, Paolo Surico, Gianluca Violante, Anette Vissing-Jorgensen and
seminar and conference participants at numerous venues for useful comments. We are also very
grateful to Livia Chitu and Sofia Gori for providing access to and assistance with AnaCredit,
which helped us assess the generalizability of our findings to other Euro Area countries. We thank
Mikkel Riiser for excellent research assistance. Rey is very grateful to the ERC (Advanced Grant
695722). Send correspondence to Hélène Rey.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Sigurd Galaasen, Rustam Jamilov, Ragnar Juelsrud, and Hélène Rey. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Granular Credit Risk
Sigurd Galaasen, Rustam Jamilov, Ragnar Juelsrud, and Hélène Rey
NBER Working Paper No. 27994
October 2020, Revised December 2025
JEL No. E3, G2
ABSTRACT
What is the impact of granular credit risk on banks and the economy? We quantify single-name
exposure risk in bank portfolios by applying a novel empirical strategy to an administrative loan-
level dataset from Norway. Exploiting the fat-tailed properties of the loan-share distribution, we use
the granular instrumental variable approach to show that idiosyncratic borrower risk survives
aggregation within banks’ portfolios. These granular credit shocks spill over from affected banks to
firms, reducing investment and raising default risk among non-granular borrowers, with sizeable
consequences for the real economy.
Sigurd Galaasen Ragnar Juelsrud
Bank of Norway Norges Bank
sigurd.galaasen@gmail.com Department of Economics
ragnar@juelsrud.no
Rustam Jamilov
All Souls College Hélène Rey
rustam.jamilov@all-souls.ox.ac.uk London Business School
and CEPR
and also NBER
hrey@london.edu

1 Introduction
What is the impact of idiosyncratic borrower risk on banks and the broader economy?
It has long been understood that if individual loans are small relative to the overall
size of a portfolio, then credit risk pooling should provide perfect insurance against
idiosyncratic shocks (Diamond, 1984). But what if some loans are large? When the loan-
size distribution is fat-tailed, can the performance of a single large loan directly shape
portfolio-level outcomes and lending? A rapidly growing literature, originating from
the seminal contribution of Gabaix (2011), has emphasized the micro—or “granular”—
origins of macroeconomic outcomes across a range of theoretical and applied contexts.
According to the granular hypothesis, shocks to large, non-atomistic agents generate
ff
non-diversifiable “grains” of economic and financial activity, which can directly a ect
ff
aggregatefluctuationsand,throughgeneralequilibriume ects,allotheragents.
Curiously, there are relatively few empirical applications of the granular hypothesis
to banking. This is puzzling because in practice the hypothesis maps directly into “large
exposure regulation” of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS). The BCBS
hasbeenregulatingbankcreditconcentrationriskfordecades,formallyatleastsincethe
ff
Basel I Accords. The Core Principles for E ective Banking Supervision emphasize that local
country laws should “set prudent limits on large exposures to a single borrower” (BIS,
ff
2013). In practice however, the Principles admit that “material di erences in scope of
application, the value of large exposure limits, methods for calculating exposure values,
andmorelenienttreatmentsforcertaintypesofexposuresexist”. Asaresult,thedocument
concludes, “although a concentration risk adjustment could be made to mitigate these
risks, these adjustments are neither harmonised across jurisdictions, nor designed to
controltraumaticlossesfromasinglecounter-partydefault”.
Ourpaperattemptstofillthisliteraturegapbyprovidingcausalempiricalevidenceon
theimportanceandimplicationsof“single-name”creditconcentrationrisk.1 Wedevelopa
newempiricalapproachandapplyittoanoveladministrativefirm-bankmatcheddataset
from Norway. We merge our loan-level database with firm and bank balance sheet data.
Wecovereverysinglebankloanmadetolimitedliabilitycompanies(LLC)inNorwayover
the 2003-2015 period.2 This data-rich environment enables us to study the transmission
ff
mechanismandheterogeneoustreatmente ectsatmanylevelsofaggregation.
Our empirical strategy and presentation of results consist of six steps. First, we
1WefollowtheBCBSvocabularywhere“single-name”referstothelevelofanindividualborroweror
counterparty. This is in contrast, for example, to how BCBS defines and treats sectoral or geographical
exposureswheretheunitofanalysisiseitherawholeindustryorregion.
2LLCisbyfarthemostcommonlyusedorganizationalstructureinNorway. Formostyears,ourfirm
dataaccountsformorethan90%oftotalemploymentintheprivatesector.
2

establish that the distribution of loan shares in our dataset is fat-tailed. Our estimate
of the Pareto power implies that 80% of all credit is concentrated in 20% of the loans.
Interestingly,weprovidethereforeanotherexampleofthefamous“80-20”Paretoprinciple
that occurs in a variety of settings in economics as well as more generally in social and
physicalsciences(Gabaix,2009).
Second, we construct a measure of idiosyncratic borrower risk. Using firm-level data
on balance sheets and income statements, we extract non-systematic variation in firm
value-addedbycontrollingforavarietyoffirm-levelcharacteristicslikesizeandcostsas
ff
well as firm, industry, year, and geographical fixed e ects. Our approach follows very
closelyalargeliteratureinlaboreconomicsandmacroeconomics(Guisoetal.,2005;Hsieh
and Klenow, 2009; Fagereng et al., 2018). To validate our shock measure, we first run a
human audit of a sample of realizations. Then, we validate the universe of shocks with
state-of-the-artmachinelearningandLargeLanguageModelling(LLM)tools.
Third,weestablishthepass-throughfromtheseidiosyncraticfirmshockstoloan-level
ff
returns. We investigate how such shocks a ect returns on loans within the same bank,
industry, county, year, and loan type. Importantly, our specification controls for time-
varying confounding bank-side supply factors, potentially specific to a given industry,
ff
county, or contractual type. We find that idiosyncratic firm shocks have a strong e ect
ff
on loan returns. In our preferred specification with a full set of controls and fixed e ects,
a one standard deviation negative firm shock causes annual loan-level returns to fall by
34-36basispoints. Wealsoexploreheterogeneityacrossfirmcharacteristics,geographical
location,ownership,andotherdimensions.
Fourth, we look at the impact of idiosyncratic borrower shocks on banks’ portfolio-
level outcomes. This is a critical step in our analysis. Once aggregated to the level of
a bank, we lose the appealing properties of loan-level analysis: the loan share-weighted
×
firm shock series could be contaminated by bank year confounding factors, such as
ff ffi
time-varying di erences in the e cacy of monitoring devices (Stiglitz and Weiss, 1981),
which we no longer have the power to deal with. For this stage, we adopt the granular
instrumental variable (GIV) approach, which was developed in a series of papers by
Gabaix and Koijen (2021, 2024). Intuitively, the GIV extracts variation in the share-
weighted aggregated firm shock series that can be attributed to “granular” borrowers.
ff
Specifically, the instrument in its simplest form is the di erence between size-weighted
×
and unweighted aggregated firm shocks. The GIV thus purges away any bank year
factor, e.g. monitoring capacity. Conditional on the distribution of credit shares being
fat-tailed, idiosyncratic shocks to large borrowers allow us to achieve identification and
validity. Our various parameteric and non-parameteric specifications and extensions
3