NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A Q-THEORY OF BANKS
Juliane Begenau
Saki Bigio
Jeremy Majerovitz
Matias Vieyra
Working Paper 27935
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27935
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2020, revised April 2024
We would like to thank Youngmin Kim, Adam Su, and Mengbo Zhang for excellent research
assistance. We are grateful to our discussants Dean Corbae, Miguel Faria-e-Castro, Elena
Loutskina, Thorsten Koeppl, David Martinez-Miera and Adrián Pardo. We thank Andrew
Atkeson, Haelim Anderson, Patrick Bolton, Pablo D’Erasmo, Andrea Eisfeldt, Francesco
Ferrante, Mark Gertler, Kinda Hachem, Valentin Haddad, Benjamin Hebert, Arvind
Krishnamurthy, Anton Korinek, Hanno Lustig, Ken Miyahara, Gaston Navarro, Andrea
Prestipino, Jose-Victor Rios-Rull, Pari Sastry, Jesse Schreger, Jeremy Stein, Robert Townsend,
and Pierre-Olivier Weill for their many useful comments. We thank the conference and seminar
participants of the Barcelona GSE 2021, UofT Finance Conference 2021, MFM Winter 2019
Meeting, Columbia 2020 Junior Finance Conference, Banco de Mexico, Philadelphia Fed,
Federal Reserve Board, UCSD, UCSC, Michigan Ross, Northwestern University (Economics and
Finance), University of Virginia, and Wharton (Macro). Previous versions of the paper circulated
under the title “Data Lessons on Bank Behavior” and “Banks Adjust Slowly”. These are our
views and not necessarily those of the Bank of Canada, the Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Juliane Begenau, Saki Bigio, Jeremy Majerovitz, and Matias Vieyra. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Q-Theory of Banks
Juliane Begenau, Saki Bigio, Jeremy Majerovitz, and Matias Vieyra
NBER Working Paper No. 27935
October 2020, revised April 2024
JEL No. G21,G32,G33
ABSTRACT
We introduce a dynamic bank theory featuring delayed loss recognition and a regulatory capital
constraint, aiming to match the bank leverage dynamics captured by Tobin’s Q. We start from
four facts: (1) book and market equity values diverge, especially during crises; (2) Tobin’s Q
predicts future bank profitability;(3) neither book nor market leverage constraints are strictly
binding for most banks; and (4) bank leverage and Tobin’s Q are mean reverting but highly
persistent. We demonstrate that delayed loss accounting rules interact with bank capital
requirements, introducing a tradeoff between loan growth and financial fragility. Our welfare
analysis implies that accounting rules and capital regulation should optimally be set jointly. This
paper emphasizes the need to reconcile regulatory dependence on book values with the market’s
emphasis on fundamental values to enhance understanding of banking dynamics and improve
regulatory design.
Juliane Begenau Jeremy Majerovitz
Graduate School of Business 4400 Lindell Boulevard, 18 A
Stanford University Saint Louis, Miss 63108
655 Knight Way United States
Stanford, CA 94305 jeremy.majerovitz@gmail.com
and NBER
begenau@stanford.edu Matias Vieyra
Bank of Canada
Saki Bigio 234 Wellington St. W
Department of Economics Ottawa, ON K1A 0G9
University of California at Los Angeles Canada
8283 Bunche Hall mvieyra@bankofcanada.ca
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
sbigio@econ.ucla.edu

1 Introduction
This paper introduces a banking model that emphasizes the slow recognition of losses in
accounting books. Delayed accounting of losses induces a distinction between the funda-
mental value of equity, which fully incorporates information on losses, and the book value of
equity, which does not. This distinction is crucial because bank regulation relies on account-
ing frameworks while financial vulnerabilities are influenced by fundamental values. Our
model underscores the need to consider the limited information in accounting books, both
to correctly capture bank behavior and to guide regulatory design.
Our theory is motivated by four stylized facts about banks’ leverage and about their ratio
of market-to-book equity, which we henceforth call Tobin’s Q1:
1. Time series of Tobin’s Q: The banking sector’s Tobin’s Q fluctuates substantially
over time. Market capitalization of banks fell substantially during the 2007/2008 fi-
nancial crisis, while book equity was stable.
2. Informational content of Tobin’s Q:Marketequitycapturesinformationthatbook
equity does not. Tobin’s Q predicts bank profits over a two-year horizon and banks’
distance to default in the cross-section.
3. Cross-section of book and market leverage: Banks hold a capital buffer above
the regulatory minimum. Even during the financial crisis, only a small fraction of
banks violated their regulatory constraints, and most were well-capitalized according
to book measures. In contrast, the dispersion of market leverage (assets over market
equity) increased substantially during the financial crisis, and many banks temporarily
had very high levels of market leverage.
4. Dynamic response of leverage and Tobin’s Q: After a net-worth shock, Tobin’s
Q and market leverage respond on impact and mean-revert slowly. By contrast, book
equity does not react on impact but incorporates the shock to net worth gradually.
Fact 1 is that aggregate book equity and market-value equity differ, especially during crises,
leading to stark differences in book and market leverage. These measures typically comove
in models,2 but not in the data.3 However, models must take a stance on whether book or
market leverage is constrained, leading to different implications depending on which leverage
measure is used to draw inferences.
1Werefertothemarket-to-bookequity ratioasTobin’sQ,asopposedtothemarket-to-bookassets ratio.
2Papersthatstudytheassetpricingimplicationsofintermediarynetworth(e.g.,HeandKrishnamurthy,
2013;BrunnermeierandSannikov,2014)usemarketequityasastatevariable,whereaspapersthatfocuson
the effects of regulation use book measures of equity (e.g., Adrian and Boyarchenko, 2013; Begenau, 2020;
Adrian and Shin, 2013; Corbae and D’Erasmo, 2021; Begenau and Landvoigt, 2022).
3See the debate between Adrian, Etula and Muir (2014) and He, Kelly and Manela (2017).
1

Fact 2 implies that market values contain more information about losses, a feature con-
sistent with many findings in the accounting literature but not with models where book and
market measures contain the same information.4
Fact 3 regards the cross-sectional dispersion of market and book leverage. Book measures
of leverage suggest that banks are almost always well capitalized. Even during the financial
crisis, only a small fraction of banks had regulatory capital ratios below the minimum, and
the vast majority of banks held a substantial buffer of capital beyond the minimum. In
contrast, market-based measures of leverage suggest that leverage rose dramatically during
the crisis and that the distribution of leverage also fanned out. As a result, many banks
were well capitalized on the books despite significant erosions in their market valuations.5
Fact 4 summarizes the dynamics of market and book leverage after net-worth losses. We
identify net-worth losses in a panel of US banks by exploiting cross-sectional variation in
bank stock excess returns, using a factor model that partials out variation driven by changes
in risk premia.6 We construct time series of bank-level proxies of net-worth shocks from
return shocks and estimate the impulse responses of bank variables to those shocks. Fact
4 is that banks adjust very slowly after these shocks.7 In response to a negative net-worth
shock that mechanically increases market leverage, banks reduce their market leverage by
slowly reducing their liabilities. Book equity does not respond on impact and declines slowly.
In conjunction, these four facts inform the essential elements of our Q-theory, which
is based on a delayed loss accounting mechanism. Our model features a cross-section of
risk-neutral banks. Banks fund risky loans with deposits and internal equity. Banks can
increase the return on equity by taking on more leverage, capturing frictions that prevent
deposits from being properly priced. A regulatory limit and a market-based limit constrain
bank leverage. If either limit is exceeded, banks are dissolved and receive a fixed liquidation
value. To avoid liquidations, banks optimally maintain a capital buffer.
The key element of our Q-theory is that book equity values differ from fundamental, and
hence market, equity value, predominantly because book equity takes time to recognize past
loan losses whereas fundamental values contain real-time information on loan losses. Our
delayedlossaccountingmechanismallowsustodecomposeTobin’sQintotheratioofmarket
equity to fundamental equity and little q, the ratio of fundamental equity to accounting value
equity. When banks face a loan default, their accounting books can momentarily hide the
loss. Therefore, while banks hold a capital buffer above the regulatory limit according to
their accounting values, their fundamental leverage may exceed the regulatory limit. Banks
4Laux and Leuz (2010) explain how banks have flexibility in accounting for losses.
5An example is Silicon Valley Bank (SVB), whose equity had been wiped out in market value terms by
2022 Q3 while the bank continued to satisfy capital standards until it was liquidated in March 2023.
6It is challenging to identify net-worth shocks because accounting measures do not convey the full extent
of losses. Unfortunately, while market values capture more information, they are also affected by variation
in aggregate risk premia. Hence, we cannot directly exploit variation in market valuations.
7This fact is consistent with the literature on slow-moving capital (Duffie, 2010).
2