NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
OPTIMAL FOREIGN RESERVES AND CENTRAL BANK POLICY
UNDER FINANCIAL STRESS
Luis Felipe Céspedes
Roberto Chang
Working Paper 27923
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27923
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2020
We thank Fernando Broner, Filippo Occhino, Jaume Ventura, Bernardo Pagnoncelli, Alep
Simsek, and seminar participants at the BIS, PUC de Chile, Central Bank of Chile, NBER IFM
Program Meeting, Universidad de Chile, and Universidad Católica del Perú for useful comments
and suggestions. Any additional input will be greatly appreciated. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Luis Felipe Céspedes and Roberto Chang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Optimal Foreign Reserves and Central Bank Policy Under Financial Stress
Luis Felipe Céspedes and Roberto Chang
NBER Working Paper No. 27923
October 2020
JEL No. E5,F3,F4
ABSTRACT
We study the interaction between optimal foreign reserves accumulation and central bank
international liquidity provision in a small open economy under financial stress. Firms and
households finance investment and consumption by borrowing from domestic financial
intermediaries (banks), which in turn borrow from abroad. Binding financial constraints can
cause the domestic rate of interest to rise above the world rate and the real exchange rate to
depreciate, leading to inefficiently low investment and consumption. A role then emerges for a
central bank that accumulates reserves in order to provide liquidity if financial frictions bind. The
optimal level of international reserves in this context depends, among other variables, on the term
premium, the depth of financial markets, ex ante financial uncertainty and the precise way the
central bank intervenes. The model is consistent with both the increase in international reserves
observed during the period 2004-2008 and with policy intervention after the Lehman bankruptcy.
Luis Felipe Céspedes
Universidad de Chile
Departamento de Economía
lfcespedes@fen.uchile.cl
Roberto Chang
Rutgers University
Department of Economics
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
chang@econ.rutgers.edu

1 Introduction
The period surrounding the recent global …nancial crisis, which peaked around the Lehman
bankruptcy in September 2008, has motivated lively and important debates on macroeconomic
policy. Two observations have attracted particular attention, especially in emerging economies.
First, prior to the crisis, several central banks had accumulated signi…cantly high amounts
of international reserves. A justi…cation for such accumulation, often mentioned by central
bankers, was the need to build a "war chest" of international liquidity, to be available in case
of sudden out‡ows of capital, similar to those experienced in the late 1990s. Second, when the
global crisis did erupt, those same central banks were in a good position to mitigate its impact,
inparticularbyprovidingforeigncurrencyliquiditythatcompensatedtheforeigncreditcrunch,
prevented the collapse of the …nancial sector, and calmed the markets.1
The …rst observation has motivated a recent literature that focuses on accounting for the
observedlevelsofforeignreservesaccumulation. Thatliteraturehasservedtoidentifyvariables,
such as the probability of a "sudden stop" or the degree of …nancial development, that are key
determinants of optimal levels of reserves and were ignored by older treatments which tied
optimal reserve levels to international trade considerations. At the same time, the second
observation has spurred a host of studies on central bank responses to …nancial crunches and
sudden stops, especially on the so called "unconventional policies" designed to increase the
availability of credit in a …nancial crisis.
While these two literatures have delivered important and useful lessons, they have evolved
mostly in parallel. It is not hard, however, to argue that the two issues, optimal foreign
reserves accumulation and policy responses to crises, are intimately connected. For one thing,
as mentioned, central bankers often say that they hoard reserves because they plan to use them
to …nance liquidity assistance in case of a crisis. For another, reserves accumulation may a¤ect
private sector behavior, inducing domestic agents to borrow more, and potentially placing the
…nancial system in a more fragile situation. Finally, it may be the case that the probability
1For a discussion of Latin American experiences, see Céspedes, Chang, and Velasco (2014).
2

of crisis itself may be a¤ected by the level of international reserves and by the existence and
nature of liquidity policies that the central bank implements during crises.
Accordingly, this paper analyzes the interaction between optimal reserves accumulation
and central bank liquidity policies under …nancial duress, in a small open economy in which the
probabilityof…nancialcrisisisendogenouslydetermined. Thisexerciseyieldsseveralinteresting
lessons about the bene…ts and costs of international reserves, their link to the precise details of
ex post central bank responses to crises and of …nancial intermediation.
We develop our arguments in a small open economy model that extends that of Céspedes,
Chang, and Velasco (2017, hence CCV). In the model, domestic agents cannot borrow directly
from international lenders, but instead they can obtain credit from …nancial intermediaries or
banks, which in turn can borrow from abroad. Because of incentive or enforcement problems,
however, banks’foreign debts are limited to a multiple of their net worth. The collateral
constraint may or may not bind in equilibrium. If it does, there is a credit crunch that causes
the domestic interest rate to rise above the world rate, the real exchange rate to depreciate,
and investment to fall.
OurmodeldepartsfromthatinCCVintwokeyrespects. First, theseverityofthecollateral
constraint can be a¤ected by exogenous shocks, which can be thought of as exogenous "sudden
stops" of international capital ‡ows. Second, whether the collateral constraint binds or not
also depends on inherited debt, which is determined by households’initial consumption and
borrowing decisions, and is therefore endogenous. As a consequence, under laissez faire, crises
can occur with a probability that depends on the basic parameters of the economy.
In this setting, we allow the central bank to accumulate international reserves that can
be used to …nance liquidity assistance to domestic agents if there is a crisis. Speci…cally, the
central bank has the option of borrowing long term in order to acquire short term international
assets. Such option can come at a cost, but enables the central bank to provide liquidity to
domestic agents in case of need. Because liquidity provision in a crisis reduces ine¢ ciencies in
investment, it can be welfare improving for the central bank to take advantage of the option
3