NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EMERGING MARKETS SOVEREIGN CDS SPREADS DURING COVID-19: ECONOMICS
VERSUS EPIDEMIOLOGY NEWS
Timo Daehler
Joshua Aizenman
Yothin Jinjarak
Working Paper 27903
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27903
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2020, Revised March 2021
Insightful comments by anonymous referees and the editor are gratefully acknowledged. We
gratefully acknowledge the financial support by the Dockson Chair and the Center of
International Studies at USC. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Timo Daehler, Joshua Aizenman, and Yothin Jinjarak. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Emerging Markets Sovereign CDS Spreads During COVID-19: Economics versus Epidemiology
News
Timo Daehler, Joshua Aizenman, and Yothin Jinjarak
NBER Working Paper No. 27903
October 2020, Revised March 2021
JEL No. F34,F36,F41,H12,H51
ABSTRACT
Can bad news about COVID-19 induce negative expectations on sovereign credit risks? We
investigate the factors driving credit default swap (CDS) spreads of emerging market sovereigns
around the outbreak of COVID-19. Using 2014-2019 data, we estimate a two-factor model of
global and regional risks and then extrapolate the model-implied spreads for the period July
2019–June 2020. Intriguingly, the model initially predicts the realized spreads well but loses
predictive accuracy during the COVID-19 pandemic. Fiscal space and oil-revenue dependence
primarily drive the differences between the realized and predicted sovereign spreads. Our
augmented-factor model indicates that the cumulative COVID-19 mortality rate growth is
positively associated with the CDS spreads. The evidence suggests that the epidemiological
deterioration can lower confidence in the sovereign credit markets due to the prospects of
prolonged lockdowns and a slower GDP growth recovery. Our results also hold for a single
regression of daily spread changes during 2014-2020.
Timo Daehler Yothin Jinjarak
University of Southern California School of Economics and Finance
3518 Trousdale Pkwy. Victoria University of Wellington
Los Angeles, CA 90089 PO Box 600
daehler@usc.edu 23 Lambton Quay, Wellington
New Zealand
Joshua Aizenman yothin.jinjarak@vuw.ac.nz
Economics and SIR
University of Southern California
University Park
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0043 and
NBER
aizenman@usc.edu
The code and data are available at https://github.com/timodaehler/COVID19-DOMINANCE/

1 Introduction
Many emerging market economies (EM) depend on commodity revenues, or on
manufacturing exports, whilst they have relatively limited policy space to buffer
fluctuations in these markets. Frequently their populations are comparatively exposed to
economic fluctuations as social safety nets and public health systems are limited in size.
Additionally, emerging market governments’ access to international capital markets is
fragile, limiting fiscal space and the capacity to react to external shocks. Against this
backdrop, many observers were wondering how emerging markets would deal with the
global outbreak of COVID-19, an unprecedented shock affecting both sides of the fiscal
equation simultaneously: On the revenue side, the global slump in demand caused a fall
in oil prices which would diminish oil exporter revenues both directly and indirectly.
Equally, a fall of domestic economic activity lowered household incomes and consumer
confidence, further reducing tax revenues. On the expenditure side, debt became more
costly as a global spike in investors’ risk aversion induced capital outflows from
emerging markets, an increase in their sovereign credit default swap (CDS) spreads
and a depreciation of their currencies (see Figure 1 and Figure 2). The increase in risk
aversion, in turn, can be attributed both to economic challenges in investors’ home
countries and in emerging markets alike. More importantly still, the pandemic forced
governments to engage in unparalleled deficit spending to support strained public health
systems and households severed from their income sources due to lockdowns (see
Figure 3).
The economic challenges caused by the pandemic and the simultaneous oil price
collapse are not the first shock that emerging markets face. Indeed, there have been six
previous oil price collapses since 1970. Additionally, in recent decades, the increased
flow of cross-border investment and trade in a more and more deeply intertwined global
economy has been subject to repeated interruption. For example, in 2015, there was a
relatively contained crisis in China when the Chinese stock market tumbled, the Yuan
slid, and a lot of foreign investment quickly left the country. A year before that, dropping
prices of oil and other commodities sent a shock wave through several emerging
markets. Furthermore, a general slowdown in emerging market growth began in 2013
with the Federal Reserve’s (Fed) taper tantrum. Taken together, these examples
indicate that not all crises in emerging markets are the same. Some are more country-
specific while others seem to be driven by some common global factor, affecting
emerging markets at large. Thus, with COVID-19 as a global pandemic and an external
demand shock, two research questions reveal themselves: Are sovereign CDS spreads
determined by a time-varying combination of global and country-specific factors and if
the later factors play a role, which ones? Particularly COVID-19 raises a corollary
question about country-specific determinants of sovereign CDS spreads: is the
epidemiological situation in a country significant for CDS spread determination once the
economic repercussions of lockdowns and foreign demand slump as well as stimulus
responses are taken into account?
To address the first question, we adopt a two-stage econometric approach, using a
panel of thirty investible emerging markets. In the first stage, we estimate a
global/regional factor model for changes in sovereign CDS spreads before the outbreak
2

of COVID-19. Specifically, we estimate and train the model over the period January
2014 through June 2019. In the second stage, we use the estimated coefficients to
extrapolate model-implied changes in CDS spreads for the period July 2019 through
June 2020.
This approach is appealing for several reasons: On the one hand, it allows us to
compare the model’s out-of-sample properties during normal and pandemic times. On
the other hand, this approach facilitates the statistical derivation of the “COVID-19
residual,” which is the difference between actual CDS changes and model implied
changes for the pandemic period. Additionally, the residuals can then be used to
answer the question which exact country-specific factors were the biggest drivers of
CDS adjustment during COVID-19. Specifically, we explain the residuals through a
variety of country-specific factors from three different realms: epidemiological,
economic, and policy factors.
To address the second question, we leverage the panel and introduce all control
variables (global/regional and country-specific epidemiological, economic and policy
factors) simultaneously to test the significance of the epidemiological variables.
Our paper makes two distinct contributions. First, we engage in the discussion of the
relative importance and time-varying nature of global/regional and country-specific
factors in the determination of emerging markets sovereign risk pricing, particularly
during a global pandemic. Second, our analysis contributes to an understanding of the
economic effects of lockdowns on government finances by identifying if and which
country-specific factors drive spreads during a global pandemic. Disentangling the
effects of economic contagion and of domestic economic conditions and policy
responses on sovereign CDS spreads promises to hold valuable implications for policy
makers weighing the economic trade-offs of different containment strategies.
Our main findings can be summarized as follows:
First, the global/regional factor model traces the realized sovereign CDS spreads well
for the out-of-sample period before the pandemic. This observation suggests that
emerging market CDS spreads are driven largely by global/regional factors in risk-on
environments.
Second, the relationship between actual CDS spread changes and changes predicted
by the global/regional factor model breaks down during the pandemic. This suggests
that CDS spread determinants are of time-varying nature and that investors weigh
country-specific factors more heavily in their decision-making process in risk-off
environments.
Third, actual CDS spread changes experience the biggest deviations from model-
implied values in March 2020, suggesting that uncertainties around the ramifications of
COVID-19 vary across time and were highest at the peak of the first wave.
Fourth, residuals at peak COVID-19 were primarily driven by traditional country-specific
factors of sovereign solvency such as fiscal space and oil income dependence rather
than epidemiological factors. This suggests, maybe surprisingly, that the severity of the
3