NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANK LIQUIDITY PROVISION ACROSS THE FIRM SIZE DISTRIBUTION
Gabriel Chodorow-Reich
Olivier Darmouni
Stephan Luck
Matthew C. Plosser
Working Paper 27945
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27945
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2020, Revised December 2020
We thank Tania Babina, Tobias Berg, Xavier Giroud, Ivan Ivanov, Martina Jasova, Trish Mosser,
Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, Pascal Paul, Giorgia Piacentino, Kerry Siani, and seminar
participants˛at the UC Berkeley Haas School of Business, Columbia Business School, the FDIC,
John Hopkins University, the Temple Fox School of Business, and the University of Rochester
Simon School of Business for useful comments and Sungmin An, Harry Cooperman, and Alena
Kang-Landsberg for excellent research assistance. The opinions expressed in this paper do not
necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2020 by Gabriel Chodorow-Reich, Olivier Darmouni, Stephan Luck, and Matthew C. Plosser. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Bank Liquidity Provision Across the Firm Size Distribution
Gabriel Chodorow-Reich, Olivier Darmouni, Stephan Luck, and Matthew C. Plosser
NBER Working Paper No. 27945
October 2020, Revised December 2020
JEL No. E51,G21,G32
ABSTRACT
We use supervisory loan-level data to document that small firms (SMEs) obtain shorter maturity
credit lines than large firms; have less active maturity management; post more collateral; have
higher utilization rates; and pay higher spreads. We rationalize these facts as the equilibrium
outcome of a trade-off between lender commitment and discretion. Using the COVID recession,
we test the prediction that SMEs are subject to greater lender discretion by examining credit line
utilization. We show that SMEs do not drawdown in contrast to large firms despite SME demand,
but that PPP loans helped alleviate the shortfall.
Gabriel Chodorow-Reich Stephan Luck
Department of Economics Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Harvard University 33 Liberty St
1805 Littauer Center New York, NY 10045
Cambridge, MA 02138 stephan.luck@ny.frb.org
and NBER
chodorowreich@fas.harvard.edu Matthew C. Plosser
Financial Intermediation Function
Olivier Darmouni Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Columbia Business School 33 Liberty Street
Uris 816 New York, NY 10045
New York, NY 10027 matthew.plosser@ny.frb.org
omd2109@columbia.edu

1 Introduction
The ability of borrowers to access funds in bad times is crucial to avoiding financial distress, with banks
playing a key role as liquidity providers (Kashyap et al., 2002; Gatev and Strahan, 2006). However, there
are widespread concerns that small firms might not be able to access this liquidity, unlike firms at the
top of the size distribution.1 These concerns reflect the high reliance of small firms on bank funding and
that they are riskier and more opaque than larger firms (Petersen and Rajan, 1994; Berger and Udell,
1995; Gertler and Gilchrist, 1994), so that financing may not materialize when it is most needed. And
yet, empirical evidence of differential access to bank liquidity by small and medium enterprises (SMEs)
remains scarce, as most analyses of loan terms in the United States rely on syndicated loan data that
only includes large loans and by extension large borrowers.
In this paper we document sharp differences in the provision of bank liquidity to small and large
firms. Using supervisory data covering 60% of all corporate loans, including to 50,000 SMEs, we present
five facts about differences in loan terms that reflect lender commitment to large firms and discretion to
small firms. Relative to large firms, small firms (i) obtain credit lines with much shorter maturity, (ii)
have less active maturity management and as a result frequently have expiring credit, (iii) post more
collateral, (iv) have higher utilization rates, and (v) pay higher spreads even conditional on other firm
characteristics.
We then show that differences in loan terms impacted firms’ access to liquidity at the outset of the
COVID-19 recession. The increase in bank credit in 2020Q1 and 2020Q2 came almost entirely from
drawdowns by large firms on pre-committed lines of credit, whereas small firms had no net drawdown
of credit lines. To minimize differences in demand for credit in explaining these results, we further
show that large firms exhibited much higher sensitivity of drawdown rates to industry-level measures
of exposure to the COVID recession. Instead, differences in drawdowns appear to reflect deteriorating
firm fundamentals and banks’ ability to exercise discretion in lending to small firms. Finally, we analyze
the role of the government-sponsored Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) in alleviating the liquidity
shortfall to small firms. By merging the PPP data with our supervisory data, we find that PPP recipients
on net reduced their non-PPP bank borrowing in 2020Q2, suggesting that the program fully overcame
any shortfall but at a cost to the government.
1See e.g. "Much of America Is Shut Out of The Greatest Borrowing Binge Ever", Au-
gust 13th 2020, Bloomberg, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-08-13/
a-2-trillion-credit-boom-leaves-america-s-smaller-firms-behind(accessedSeptember8,2020).
1

The paper unfolds as follows. Section 2 describes the supervisory data. The data come from the
Federal Reserve Y-14 and contain information on all loans of more than $1 million made by banks with
more than $100 billion in total consolidated assets. For each loan, the data contain information on
loan terms (loan type, commitment, maturity, origination date, interest rate, collateral type, etc.) and
borrower characteristics (industry, assets, sales, risk rating, etc.). We benchmark the Y-14 sample against
the universe of corporate loans as well as loans to public firms (Compustat) and syndicated loans.
Section 3 presents an illustrative framework of equilibrium loan term determination to set the stage
for the empirical analysis. We emphasize an incomplete contracting view of credit lines in the cross-
section of firms. The framework extends the Holmström and Tirole (1998) model of liquidity provision
to firms facing cash-flow shocks to allow for uncertainty over the borrower’s final pledgable value.
Loan terms give lenders either commitment or discretion in granting funds. With lender commitment, the
borrower can always draw on credit limits determined ex-ante. With discretion the lender can deny
requests for funds ex-post even though liquidity is available on paper. Both types of contracts reduce
creditconstraints: commitmentthroughaninsurancechannelbycross-subsidizinghighshockswithlow
shocks and discretion by giving the lender an option to monitor and make funding contingent on the
borrower’s repayment prospects. In equilibrium, firms choose contracts that minimize the probability of
liquidity-driven default. Firms that choose discretion have pledgeable value that is (i) small relative
to expected cash-flow shocks and (ii) more uncertain ex-ante. Intuitively, insurance is less valuable
when large cash-flow shocks are more likely, and discretion more valuable when the option value
of monitoring is larger. We provide evidence of audit frequency and firm volatility that links these
characteristics to small firms.
Section 4 presents the five facts about bank loan terms across the firm size distribution. Fact 1
documents sharp differences in maturity at origination for credit lines, but not for other loan types.
Among firms with less than $50 million in assets, three-quarters of credit lines have maturity of 1 year
or less at origination and more than one-quarter of loans to these firms are demand loans immediately
callable by the lender. These loans grant banks discretion — any time the borrower requests funds, the
lender can monitor and reject. The share of credit lines with less than 1 year maturity at origination
declines to below 10% for firms with more than $1 billion of assets, for which the median and modal
credit line is a 5 year facility. The maturity difference disappears for term loans, for which the vast
majority of credit to both small and large firms originates with 5 or more years of maturity. In our
framework, term loans offer less scope for discretion since the bank disburses the funds up front.
2