NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
GOING-CONCERN DEBT OF FINANCIAL INTERMEDIARIES
Yueran Ma
José A. Scheinkman
Working Paper 28088
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28088
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2020
We thank Felipe de Souza Netto and Ammon Lam for excellent research assistance. We thank Jason
Donaldson, Martin Oehmke, Giorgia Piacentino, Yao Zeng, seminar participants at Columbia and
New York Fed, and conference participants at SED and AEA for helpful comments. The views expressed
here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2020 by Yueran Ma and José A. Scheinkman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Going-Concern Debt of Financial Intermediaries
Yueran Ma and José A. Scheinkman
NBER Working Paper No. 28088
November 2020
JEL No. G21,G28,G32
ABSTRACT
We study asset and debt characteristics of US bank holding companies. We show that financial institutions,
especially large institutions, are not just about holding discrete assets. Services and going-concern
values are important, and capital market debt against going-concern values accounts for 10% to 15%
of total assets, comparable to the volume of capital market debt against discrete assets. We find that
financial institutions’ debt against going-concern values has weak monitoring, relative to similar debt
among non-financial firms. We argue that weak monitoring prevails because creditors cannot easily
punish or restructure these institutions should they violate covenants, which limits covenants’ usefulness.
Yueran Ma
The University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Ave.
Chicago, IL 60637
United States
Yueran.Ma@chicagobooth.edu
José A. Scheinkman
Department of Economics
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
js3317@columbia.edu

1 Introduction
The funding of financial institutions has always garnered substantial interest in eco-
nomics research. A key focus has been theories and evidence on the nature of deposits.
Nonetheless, major deposit-taking financial institutions in the US also rely on a sizable
amount of non-deposit debt contracts from capital markets. For example, roughly 35%
of the total liabilities of JP Morgan and Bank of America are not deposits. What is the
nature of the capital market debt contracts of financial firms? What are the similarities
and differences relative to non-financial firms? We investigate these questions and draw
comparisons with non-financial firms, to flesh out the unifying themes as well as the
distinct features of debt contract enforcement among financial institutions.
Among non-financial firms, there are two common approaches to debt enforcement.
One approach is to lend against the liquidation value of discrete, separable assets, such
asfixedassetsandworkingcapital,wherecreditorsrelyontheintrinsicliquidationvalue
of these well-defined assets. Another approach is to lend against the going-concern cash
flow value of the firm, where creditors rely on the value of the business as a whole and
the verifiability of cash flows. The prevalence of these two approaches is influenced by
thenatureoffirms’assetsandeconomicactivities, andthelatteroftencomeswithstrong
creditor monitoring and control (Kermani and Ma, 2020b).
In this paper, we collect data on the asset and debt characteristics of financial in-
termediaries (in particular, bank holding companies), and analyze the extent to which
a similar framework applies to the capital market debt of financial firms. We show
that there are broad similarities, but also important twists. On the asset side, although
intuitively financial firms have more liquid, separable assets than non-financial firms,
other types of activities such as services are also important, especially for large institu-
1

tions. Indeed, whereas the asset features of non-financial firms appear to be significantly
shaped by the industry, the asset composition of financial firms varies much by size. On
the debt side, although debt against going-concern values among financial firms is less
prevalent than such debt among non-financial firms, its volume is still meaningful in
aggregate. Notably, this type of debt among financial institutions appears to have much
fewer covenants, relative to what we observe among non-financial firms. Thus financial
institutions can be an interesting “out-of-sample” data point for analyses of covenants
and creditor monitoring. To interpret our empirical findings, we develop a model in
which limited effectiveness or limited threats from creditor control results in the absence
of covenants and monitoring-intensive debt.
In the empirical analyses, we start with asset composition, then proceed to debt com-
position, and finally contract enforcement. First, on the asset side, we find that the
pledgeable value of discrete assets (i.e., the amount of borrowing that discrete assets can
support when pledged directly) accounts for about 60% of total assets in aggregate. By
discrete assets, we mean assets that can be separated and repossessed on a standalone
basis, such as securities, mortgages and other loans, and fixed assets in the case of fi-
nancial intermediaries. This value is much larger compared to the case for non-financial
firms, where the liquidation value of (non-cash) discrete assets is less than 25% of total
assets in aggregate (Kermani and Ma, 2020b). Nonetheless, financial intermediaries do
generate meaningful going-concern values from services (e.g., deposit franchise, com-
mercial banking, underwriting, trading and market making, brokerage, etc.), which is
not necessarily captured by the intrinsic value of discrete assets.
In addition, there is substantial heterogeneity in financial intermediaries’ asset fea-
tures. In general, the share of services revenue is higher among larger institutions,
suggesting fixed costs or increasing returns to scale in the provision of services. We
2