NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHO BENEFITS FROM ANALYST “TOP PICKS”?
Justin Birru
Sinan Gokkaya
Xi Liu
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 28038
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28038
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2020
We are grateful to Leandro Sanz for comments. René Stulz consults and provides expert
testimony on issues involving financial institutions that may employ analysts. None of his current
or recent consulting concerns analysts. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Justin Birru, Sinan Gokkaya, Xi Liu, and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Who Benefits from Analyst “Top Picks”?
Justin Birru, Sinan Gokkaya, Xi Liu, and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 28038
October 2020
JEL No. G11,G12,G14,G20,G23,G24
ABSTRACT
Following the Global Settlement, analysts extensively use a top pick designation to highlight their
highest conviction best ideas. Such a designation enables analysts to provide greater granularity
of information, but it can potentially be influenced by conflicts of interest. Examining a
comprehensive sample of top picks, we find, even though top picks are more likely to be
investment banking clients, they have greater investment value, attract greater media and investor
attention, and lead to more trading than buy recommendations. Bad top picks are more likely to
be influenced by strategic objectives and have adverse consequences for analysts. Institutions, but
not retail investors, discern between good and bad top picks.
Justin Birru Xi Liu
The Ohio State University Farmer School of Business
Fisher College of Business Department of Finance
824 Fisher Hall 800 E. High St.
Columbus, OH 43210-1144 Oxford, OH 45056
birru.2@osu.edu liux60@miamioh.edu
Sinan Gokkaya René M. Stulz
Department of Finance The Ohio State University
Ohio University Fisher College of Business
gokkaya@ohio.edu 806A Fisher Hall
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu

1. Introduction
In the early 2000s, concerns about conflicts of interest of sell-side analysts led to new regulations and
eventually to the Global Analyst Research Settlement. As discussed in Kadan, Madureira, Wang, and Zach
(2009), one important byproduct of these regulations is the adoption of a new stock rating system by most
leading investment banks. Before the Global Settlement, 85% of analyst recommendations are issued using a
traditional five-tier rating system, but only less than 20% are afterwards.
Though a coarser three-tier rating system has the potential to reduce gains to analysts from engaging in
strategic behavior, such a system also reduces the information available to investors. That is, sell-side analysts
cannot fully discriminate among stocks whose performance they expect to be superior. To mitigate the costs of
a coarser three-tier stock rating system, we would expect brokerage houses to attempt to increase the granularity
of information available to financial market participants by devising new ways to draw attention to their best
stocks. Consistently, we show that a new stock designation, “top picks,” emerges following the Global Analyst
Research Settlement and its use becomes widespread mostly among three-tier brokers. A top pick is typically
the stock for which the analyst has the strongest conviction of superior performance compared to other buy
recommendations. Notwithstanding the disproportionate amount of attention top picks receive from investors,
media, and regulatory agencies, there exists no academic research on top picks we are aware of. A possible
reason for this lack of research is that top picks are not identified on traditional databases academics rely upon
(e.g., IBES). As a result, little is known about even basic details of top picks and whether analysts use top pick
designations to give their best investment advice to investors, or are tempted to use these important designations
to pursue strategic objectives that are not in the interest of investors.
Exploiting a novel and comprehensive sample of 3,563 top picks by 113 unique brokerage houses over
1999-2016, we find that top picks attract more retail, institutional and financial press attention and affect the
trading of both institutional and retail investors more compared to buy recommendations. We investigate
whether potential conflicts of interest affect the choice of top pick stocks and whether the market and investors
can see through designations potentially tainted by conflicts of interest. Although investment banking clients
2

are more likely to be selected as top picks, top pick designations, on average, have superior investment value
for investors. Top picks with poor ex post investment performance are more likely to be investment banking
clients. Though top pick designation announcements have a strong positive stock price reaction, the stock price
reaction for top picks that have poor ex post performance is neither statistically nor economically significant,
which suggests that the market does not credit poor top picks when they are announced. Top picks that have
poor ex post performance are costly for analysts in that they worsen their career prospects and hurt their
credibility with investors.
Top picks differ from stock recommendations in a number of ways.1 First, a top pick is not a
recommendation but an optional designation that represents an analyst’s highest conviction “single best” idea
within her coverage universe. In contrast, a buy recommendation typically means a stock is expected to
outperform its industry peers. Hence, there can be at most only one top pick selection while there are multiple
buy rated stocks outstanding by the same analyst at a given point in time. Second, unlike stock
recommendations, “top pick” designations are assigned to a stock only for the upcoming one-year investment
horizon (typically at the end or beginning of the year, with December, January, and February accounting for
66% of top pick announcements) and almost always expire on December 31st. Third, though analysts select
their top pick stock from their buy recommendations, only 19% of top pick announcements coincide with a
recommendation initiation, reiteration, or revision. In other words, the top pick designation represents a stand-
alone analyst research output and we can directly assess its impact on financial markets. Fourth, top picks appear
to be intentionally used as a marketing tool for brokerage houses. Indeed, a primary reason for the clustering of
top picks in December – February is so that brokers can advertise stocks as top picks for the upcoming calendar
year. In addition, brokers frequently organize best idea conferences to which they invite institutional clients and
1 Throughout the paper, we use “buy rating” to also include “strong buy rating” when such a rating is employed by a
brokerage firm. Occasionally, when the distinction is important, we refer to “strong buy” and “buy” ratings separately.
Three-tier brokerages do not use the strong buy rating.
3