NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE MARKET RISK PREMIUM FOR UNSECURED CONSUMER CREDIT RISK
Matthias Fleckenstein
Francis A. Longstaff
Working Paper 28029
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28029
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2020
Matthias Fleckenstein is with the University of Delaware. Francis A. Longstaff is with the UCLA
Anderson School and the NBER. We are grateful for the comments and suggestions of Adair
Morse, Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, and Antoinette Schoar. All errors are our responsibility. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Matthias Fleckenstein and Francis A. Longstaff. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Market Risk Premium for Unsecured Consumer Credit Risk
Matthias Fleckenstein and Francis A. Longstaff
NBER Working Paper No. 28029
October 2020
JEL No. G12,G51
ABSTRACT
We use the prices of credit card asset-backed securities to study the market risk premium
associated with unsecured consumer credit risk. The consumer credit risk premium has
historically been comparable to high yield corporate bond spreads, but has increased dramatically
since the financial crisis. We find evidence that this increase is primarily due to balance-sheet
costs imposed by recent changes in regulatory capital requirements which have effectively
placed credit card securitizations back onto issuer balance sheets. These changes in capital
regulation may have added hundreds of basis points to the cost of unsecured household credit.
Matthias Fleckenstein
University of Delaware
Lerner College of Business and Economics
310 Purnell Hall
Newark, DE 19716
mflecken@udel.edu
Francis A. Longstaff
UCLA
Anderson Graduate School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
francis.longstaff@anderson.ucla.edu

1. INTRODUCTION
Why is the cost of unsecured household borrowing so high? For example, the
effective annual rate for consumer credit card debt—which represents one of the
largest components of unsecured household debt—averaged nearly 20 percent
1
over the past 20 years. The widely-held industry view is that these high rates
simplyreflectthelargepotentialcreditlossesassociatedwithunsecuredconsumer
credit. In reality, however, actual credit card charge-off rates averaged less than
six percent over the same period. Thus, expected credit losses are unlikely to
fully explain the high cost of unsecured consumer debt.
Could these high borrowing rates then be at least partially due to the pres-
ence of a large market risk premium for unsecured consumer credit risk? The
challenge in answering this question is that relatively little is known about the
size and nature of household credit risk premia. One reason for this is that con-
sumer lending typically occurs in private transactions between households and
financial institutions. Thus, market prices of consumer debt contracts are gener-
ally not directly observable in the secondary capital markets, making it difficult
to measure how financial markets value unsecured consumer credit risk.
The key innovation of this paper is the use of market prices of credit card
asset-backed securities (ABS) to measure the risk premium for unsecured con-
sumer credit card risk. An important advantage of our approach is that the
prices of credit card securitizations are determined purely by the actual credit
risk of consumer cash flows faced by secondary market participants. This aspect
2
allows us to directly identify the consumer credit risk premium.
1
The effective credit card APR (including both fees and card interest) averaged
19.37 percent from 2000–2020 (for the subset of issuers with available data).
Recently, however, the effective APR has been increasing. For example, the
effective APR averaged 20.82 percent in 2018, and 21.75 percent in 2019. For
other examples of the high cost of unsecured household borrowing, see Morse
(2011) and Melzer (2011).
2
In contrast, non-price-based approaches such as attempting to infer the risk
premium from the accounting margin between credit card and charge-off rates
can confound the risk premium with other factors such as the economic rents
earned by lenders or asymmetries in the bargaining power of consumers and
lenders.
1

We find that the market incorporates a substantial risk premium into the
prices of credit card ABS. In particular, the difference between the implied risk-
neutral charge-off rate and the actual charge-off rate averages 522 basis points
during the 2000–2020 sample period. This spread is almost the same as the
spread on high yield corporate debt over the same period, with the unflattering
implication that the market views the typical consumer credit card borrower as
the equivalent of a “junk bond.”
Perhaps the most striking result is that there appears to have been a major
repricing of unsecured consumer credit risk beginning in 2010. The average
consumer credit risk premium increased dramatically from values of about two
to fivepercentduringmostofthe 2000s,to morethanten percentduringthepast
decade. Surprisingly,this dramaticincrease in the consumercredit risk premium
occurred as credit card charge-off rates actually declined significantly following
the peak of the financial crisis.
What explains the large increase in the consumer credit risk premium since
2010? A strong possibility is the impact of major changes in the regulation of
financial intermediaries following the financial crisis. Foremost among these was
the requirement for issuers to reconsolidate credit card securitizations back onto
their balance sheets at the beginning of 2010. Since most credit card issuers are
large financialinstitutions subject to strict regulatory capital requirements,their
securitizations now required regulatory capital. Upon reconsolidation, issuers’
capital ratiosdeclinedsignificantly,whichsuggeststhatthey faced tightercapital
constraints and new costs for meeting regulatory requirements (“balance-sheet
costs”). Two other major changes were the “skin-in-the-game” risk-retention
requirement of the FDIC Securitization Safe Harbor Rule of 2010 and the Dodd-
Frank Act which required issuers to retain a specific fraction of the credit risk of
the assets underlying their securitizations.
To explore the relation between the consumer credit risk premium and the
balance-sheet costs and capital constraints faced by financial intermediaries, we
conduct a numberof analyses. First, we rule out the possibility that the increase
in the consumer credit risk premiumsimply reflects the pattern of credit spreads
in other markets during the post-financial-crisis period. In particular, we find
that while changes in the consumer credit risk premium are significantly related
to changes in other credit spreads, they are also drivenby additional factors that
may be unique to the securitizated consumer credit markets.
Second,we findthat the consumercreditriskpremiumissignificantlyhigher
at quarter-ends (when regulatory capital ratios are reported) relative to other
months. This result is consistent with Du, Tepper, and Verdelhan (2018), Fleck-
enstein and Longstaff (2020a), and others, and provides evidence that interme-
diary balance-sheet effects play a role in the pricing of consumer credit risk.
2