NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ADVERSE SELECTION DYNAMICS IN
PRIVATELY-PRODUCED SAFE DEBT MARKETS
Nathan Foley-Fisher
Gary B. Gorton
Stéphane Verani
Working Paper 28016
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28016
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2020
For providing valuable comments and assistance with data, we would like to thank, without
implication, Sriya Anbil, Celso Brunetti, Richard Cantor, Francesca Carapella, Larry Cordell,
Burcu Duygan-Bump, Sebastian Infante, Tom King, Brittany Lewis, David Little, Ralf
Meisenzahl, Borghan Narajabad, Michael Palumbo, Lubo Petrasek, Coco Ramirez, Algis
Remeza, Peter Sallerson, Alex von Hafften, and Guillaume Vuillemey. We are grateful to Sam
Dreith and Nathan Heinrich for exceptional research assistance. The views in this paper are solely
the authors’ and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System or of any other person associated with the Federal Reserve System. The
authors have nothing to disclose. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Nathan Foley-Fisher, Gary B. Gorton, and Stéphane Verani. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Adverse Selection Dynamics in Privately-Produced Safe Debt Markets
Nathan Foley-Fisher, Gary B. Gorton, and Stéphane Verani
NBER Working Paper No. 28016
October 2020
JEL No. E44,G14,G23
ABSTRACT
Privately-produced safe debt is designed so that there is no adverse selection in trade. This is
because no agent finds it profitable to produce private information about the debt’s backing and
all agents know this (i.e., it is information-insensitive). But in some macro states, it becomes
profitable for some agents to produce private information, and then the debt faces adverse
selection when traded (i.e., it becomes information-sensitive). We empirically study these adverse
selection dynamics in a very important asset class, collateralized loan obligations, a large
symbiotic appendage of the regulated banking system, which finances loans to below investment-
grade firms.
Nathan Foley-Fisher Stéphane Verani
Federal Reserve Board Federal Reserve Board
20th Street and Constitution Avenue 20th Street and Constitution Avenue
NW Washington, DC 20551 NW Washington, DC 20551
nathan.c.foley-fisher@frb.gov stephane.h.verani@frb.gov
Gary B. Gorton
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
Gary.Gorton@yale.edu

1 Introduction
Thereisaprimitivedemandforsafedebt, debtthatcanstorevaluethrough
time safely and can be traded without fear of adverse selection. The
government cannot completely meet this demand (see, e.g., Krishnamurthy
and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012), Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas (2017),
Gorton, Llewellen and Metrick (2012), and Gorton (2017)). The private
sector cannot produce riskless debt, but it can produce a close substitute,
debt such that no agent finds it profitable to produce private information
about its fundamentals, and all agents know this. This debt is senior,
complicated, and opaque, making the cost of understanding it high. It is
information-insensitive. It provides protection against adverse selection; it
is rated AAA/Aaa (S&P/Moody’s) and it trades at par (minus a small
bid-ask spread). But bad public news about the fundamental value of
the debt’s backing can prompt sophisticated investors to acquire private
information creating adverse selection; see Dang, Gorton and Holmström
(2019). We study the dynamics of this switch from information-insensitive
to information-sensitive in the collateralized loan market and document the
resulting adverse selection.
The risk of a switch from information-insensitive to sensitive, and the
resultingadverseselection,isauniquerisk. Becausethesecurityisdesigned
to be information-insensitive, no investor has an incentive to produce
2

private information about the security’s fundamentals. Ex ante investors
do not investigate the fundamentals of the bond and accept the debt at
par. Investors are uninformed by design. In particular, the risk of a switch
to adverse selection is neither investigated nor priced ex ante. Ex post in
the case of bad times, they cannot price the security because they have not
invested in the technology to do so. See Hanson and Sunderam (2013), and
Monnet and Quintin (2017). So, privately-produced safe debt is a double-
edged sword: It serves its purpose of avoiding adverse selection until it
doesn’t.
A collateralized loan obligation (CLO) is a legal entity that buys loans
from banks and finances them by issuing debt in the capital market.The
CLO manager can subsequently buy and sell assets. The CLO liabilities,
called “tranches”, have ratings that range from AAA/Aaa to B. CLOs
play a very significant role in financing below investment-grade firms,
whose loans are called “leveraged loans”. According to Fed Chair Jerome
Powell Powell (2019): “Collateralized loan obligations are now the largest
[nonbank] lenders, with about 62 percent of outstanding leveraged loans.”
The leveraged loan market is about $1.1 trillion, and is used by about
70percentofU.S.companies,includingcompanieslikeBurgerKing,United
Airlines, Avis Rent a Car, and Equinox Fitness.
Why do banks sell their loans? The answer is that it is profitable to do
so. And it reduces the cost of credit to the borrowing firms. Nadauld and
3