NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE COLLATERAL LINK BETWEEN VOLATILITY AND RISK SHARING
Sebastian Infante
Guillermo Ordoñez
Working Paper 28119
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28119
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2020
We thank Anna Orlik for a thoughtful discussion. We also thank Jules van Binsbergen, Stijn van
Nieuwerburgh, David Rappoport, and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Board and the
2020 Internal FRB Macro-Asset Pricing Workshop for comments. The usual waiver of
responsibility applies. The views of this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and
should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, nor of any other person associated with the Federal Reserve System, nor of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Sebastian Infante and Guillermo Ordoñez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Collateral Link between Volatility and Risk Sharing
Sebastian Infante and Guillermo Ordoñez
NBER Working Paper No. 28119
November 2020
JEL No. E44,G12,G18
ABSTRACT
We show that aggregate volatility affects the extent to which agents can share idiosyncratic risks
through the valuation of collateral. Both private and public assets are used in insurance markets
as collateral, but their exposure to volatility differs. While aggregate volatility decreases the value
of private assets—they are exposed to more variation—it increases the value of public assets—
they become more valuable to smooth consumption intertemporally. Hence, a more volatile
economy tends to damage risk sharing when the composition of collateral is biased toward
private assets. As we show that a stable economy is more propitious to the creation of private
collateral, stability makes risk sharing increasingly fragile to volatility shocks. We find empirical
evidence that the higher use of private assets in the U.S. has affected the sensitivity of risk
sharing to aggregate volatility as predicted by our model.
Sebastian Infante
Federal Reserve Board
20th and Constitution Ave NW
Washington, DC, 20551
sebastian.infantebilbao@frb.gov
Guillermo Ordoñez
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Economics
PCPSE - Room 505
133 South 36th Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
ordonez@econ.upenn.edu

1 Introduction
Public assets (government bonds, T-bills, etc.) and private assets (houses, asset backed
securities, etc.) have two relevant uses. On the one hand, they back promises to move
resources over time, this is to smooth aggregate shocks intertemporally. On the other hand,
they back promises to move resources across agents, this is to smooth idiosyncratic shocks
intratemporally. The first use has been widely analyzed by the asset pricing literature (for
example, Holmstrom and Tirole 2001 and Bansal et al. 2014). The second has been instead
mostly discussed by macroeconomics (for example, Heaton and Lucas 1996, Lustig and
Van Nieuwerburgh 2005, Blundell et al. 2008, Schulhofer-Wohl 2011 and Blundell et al.
2016).
These uses, however, are intimately related. The use of assets as collateral affects the
prevalence of idiosyncratic risk in the economy and, as such, affects the intertemporal value
of assets. In parallel, the intertemporal value of assets determines their value as collateral
and thus the prevalence of idiosyncratic risk. In this paper, we explore how the intertem-
poral properties of an economy (its time series volatility of aggregate consumption) affects
its intratemporal properties (its cross-sectional idiosyncratic variance). In other words, we
explore the effect of aggregate volatility on the extent of risk sharing across agents in the
economy through the valuation of collateral.
Understanding the relationship between aggregate volatility and risk sharing has become
particularly relevant during turbulent times, such as the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The pandemic constitutes a sudden, unexpected shock to the economy, affecting all countries
and vastly increasing the aggregate uncertainty individuals face in the short- and medium-
run. How does this shock affect the capacity of individuals, companies, and financial institu-
tions to cross-insure against future idiosyncratic shocks? How does an increase in economic
uncertainty affect inequality across agents, the functioning of financial markets, and the
allocation of resources?
We show that this relationship is non-monotonic, as an increase in uncertainty—captured
by an increase in the volatility of time-series aggregates that agents face—can either reduce
or increase the possibilities for those agents to share risk. To be more precise, the way in
which volatility affects risk sharing depends on the ratio of private to public assets used as
collateral in the economy, as their valuations react to volatility in opposite directions. On
1

the one hand, an increase in aggregate volatility increases the intertemporal price of public
assets. The reason is that public assets, through the taxation power of governments, have
the property of providing noncontingent future payment promises, and a promise of a dollar
in the future depends on how uncertain the future is. If agents face high volatility (that
is, when the variance of future realizations is high), such a dollar can pay off in very bad
periods, with high marginal utility, making the promise more valuable. On the other hand,
an increase in aggregate volatility reduces the intertemporal price of private assets. The
reason is that their payoffs are tied to the evolution of the aggregate economy, and riskier
assets become less valuable when the variance of future realizations is high.
When the ratio of private to public assets used as collateral to back insurance promises is
relatively low, the value of public assets is more relevant to determine the value of available
collateral. In this case, higher volatility implies more valuable collateral, on average, and
better idiosyncratic insurance—a sort of “positive externality” of economic volatility on
economic risk sharing. The opposite is true when the ratio of private to public assets is
relatively high. In this case, the total value collateral declines, and there is less idiosyncratic
insurance—a “negative externality” of economic volatility on economic risk sharing.
The effect of volatility on risk sharing feeds back on the price of government bonds, which
also has implications for the cost of public finances. When government bonds are heavily
usedascollateraltobackidiosyncraticinsurance, anincreaseinaggregatevolatilityincreases
insurance by reducing idiosyncratic variance, thus moderating the increase in the price of
public assets as their risk-sharing premium decreases. In contrast, when private assets are
used as collateral to back idiosyncratic insurance, an increase in volatility reduces insurance,
consequently adding idiosyncratic risk to consumption and thus providing an extra kick in
increasing the price of public assets.
These results naturally apply to insurance markets among financial intermediaries and
uncover a novel source of financial fragility. In an economy in which banks insure against
idiosyncratic shocks (such as liquidity needs, shocks to specific asset positions, etc.) by
using contracts that rely heavily on the use of private collateral, their risk sharing could
be negatively affected by an increase in economic volatility. In this case, a large use of
private assets as collateral in inter-bank transactions will positively correlate volatile times
with financial fragility, as banks will find it harder to hedge their idiosyncratic shocks in
interbank markets, putting their activities under stress.
2