NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
AUTO DEALER LOAN INTERMEDIATION:
CONSUMER BEHAVIOR AND COMPETITIVE EFFECTS
Andreas Grunewald
Jonathan A. Lanning
David C. Low
Tobias Salz
Working Paper 28136
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28136
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2020
The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, the Federal Reserve System,
the United States, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Andreas Grunewald and Tobias
Salz thank the Institute for Social and Economic Research and Policy at Columbia University and
the Russel Sage Foundation for financial support. We thank Brian Bucks, Glenn Ellison, Matt
Gentzkow, Kate Ho, Éva Nagypál, Michael Riordan, Mike Whinston, Maximilian Voigt, and
audiences at Berkeley, BRIQ Bonn Structural Behavioral Conference, Boston College, IO
workshop at CREST, CFPB, University of Cologne, University of Copenhagen, DICE
Duesseldorf, EIEF Junior Conference, Frankfurt School, German Economist Abroad Conference,
Goethe University Frankfurt, Harvard, University of Mainz, University of Marburg, University of
Minnesota, University of Konstanz, NYU, University of Oregon, University of Pennsylvania,
Penn State, Solvay Brussels School / Ecare, Stanford, Toulouse School of Economics, and Yale
for helpful comments and suggestions. Guy Aridor, Jasper Clarkberg, Thi Mai Anh Nguyen, and
Yining Zhu provided outstanding research assistance.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Andreas Grunewald, Jonathan A. Lanning, David C. Low, and Tobias Salz. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Auto Dealer Loan Intermediation: Consumer Behavior and Competitive Effects
Andreas Grunewald, Jonathan A. Lanning, David C. Low, and Tobias Salz
NBER Working Paper No. 28136
November 2020
JEL No. G41,G51,L0,L13,L5,L62
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the intermediation of auto loans through auto dealers using new and
comprehensive administrative data. The arrangements between auto dealers and lenders
incentivize dealers to increase loan prices. We leverage details of the corresponding contracts to
demonstrate that many consumers are less responsive to finance charges than to vehicle charges.
Taking this behavior into account, we estimate an equilibrium model of dealer price setting and
lender competition. We explore counterfactuals where dealers have no discretion to price loans
and final rates are set by lenders instead. We find large gains in consumer surplus from such a
policy.
Andreas Grunewald David C. Low
Frankfurt School of Finance and Management CFPB
Adickesallee 32-34 1700 G St. NW
Frankfurt, Hess 60322 Washington, DC 20002
Germany david.low@cfpb.gov
gruni06@googlemail.com
Tobias Salz
Jonathan A. Lanning MIT Deparatment of Economics
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 77 Massachusetts Avenue, E52-404
2018 W Churchill St Cambridge, MA 02139
Chicago, IL 60647 and NBER
jonlanning@gmail.com tsalz@mit.edu

1 Introduction
In retail financial markets consumers make infrequent, high-stakes decisions about complex
products. Often, such decisions are made in negotiations with professional intermediaries,
brokers, or sales agents who are incentivized to extract revenue from consumers. A key
questionisthereforetowhatextentthepricingdiscretionoftheseagentscanharmconsumers.
In particular, the dispersion in markups enabled by such discretion likely reflects differences
in consumers’ knowledge about the terms of financial products and their ability to assess
prices correctly. While regulations, such as the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, are meant to
curb certain sources of price dispersion, in practice different consumers may achieve very
differentoutcomesinsuchmarkets.
In this context, the market for financed vehicles has received considerable attention from
regulatorsandconsumeradvocacygroups. Autodealersactasintermediariesbetweenlenders
and consumers for the financing of the car. Specifically, lenders suggest loan prices but al-
low dealers to increase them; dealers often do so and are compensated with a share of the
resulting profit through incentive contracts. Dealer loan intermediation is of outsize impor-
tanceforAmericanconsumersastheyholdmorethan$1trillioninautodebt,andmorethan
eighty percent of auto loans are obtained “indirectly” through dealers.1 Several regulators,
including the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
(CFPB),andtheU.K.’sFinancialConductAuthority(FCA)havestatedthatthearrangements
between lenders and dealers can harm consumers.2 In particular, if some consumers respond
less to loan price markups than to financially-equivalent vehicle price markups, dealers can
tailor “price bundles” to extract more revenue from consumers who are less responsive to
loan prices. Understanding the market for financed vehicles therefore requires understand-
ing how lenders incentivize dealers to price loans and how these incentives affect dealer and
consumerbehavior.
This paper uses new and comprehensive administrative data to study the agreements be-
tweendealersandlendersandhowtheyaffectthemarketforfinancedvehicles. Firstweshow
that consumers are substantially more sensitive to changes in car prices than loan prices. To
thisend,weleveragetheincentivestructureunderwhichdealersmakethosedecisions,which
weobserveinourdata. Theintuitionforourapproachissimple: dealerskeepnearlyallprofit
from car price markups, but share profits from loan price markups with lenders. Thus, if a
consumerisequallyresponsivetocarandloanmarkups,adealermaximizesprofitbycharg-
ingthehighestcarpricethatconsumerwillacceptandsettingtheloanmarkuptozero. Con-
1Foranestimateoftotalautoloandebtoutstanding, seehttps://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/interactives/householdcredit/d
ata/pdf/HHDC2019Q4.pdf. Weestimatethe percentof autoloans obtainedindirectly inAppendix D.3; seealsoDavis (2012). The
affordabilityofautoloansisincreasinglyaconcern.See,forexample,https://www.wsj.com/articles/the-seven-year-auto-loan-americas-m
iddle-class-cant-afford-their-cars-11569941215andhttps://www.npr.org/2019/10/31/773409100/the-7-year-car-loan-watch-your-wallet.
2SeeCFPB(2016),FCA(2019),ReynoldsandCox(2020)andSullivanetal.(2020).
1

versely,ifconsumersaresufficientlyunresponsivetoloanmarkups,thendealersshouldmark
uploanseventhoughtheykeeponlyafractionoftheprofitsthatloanmarkupsgenerate. Loan
markupsthereforecontaininformationaboutconsumers’sensitivitytoloanpricesrelativeto
vehicle prices. This argument requires only mild assumptions about consumer preferences
and market structure. Furthermore, since we observe the markup on every loan in our data,
we can derive consumer-specific estimates of the wedge between the responsiveness to loan
andvehicleprices.
We find that, on average, consumers behave as if they would pay a dollar more in finance
charges to reduce the vehicle price by $0.86. Hence, consumers respond substantially more
to vehicle prices than to loan prices. We also find that on average consumers act as if they
perceivefinancechargestobeatleast$380lessthanactualfinancecharges. Sinceweobtain
these measures at the consumer level, we can study the heterogeneity in this wedge. We
find that there are large differences across consumers. Consumers in the 10th percentile are
willing to pay a dollar in finance charges to reduce the vehicle price by just 77 cents, but at
the90thpercentileconsumersareessentiallyindifferentbetweenfinanceandvehiclecharges.
Weconsiderseveralpotentialexplanationsforourfindings,includingtimediscountingand
credit constraints, vehicle taxes, loan prepayment, and repeated dealer-lender interactions.
These factors cannot account for our results either qualitatively or quantitatively. However,
our findings are consistent with evidence that several regulators such as the FTC, the FCA,
andtheCFPBhavecollectedindicatingthatmostconsumersdonotfullyunderstandthatloan
terms are negotiable or do not correctly assess loan prices (Center for Responsible Lending
et al., 2012, CFPB, 2016, FCA, 2019, Reynolds and Cox, 2020, Sullivan et al., 2020).3 Our
results are also consistent with the literature on add-on pricing, which argues that firms can
charge higher prices on less transparent dimensions of a product (Lal and Matutes, 1994,
Verboven,1999,Ellison,2005).
In the second part of this project, we explore the equilibrium implications of dealer dis-
cretion, taking into account our estimates for consumer behavior from the previous part. We
assumethatdealersplayadifferentiated-productpricinggame(Berryetal.,1995)bysetting
both prices and interest rates strategically to compete for consumers. Lenders compete in
interestrateauctionsforthebusinessofdealers. Weusethemodeltoexplorethequantitative
effectsoftwocounterfactuals.
In our first counterfactual, we recompute equilibria under the assumption that consumers
respond equally to car and loan prices. This counterfactual delineates how the consumer
behavior that we document is reflected in the market equilibrium. We find that total prices
3Consumersmayfailtominimizetotalexpensesforanumberofreasons. Theymightlackfinancialliteracyingeneral(Lusardiand
Mitchell,2014),thecarpricemightbemoresalienttothem(Chettyetal.,2009,Ko˝szegiandSzeidl,2012,Bordaloetal.,2013),dealers
mightexploitthecomplexityoffinancialcontractstoshroudorobfuscatecrucialinformation(GabaixandLaibson,2006,Ellisonand
Ellison,2009),orconsumersmightneglectsomedimensionsofthepricebecausetheircapacitytoprocessinformationislimited(Sims,
2006,Mackowiaketal.,2018).
2