NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INDIRECT COSTS OF GOVERNMENT AID AND INTERMEDIARY SUPPLY EFFECTS:
LESSONS FROM THE PAYCHECK PROTECTION PROGRAM
Tetyana Balyuk
Nagpurnanand R. Prabhala
Manju Puri
Working Paper 28114
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28114
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2020
We thank Viral Acharya, Tarun Chordia, Sanjiv Das, Mike Faulkender, Clifton Green,
Narasimhan Jegadeesh, Simi Kedia, Dasol Kim, Gonzalo Maturana, Alessandro Rebucci, Pablo
Slutzky, Sascha Steffen, and seminar participants at the Emory University Finance Brownbag for
helpful comments and suggestions. Ethan Forgas provided excellent research assistance. Tetyana
Balyuk gratefully acknowledges a grant from the John Robson Program for Business, Public
Policy, and Government. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Tetyana Balyuk, Nagpurnanand R. Prabhala, and Manju Puri. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Indirect Costs of Government Aid and Intermediary Supply Effects: Lessons From the Paycheck
Protection Program
Tetyana Balyuk, Nagpurnanand R. Prabhala, and Manju Puri
NBER Working Paper No. 28114
November 2020
JEL No. E61,G32,G38,H81
ABSTRACT
The $669 billion Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) provides highly subsidized financing to
small businesses. The PPP is a positive shock in financing supply to the small, highly constrained
publicly listed firms in our sample and has average positive treatment effects. Yet, uptake is not
universal. In fact, several firms return PPP funds before use, and curiously, experience positive
valuation effects when they do so. These firms desire and the markets value the release from
government oversight even if it means giving up cheap funding. The PPP is also a demand shock
to the banks making PPP loans. Intermediary supply effects shape PPP delivery. Larger
borrowers enjoy earlier PPP access, an effect that is more pronounced in big banks. The results
have implications for policy design, the costs of being public, and bank-firm relationships.
Tetyana Balyuk Manju Puri
Goizueta Business School Fuqua School of Business
Emory University Duke University
1300 Clifton Rd 100 Fuqua Drive
Atlanta, GA 30322 Durham, NC 27708-0120
tetyana.balyuk@emory.edu and NBER
mpuri@duke.edu
Nagpurnanand R. Prabhala
The Johns Hopkins Carey Business School
100 International Drive
Baltimore, MD 21202
prabhala@jhu.edu

The Covid-19 pandemic is a significant black swan event. After being first noticed in China’s
Hubei province, Covid-19 was soon recognized as a major health threat due to its high trans-
missibility, its high mortality rate, and because relatively little was known about effective
ways to treat or prevent it. The speed at which it spread and the damage it has wrought
on economies around the world are unprecedented. As of September 2020, there are over
33 million Covid cases worldwide and 1 million deaths.
Besides the threat to life, Covid-19 has also threatened livelihoods. Interactions between
people are a primary source of transmitting the Covid-19 virus. Thus, high-contact sectors
such as airlines, retail stores, and hotels closed virtually instantly. Factories and officers
scaled or cut back to avoid transmission and individuals faced significant adjustments in
even basic day-to-day activities. The net result of these forces was a wide, deep, and speedy
economic contraction across the globe. In the U.S., GDP decreased by close to a third within
a quarter and unemployment jumped from historical lows of under 4% to nearly 15%.
Given the contraction in both the household and the business sectors, fiscal stimulus from
the government has been a key focus for economic revival. In the U.S., its centerpiece is
the $2 trillion Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act, which extends
support in varying degrees to workers, businesses, and local governments. Our focus is
on the portion of the CARES Act package designed to aid small businesses, the Paycheck
Protection Program (PPP). This program was allocated $669 billion, about a third of the
overall CARES Act package, and provided cheap, forgivable debt to small businesses.
We study the PPP for small public firms. Even in normal times, the small firms in
our sample – typically microcaps in the lowest capitalization decile – face extreme financial
constraints. The PPP is a shock in the supply of finance to these firms. It seems to be a very
desirable source of funding as it provides liquidity, does so with little lag, and has attractive
terms including a concessional 1% interest rate and forgiveness for proceeds used in eligible
ways. Not surprisingly, taking PPP funds is associated with positive announcement effects.
Yet, we find that the firms appear reluctant to take PPP funds, to the point where
several firms that took PPP funds return the money without using it and in fact, experience
valuation increases when returning the subsidized funding. Our sample firms appear to
perceive large indirect costs of taking government funding, likely due to perceptions about
subjectivity in the scrutiny of PPP recipients and the special targeting of public firms in
these audits. Expanding on these results, interpreting the findings, and understanding their
economic implications is one focus of our study.
The second leg of our study is motivated by the observation that the PPP is a large-scale
shock in loan demand for the participating banks that make the loans. This is especially true
in the early stages of the program when the rush for PPP funds was overwhelming, requiring
1

rapid processing of applications and prompt disbursements to approved firms. An additional
issue was that the program funds ran out quickly and was only remedied weeks later through
theappropriationsprocess. Bankswereforcedtoprioritizeclients. Thus, observingthetypes
of borrowers who gain early access to PPP funds is a unique opportunity to understand bank
decision-making in times of scarce resources.
Accordingly, ourresearchdesignexaminesthedifferencesinallocationsintheearlystages
relative to later stages. We first cut the data by borrower type. From a demand perspective,
small firms, which are perhaps more financially constrained and more vulnerable, should
access PPP funds sooner. However, we find that larger borrowers receive priority in early
stages. Supply-side intermediary effects thus matter and shape how PPP funds flow to small
businesses. We then cut the results by bank type, effectively comparing how big and small
banks differ in their early versus late allocation between small and large firms. The effect
appears to be more pronounced for the big banks, who seem to have a greater propensity to
prioritize larger clients early in PPP access.
We briefly discuss the data, the results, and their plausible economics next. We obtain
data on the public firms using PPP funds from disclosures filed by firms. Many firms
disclose their access to PPP in their 8-K filings but some do so in 10-Q’s and 10-K’s. As
the reporting within and across disclosures is not standard, being spread across more than
a half-dozen items in the filings and the attached promissory notes, we search all 8-K, 10-Q,
and 10-K filings by public firms filed between January 1, 2020 and August 15, 2020, one
week after the PPP closed on August 8, 2020. A combination of keyword searches and
intensive manual screening identifies a preliminary list of 731 PPP applicants. We match
these using some combination of firm names, tickers, CUSIPs and CIKs with returns from
Yahoo! Finance, accounting information from COMPUSTAT and exclude certain firms (e.g.,
financials, SPACs). The usable sample for most tests includes about 553 public firms.
The PPP provides extraordinarily cheap and readily available funding to small firms.
These firms face quantitative constraints that impair growth (Petersen and Rajan (1994);
Whited and Wu (2006); Hadlock and Pierce (2010); Banerjee and Duflo (2014)) and receive
funds in the midst of an economic crisis. Taking PPP funds does not appear to hurt firm
value. In fact, share values increase with positive “bang for the buck” treatment effects even
after adjustment for partial anticipation. Nevertheless, firms appear somewhat reluctant
to take PPP funds. In fact, over 100 firms that manage to qualify for, apply for, and
take PPP funds return the funds without using them. While returning cheap funds should
decreasesharepricesbythenetpresentvalueofthesubsidylost,returnersexperiencepositive
announcement effects, more than making up for the subsidy lost in cheap financing.
Why do firms seem to turn away from PPP funds? Two explanations present themselves
2