NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
STAY-AT-HOME ORDERS IN A FISCAL UNION
Mario J. Crucini
Oscar O'Flaherty
Working Paper 28182
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28182
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2020
The authors thank participants in the 2020 SEA conference and the Vanderbilt Economics
Macroeconomics and International Brown Bag for helpful comments. We thank Michael
McGuire for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Mario J. Crucini and Oscar O'Flaherty. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Stay-at-Home Orders in a Fiscal Union
Mario J. Crucini and Oscar O'Flaherty
NBER Working Paper No. 28182
December 2020
JEL No. E3,E47,E62,H12,H23,H7
ABSTRACT
State and local governments throughout the United States attempted to mitigate the spread of
Covid-19 using stay-at-home orders to limit social interactions and mobility. We study the
economic impact of these orders and their optimal implementation in a fiscal union. Using an
event study framework, we find that stay-at-home orders caused a 4 percentage point decrease in
consumer spending and hours worked. These estimates suggest a $10 billion decrease in spending
and $15 billion in lost earnings. We then develop an economic SIR model with multiple locations
to study the optimal implementation of stay-at-home orders. From a national welfare perspective,
the model suggests that it is optimal for locations with higher infection rates to set stricter
mitigation policies. This occurs as a common, national policy is too restrictive for the economies
of mildly infected areas and causes greater declines in consumption and hours worked than are
optimal.
Mario J. Crucini
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
Box 1819 Station B
Nashville, TN 37235-1819
and NBER
mario.j.crucini@vanderbilt.edu
Oscar O'Flaherty
Vanderbilt University
Department of Economics
VU Station B #351819
2301 Vanderbilt Place
Nashville, TN 37235-1819
USA
oscar.oflaherty@vanderbilt.edu

1 Introduction
State and local governments throughout the United States attempted to mitigate the out-
break of Covid-19 using stay-at-home orders to limit social interactions and mobility. Many
praised these policies for slowing the spread of the virus while others protested them due to
their perceived negative impact on the economy. The implementation of stay-at-home orders
also created conflict between policy makers. Some called for a nationwide order while others
believed discretion should be left to state and local governments.
This paper studies the economic and political controversy associated with stay-at-home
orders and their implementation, both empirically and theoretically. Empirically, we use
an event-study framework to estimate the marginal impact of stay-at-home orders on the
economy. Webuildadaily, state-levelpaneloflabormarketandconsumerspendingvariables
using data from the time-clock company Homebase and non-profit organization Opportunity
Insights. Our main sample spans several weeks before the issuance of the first stay-at-home
order in March up to the first reopening in April. Both hours worked and consumer spending
were already declining before the first statewide stay-at-home order was issued on March
19th. Thus, the economic decline was likely attributed to a combination of government-
issued policies and behavioral responses by consumers and firms to the health risks posed by
the pandemic. The event-study framework allows us to separate these economic effects by
exploiting differences across states that issued a stay-at-home order and those that did not.
Controls for the daily, case load of infections in each state and non-essential business closures
help isolate the impact of stay-at-home orders. The control for non-essential closures also
helps approximate the cumulative effect of mitigation policy.
Stay-at-home orders negatively impacted the labor market. Hours worked initially de-
clines by 2 percentage points and continues downward to a trough of 6 percentage points
(pp) two weeks after the order is enacted. High-income workers experience larger declines in
employment compared to low-income workers. Early-treated states experience about twice
1

thedeclineinhoursworked(4pp)relativetolate-treatedstates(2pp). Non-essentialbusiness
closures did not exacerbate or mitigate the labor market response.
Stay-at-home orders also decreased consumer spending by 4 percentage points for several
weeks. In contrast to employment, spending declines are larger in magnitude among low-
income consumers compared to high-income consumers. Consumer anticipation effects vary
across sectors. For example, we find evidence of stockpiling in grocery and food stores, but
not in accommodation and food services. Early and late-treated states experience similar
post-treatment declines in spending. However, stockpiling in the pre-treatment period is
primarily driven by early-treated states. Unlike employment, non-essential business closures
did exacerbate the consumer spending response.
The baseline estimates suggest that stay-at-home orders decreased consumer spending
by $10 billion and total earnings by $15 billion. They also suggest that stay-at-home orders
account for 10%-25% of the total employment decline observed during our sample. The non-
essential business closure estimates suggest that the cumulative effect of mitigation policy is
at least as large in magnitude as implied by the stay-at-home order estimates. The results
are not driven by outliers. Lastly, in response to the virus, some counties implemented their
own stay-at-home orders before their respective states. We also conduct our analysis at the
county-level to account for these orders and find similar impacts compared to our baseline
estimates.
In order to study the optimal implementation of stay-at-home orders, we extend the
Susceptible-Infected-Recovered (SIR) model of Eichenbaum et al. (2020) to multiple loca-
tions. Each location initially experiences an idiosyncratic virus shock. Following this, the
viruscanspreadthroughbothconsumptionandemploymentwithin agivenlocation. Thisin-
teraction captures the natural societal responses to the virus as people reduce their economic
activity in order to limit their risk of infection. Although locations are closed economies with
respect to their economic transactions, individuals may also spread the virus across locations
by travelling from place to place. Thus, the economic activity of one location is dependent
2