NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CYBERSECURITY RISK
Chris Florackis
Christodoulos Louca
Roni Michaely
Michael Weber
Working Paper 28196
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28196
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2020, Revised March 2022
We would like to thank Itay Goldstein (the editor), two anonymous referees, Kenneth Ahern
(discussant), Scott Baker (discussant), Matia Bevilacqua, Emanuele Borgonovo, Leisen Dietmar
(discussant), Alexandros Kostakis, Gabriele Lattanzio, Andreas Milidonis, Michael Minnis,
Dewan Muktadir-Al-Mukit, Jaideep Oberoi (discussant), Panagiotis Stamatopoulos, Morad
Zekhini (discussant), Guofu Zhou and conference/seminar participants at the University of
Durham, University of Surrey, the 19th Annual Meeting of the Hellenic Finance and Accounting
Association, the SFS Cavalcade North America 2021, the 2021 NBER Summer Institute on Big
Data and High-Performance Computing for Financial Economics, the 2021 European Meeting of
the Financial Management Association, the 2021 Annual Meeting of the European Financial
Management Association, the Global Virtual Seminar Series on Fintech (Cybersecurity Day)
organised by Center for Financial Markets and Policy (CFMP) at Georgetown University and the
2021 Annual Meeting of the American Finance Association. Weber gratefully acknowledges
financial support from the University of Chicago Booth School of Business and the Fama
Research Fund. Send correspondence to Michael Weber, Michael.Weber@chicagobooth.edu. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Chris Florackis, Christodoulos Louca, Roni Michaely, and Michael Weber. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Cybersecurity Risk
Chris Florackis, Christodoulos Louca, Roni Michaely, and Michael Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 28196
December 2020, Revised March 2022
JEL No. G14,G31
ABSTRACT
Using textual analysis and comparing cybersecurity-risk disclosures of firms that were hacked to
others that were not, we propose a novel firm-level measure of cybersecurity risk for all US-listed
firms. We then examine whether cybersecurity risk is priced in the cross-section of stock returns.
Portfolios of firms with high exposure to cybersecurity risk outperform other firms, on average,
by up to 8.3%per year. At the same time, high-exposure firms perform poorly in periods of high
cybersecurity risk. Reassuringly, the measure is higher in information-technology industries,
correlates with characteristics linked to firms hit by cyberattacks, and predicts future
cyberattacks.
Chris Florackis Roni Michaely
University of Liverpool University of Hong Kong
Chatham Street, L69 7ZH School of Business and Economics
Liverpool L69 7ZH Hong Kong
United Kingdom China
c.florackis@liverpool.ac.uk rm34@cornell.edu
Christodoulos Louca Michael Weber
Archiepiskopou Kyprianou 30 Booth School of Business
Limassol 3036 University of Chicago
Cyprus 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
christodoulos.louca@cut.ac.cy Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
michael.weber@chicagobooth.edu

Cybersecurity risk is the risk of financial loss, disruption, or damage to the reputation of a firm
as a result of a failure in its information technology systems due to external attacks. Examples
of cybersecurity risk include the risk of losing sensitive data, disruption in a firm’s network,
systems, and services, and physical electronic damage. Firm executives and market participants
in advanced economies currently consider cybersecurity risk one of the top global concerns
(WEF The Global Risks Report 2020), which is not surprising given the rapid increase in major
cyberattacks in recent years. Despite substantial investments in information security systems,
most firms remain highly exposed to cybersecurity risk.1 In addition to being direct targets,
many firms are indirectly affected or are collateral damage in a cyberattack. For example, the
adverse effects of tactical cyber operations against SolarWinds, a major U.S. information
technology firm, in 2020 went beyond the direct target and propagated to many of its client
organizations, including several large U.S. federal agencies, in what was one of the largest and
most sophisticated attacks ever. Considering the profound impact of cyberattacks on firms and
economies around the world, it is important to have a deeper understanding of individual firms’
exposure to cybersecurity risk, its quantification, and its effects on asset prices.
In this study, we propose a novel firm-level measure of cybersecurity risk for all listed
firms in the U.S. and examine whether exposure to cybersecurity risk is priced in the cross-
section of stock returns. We find that portfolios of firms with high exposure to cybersecurity
risk outperform other firms, on average, by up to 8.3% per year in terms of equal-weighted
(7.9% value-weighted) returns. Our measure of cybersecurity risk is a robust return predictor,
standard return predictors do not subsume it in Fama-MacBeth regressions, and firms in
specific industries do not drive the return premium. A cybersecurity-mimicking portfolio
1 Gartner, a global research and advisory firm, for example, estimated a worldwide spending on information
security products of $124 billion in 2019, representing an increase of 8.8% relative to 2018. In 2020, Steve
Morgan, Founder of Cybersecurity Ventures, predicted that cybercrime damages could grow by 15 percent per
year, to reach US$10.5 trillion annually by 2025. See “Cybercrime To Cost The World $10.5 Trillion Annually
By 2025” (Cyber Magazine, Nov. 13th, 2020).
2

performs poorly in times of heightened cybersecurity risk and investors’ concerns about data
breaches, suggesting a risk-based explanation.
Our measure builds on two ideas: First, firms that are actually attacked are more vulnerable
to cyberattacks ex-ante, and express this heightened risk ex-ante in their risk disclosures; and
second, firms that have similar levels of cybersecurity risk use similar words to describe their
risk exposure and exposure management. To construct our measure, we use firms that were
subject to cyberattacks as a training sample and then compare the wording and language in the
relevant parts of the risk-disclosure section in annual reports of the attacked firms with those
of all other firms. Specifically, over the period 2007-2018, we first extract the discussion on
cybersecurity risk in the “Item 1A. Risk Factors” section from firms’ 10-K, which contains
information about the most significant risk factors for each firm. Second, we identify a sample
of firms that have been subject to a major cyberattack in any given year. These firms, which
likely had a high prior exposure to cybersecurity risk, given the realization of a hack, serve as
our training sample. Third, we estimate the similarity of each firm’s cybersecurity-risk
disclosure with past cybersecurity-risk disclosures of firms in the training sample (i.e., from
the one-year period prior to the firm’s filing date). The higher the measured similarity in
cybersecurity-risk disclosure for our sample firms and firms in the training sample, the greater
is the exposure to cybersecurity risk.2
We validate our measure in several ways. First, firms that score high on the measure
emphasize cybersecurity risk in their 10-K filings more than firms with low scores. For
instance, firms with high measured exposure typically mention that the increasing
sophistication of hackers makes defending against cybersecurity attacks difficult, despite
investments in preventive systems. Firms with low measured exposure instead tend to
2 Other studies that use document similarity to extract meaning from text collections include Hoberg and Phillips
(2010; 2016), Brown and Tucker (2011), Hoberg and Maksimovic (2015), Lang and Stice-Lawrence (2015), and
Lowry, Michaely, and Volkova (2020).
3