NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LIQUIDITY RISK AT LARGE U.S. BANKS
Laurence M. Ball
Working Paper 28124
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28124
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2020
I am grateful for excellent research assistance from Benjamin Chasin, Tuna Coluk, and Jakree
Koosakul, and for suggestions from Michael Arnold, Daniel Ball, Matthew Chasin, Katherine
Gleason, Patrick Honohan, Marco Macchiavelli, Christopher Martin, Mark Paddrik, Jonathan
Rose, seminar participants at the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies, and a
number of finance professionals who spoke to me off the record. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Laurence M. Ball. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Liquidity Risk at Large U.S. Banks
Laurence M. Ball
NBER Working Paper No. 28124
November 2020
JEL No. G21,G24,G28
ABSTRACT
This paper studies liquidity risk at the six largest U.S. banks. The starting point is the stress tests
performed under the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) regulation, which compare a bank’s liquid
assets to its loss of cash in a stress scenario that regulators say is based on the 2008 financial
crisis. These tests find that all of the large banks could endure a liquidity crisis for 30 days
without running out of cash. This paper argues, however, that some of the assumptions in the
LCR stress scenario are not pessimistic enough to capture what could happen in a crisis like 2008.
The paper then proposes changes in the dubious assumptions and performs revised stress tests.
For 2019 Q4, the revised tests suggest it is unlikely that any of the six banks would survive a
liquidity crisis for 30 days. This negative finding is most clear-cut for Goldman Sachs and
Morgan Stanley.
Laurence M. Ball
Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
and NBER
lball@jhu.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
The central events of the 2008 financial crisis were liquidity crises at large financial
institutions. These firms lost the confidence of customers and counterparties, leading to losses of
cash through withdrawals of deposits, cutoffs of short-term lending, and other channels. Lehman
Brothers was forced into bankruptcy and Washington Mutual was closed by the FDIC. Other firms
such as Bear Stearns were sold at distressed prices, and many survived only with extraordinary
assistance from the Federal Reserve.
How great is the risk of similar crises in the future? Since 2008, financial institutions—which
I will simply call “banks”—have increased their levels of capital and curbed some risky activities,
in part because of new regulations. But such measures will never eliminate risk completely, and
sooner or later some unexpected mishap will shake confidence in large banks. When that happens,
will a flight of customers and counterparties again drain the banks of cash and threaten their
survival? Or can banks weather such a crisis because of improvements in liquidity management or
liquidity regulation?
Opinions on this question vary. Bankers say that liquidity risk has fallen greatly since 2008
because banks have increased their reserves of liquid assets (e.g., Bank Policy Institute, 2019).
Skeptics point out that banks still have high levels of runnable liabilities, making them susceptible
to sudden losses of cash (e.g., Johnson and Scott, 2019). The Treasury Department’s Office of
Financial Research (2019) rates banks’ liquidity risk as “moderate.”
This paper contributes to the debate by analyzing liquidity risk at specific banks. I examine
the six largest U.S. banks: JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America, Citigroup, Wells Fargo, Goldman
Sachs, and Morgan Stanley. I ask whether these firms could survive the kinds of liquidity crises that
occurred in 2008.
1

My starting point is the fact that, since 2017, the six big banks have been subject to the
Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) regulation. This rule requires a bank to repeatedly perform a
liquidity stress test. The bank must calculate its loss of cash in a 30-day stress scenario specified in
the rule, a scenario that regulators say is based on the 2008 crisis. The bank must also calculate its
holdings of “high quality liquid assets” (HQLA) that could be monetized quickly to accommodate
cash outflows. A bank’s LCR—the ratio of its HQLA to its loss of cash in the stress scenario—must
be at least 100%.
The six big banks comply with the LCR rule. This fact implies that, if the rule’s stress scenario
captures what would happen in a liquidity crisis, the banks could survive a crisis for 30 days. That
period is a long time compared to the runs at Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers, which wiped out
those firms’ cash in less than a week. With 30 days, a bank and its regulators would have a good
chance of resolving a crisis in an orderly way.
This paper argues, however, that some of the LCR rule’s assumptions are not pessimistic
enough to capture what would happen in a crisis like 2008. A bank’s losses of cash in a crisis would
probably exceed its losses in the rule’s stress scenario, so compliance with the rule does not really
ensure that the bank could survive for 30 days.
Specifically, I argue that the LCR stress scenario understates three types of cash outflows:
withdrawals of retail deposits; losses of secured funding such as repurchase agreements; and
collateral calls under derivatives contracts. The scenario also overstates the level of cash inflows
available to offset outflows.
After pointing out these problems, I propose changes in the LCR stress scenario that seem
reasonable based on the 2008 experience. I then try to derive revised LCRs for the six large banks.
Lacking some relevant information, I cannot determine these LCRs exactly, but I derive a range of
2