NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ESG PREFERENCE, INSTITUTIONAL TRADING, AND STOCK RETURN PATTERNS
Jie Cao
Sheridan Titman
Xintong Zhan
Weiming Zhang
Working Paper 28156
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28156
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2020
We thank Vikas Agrawal, Hendrik Bessembinder, Jennifer Carpenter, Tarun Chordia, Zhi Da,
Amit Goyal, Charlie Hadlock, Bing Han, Samuel Hartzmark, Kewei Hou, Ozgur Ince
(discussant), Hao Jiang, Kose John, Lars Kaiser, Ralph Koijen, Jeffrey Pontiff, Adam Reed
(discussant), Luke Taylor (discussant), Patrick Verwijmeren, Neng Wang, Robert Whitelaw,
David Yermack, and seminar participants at Erasmus University Rotterdam, Hong Kong
Polytechnic University, Korea University, NYU Stern, Michigan State University,
Northeastern University, Schroders Systematic Investments, and Tsinghua University for
helpful discussions and useful suggestions. We have benefited from the comments of participants
(discussant), Patrick
at Western Finance Association Annual Meeting, Northern Finance Association Annual
Conference, China International Conference in Finance, Finance Down Under Conference,
Fixed Income and Financial Institutions (FIFI) Conference, Luxembourg Asset
Management Summit, FMA Consortium on Asset Management, CQAsia-BoAML
Conference, Deutsche Bank Global Quantitative Strategy Conference, INQUIRE Europe Autumn
Seminar, and Geneva Summit on Sustainable Finance. We acknowledge the best paper award
at 2020 FMA Consortium on Asset Management, and the 2019 AAM-CAMRI Prize in
Asset Management. The work described in this paper was supported by a grant from the Research
Grant Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China (Project No. CUHK
24501519), the 2019 Alternative Risk Premia Research Grant of the Paris-Dauphine House of
Finance and Unigestion, and a grant from Geneva Institute for Wealth Management. A
previous version was circulated under the title “ESG Preference and Market Efficiency: Evidence
from Mispricing and Institutional Trading”. All errors are our own. Sheridan Titman
acknowledges that he has had consulting arrangements with institutions that use some of the
strategies described in this paper.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not
been peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that
accompanies official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Jie Cao, Sheridan Titman, Xintong Zhan, and Weiming Zhang. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

ESG Preference, Institutional Trading, and Stock Return Patterns
Jie Cao, Sheridan Titman, Xintong Zhan, and Weiming Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 28156
November 2020
JEL No. G12,G4
ABSTRACT
Socially responsible (SR) institutions tend to focus more on the ESG performance and less on quantitative
signals of value. Consistent with this difference in focus, we find that SR institutions react less to quantitative
mispricing signals. Our evidence suggests that the increased focus on ESG may have influenced stock
return patterns. Specifically, abnormal returns associated with these mispricing signals are greater
for stocks held more by SR institutions. The link between SR ownership and the efficacy of mispricing
signals only emerges in recent years with the rise of ESG investing, and is significant only when there
are arbitrage-related funding constraints.
Jie Cao Xintong Zhan
Department of Finance Dept of Finance
Chinese University of Hong Kong Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shatin, NT 00000 Shatin, NT 00000
Hong Kong Hong Kong
jiecao@cuhk.edu.hk xintongzhan@cuhk.edu.hk
Sheridan Titman Weiming Zhang
Finance Department Department of Finance
McCombs School of Business Chinese University of Hong Kong
University of Texas at Austin Shatin, NT 00000
Austin, TX 78712-1179 Hong Kong
and NBER elainezhang@link.cuhk.edu.hk
titman@mail.utexas.edu

1. Introduction
The strategies and tastes of institutional investors have changed in a number of ways in the past
20 years. On one hand, perhaps because of the influence of academic research, institutions tend to
take a more quantitative approach to investing. On the other hand, a number of institutions have
broadened their perspectives, and incorporated a firm’s ESG (Environmental, Social, and
Governance) performance into the investment decision making process.1 According to a 2016
report by the U.S. SIF Foundation, 20% of the professionally managed assets in the U.S. —$8.72
trillion or more in aggregate, are influenced by socially responsible investment principles.
This paper builds on growing literatures that examine the investment performance of both
quantitative and socially responsible investment strategies. The evidence on quantitative investing
suggests that the increased popularity of this approach may have led to a decline in the performance
of these strategies in recent years.2 In this sense, the market has become more efficient. The
literature on the link between ESG performance and investment performance is somewhat mixed
and to our knowledge, there is no clear evidence on the investment performance of socially
responsible (SR) institutions.3
We contribute to both literatures by studying how the interaction of these two investment
styles may have influenced stock return patterns. Specifically, we test the hypothesis that because
of limited attention, investors that focus on the social performance of firms pay relatively less
attention to quantitative measures of value.4 According to this hypothesis, the portfolio holdings
of socially responsible institutions respond less to quantitative mispricing signals, and because of
this, the returns of those stocks held more by these institutions may be more predictable.
As we show in Figure 1, the assets devoted to socially responsible investing accelerated
sometime around 2004. Our conjecture, which we empirically explore, is that in the years prior to
1 See, for example, Starks, Venkat, and Zhu (2018) and Hartzmark and Sussman (2019).
2 See, for example, Chordia, Subrahmanyam, and Tong (2014) and McLean and Pontiff (2016).
3 Hong and Kacperczyk (2009) find stocks in “sin” industries earn significantly higher abnormal returns than firms in
other industries. Conversely, firms that are listed as the “100 Best Companies to Work for in America” demonstrate
generate higher alphas in the future, as the market undervalues the intangible assets (Edmans (2011)). Using the release
of Morningstar sustainability rating, Hartzmark and Sussman (2019) shows that there is a reverse relation between
fund performance and sustainability rating. Pedersen, Fitzgibbons, and Pomorski (2020) model investor’s portfolio
choice under the ESG efficient frontier. Pastor, Stambaugh, and Taylor (2020) propose an equilibrium model of
sustainable investing and its implication to the return of green assets.
4 Our conversations with a quantitative asset management group that has added social performance to their asset
selection model support our hypothesis. Specifically, by adding social performance to their asset selection model, the
managers put less weight on traditional quantitative signals.
2

2004, socially responsible investors had very little influence on return patterns. However, in the
post 2004 period, the introduction of a growing group of socially responsible investors with
interests that go beyond risk and return may have at least temporarily influenced these return
patterns.
We start our analysis by following Hwang, Titman, and Wang (2018) and classify
institutions into those that are and are not socially responsible institutions, according to the value-
weighted ESG scores (from the MSCI KLD database) of their portfolio holdings.5 Our analysis
indicates that in addition to having higher ESG scores, the stocks held by SR institutions tend to
be somewhat larger, more liquid, and are followed by more analysts on average. Given these
characteristics, we would expect that all else equal, these stocks should be more efficiently priced
than their smaller counterparts that tend to be held more by other institutions.
Based on this classification, we examine how the holdings of SR institutions respond to
quantitative signals that are associated with future stock returns. Specifically, we consider the
standardized unexpected earnings signal (SUE) explored in the accounting literature,6 as well as a
composite score measure of 11 quantitative mispricing signals, which we refer to as the SYY signal
since it is based on the analysis of Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2015). The SUE signal has the
advantage that its timing is very clear, while SYY has the advantage that it is a more
comprehensive signal. The evidence indicates that SR institutions do in fact pay less attention to
quantitative signals. Specifically, we find that during the 2004-2014 sample period, relative to
other institutions, SR institutions are less likely to sell (buy) stocks with unfavorable (favorable)
quantitative signals.
We then examine the extent to which the SUE and SYY signal predict stock returns. Our
conjecture is that if SR institutions pay less attention to these signals, the returns of the stocks they
follow will under react to this information, suggesting that the signals will better predict future
returns for these stocks. We find that this is indeed the case. The efficacy of both the SUE and
SYY score is significantly stronger for the stocks that are held more by SR institutions. Specifically,
in our 2004-2014 sample period, a value-weighted long-short strategy that exploits the SUE
mispricing signal generates a significant monthly return of 0.59% on stocks that are held more by
socially responsible institutions. In contrast, we find a statistically insignificant return of -0.21%
5 This approach is also quite similar to how Morningstar is currently assessing the sustainability rating of mutual funds.
6 For example, Foster, Olsen, and Shevlin (1984); Bernard and Thomas (1989).
3