NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE REMARKABLE GROWTH IN FINANCIAL ECONOMICS, 1974-2020
G.William Schwert
Working Paper 28198
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28198
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2020
This is a personal assessment of the evolution of academic finance during my career. It does not
reflect the opinions of the Journal of Financial Economics, the University of Rochester, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research. Many people have provided helpful comments and
suggestions, especially Jonathan Brogaard, Harry DeAngelo, Ken French, Campbell Harvey,
David Hirshleifer, Laura Liu, Lubos Pastor, Jim Poterba, René Stulz, Avanidhar Subrahmanyam,
and Ivo Welch. Michelle Lowry, Laura Liu, and Kathleen Madsen provided special help with
several aspects of the data collection for this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by G. William Schwert. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Remarkable Growth in Financial Economics, 1974-2020
G.William Schwert
NBER Working Paper No. 28198
December 2020
JEL No. G10,G20,G30
ABSTRACT
Academic finance has grown and evolved in the 46 years since the Journal of Financial
Economics (JFE) began publishing papers. This paper uses detailed data on the 2,858 papers
written by 3,152 different authors published in the JFE from 1974-2019. Cumulatively, these
papers have received 278,018 citations from other published papers as reflected in the Social
Science Citation Index. Increasing computing power and electronic communication have likely
resulted in trends toward more empirical work, more co-authorship, and more complex papers.
Growth in the demand for finance faculty has driven up faculty salaries, and therefore the demand
for journal services.
G. William Schwert
William E. Simon Graduate School of Business Administration
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
Schwert@schwert.ssb.rochester.edu
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28198

2 G. W. Schwert, Growth in financial economics
1. Introduction
Michael C. Jensen founded the Journal of Financial Economics (JFE) in 1974. I began my
academic career teaching at the University of Chicago in 1975. Since then much has changed in
financial economics. This paper documents some facts related to the phenomenal growth in this
field and relates them to broader trends in financial markets and academia. My perspective is
somewhat idiosyncratic, because it reflects my editorial experience at the JFE, which began in 1979.
From the history of the JFE, I believe that the lessons I learned give an accurate picture of how the
field of financial economics has evolved.
The focus of this paper is on data that reflect changes in the demand for and supply of
academic research in finance over the last 45 years. Much of the discussion is unabashedly
descriptive, but I also relate the facts to several theories about academic production functions from
the broader economics and social sciences literature.
Section 2 describes the major editorial policies and goals that have guided the JFE. The JFE
has been innovative in its use of incentive mechanisms, such as submission fees and payments to
referees, to manage the review and editorial process. It has also been entrepreneurial in developing
new areas of research through special issues, conferences, and clinical papers. It has stressed
expositional quality and the importance of empirical implications in theoretical work. Data on the
number of submissions, submission fees, rejection rates for submitted papers, turnaround time, and
the topics of published papers (according to Journal of Economic Literature (JEL) classifications)
show how the JFE has evolved since 1974.
In section 3, data on JFE editorial decisions from 1994-2019 shed light on a number of issues
related to the evolution of finance research. Characteristics of authors, referees, and editors reflect
the roles that experience and gender play in producing the set of papers ultimately published.
Section 4 analyzes data from the Social Science Citation Index (SSCI) on citations to papers

3
published in the JFE over the past 45 years. These data show which papers, authors, and institutions
have had the most influence on the finance and economics literature. Time-series and cross-sectional
analyses provide insight into the success of JFE policies. The evidence shows that research produced
by members of the Editorial Board have played a key role in the success of the Journal.
Section 5 explores the secular growth in submissions, citations, and papers published across
the JFE, the Journal of Finance (JF), the Review of Financial Studies (RFS), and the Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis (JFQA). While there are some differences across journals,
similar factors have affected all of them.
Compared with other areas of economics or accounting, the number of finance journals has
grown remarkably from one in 1922 to 62 in 2019. Although it is beyond the scope of this paper to
explain fully why this has happened, section 6 presents data on the trends in starting salaries of
Assistant Professors of Finance since 1975, along with data on starting salaries of MBA students.
The demand for space in academic finance journals has been associated with the large salary rewards
associated with successful publication in finance journals.
Section 7 provides a few concluding remarks.
2. JFE editorial policies
When Michael C. Jensen, Eugene F. Fama, and Robert C. Merton collaborated to start the
JFE in 1974, their sense was that the finance profession could benefit from a new, high quality
academic journal. Their objectives were to provide timely service to authors and to apply high
standards so that published papers would influence the finance and economics literature. From the
beginning, the JFE published editorial data describing turnaround times and the rejection rate for
papers under review during the preceding 12 months at the front of each issue. These data reflect
not only the importance placed by the JFE editors on a prompt, high-quality review process, but also