NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A PANEL REGRESSION APPROACH TO
HOLDINGS-BASED FUND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
Wayne E. Ferson
Junbo L. Wang
Working Paper 28238
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28238
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2020
This paper is developed from and supersedes Wang’s PhD thesis at the University of Southern
California, entitled “Can weight-based measures distinguish between informed and uninformed
fund managers.” We are grateful to Hank Bessembinder, Wayne Chang, Chris Jones, Min S.
Kim, David Solomon, Scott Joslin, Yan Liu, Jinchi Lv, Lucian Taylor Russ Wermers, the editor
Thierry Foucault and anonymous referees for comments. This paper has also benefitted from
workshops at Boston College, Florida International University, the Universities of Georgetown,
Hawaii, Laval, Massachusetts at Amherst, Southern California, South Carolina, Washington,
York, the Rutgers Business School and from presentations at the 2016 Northern Finance
Association meetings, the 2017 Research Affiliates Advisory Board, the 2017 Society for
Financial Econometrics meetings, the 2017 NBER-NSF time-series conference, the 2017
Southern Finance meetings the 2018 American Finance Association meetings and the 2018 Citrus
Finance Conference. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Wayne E. Ferson and Junbo L. Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

A Panel Regression Approach to Holdings-based Fund Performance Measures
Wayne E. Ferson and Junbo L. Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 28238
December 2020
JEL No. G11
ABSTRACT
Portfolio performance measures using holdings data are panel regressions. The returns of a fund’s
stocks are regressed on its lagged portfolio weights. Stock fixed effects isolate average
performance from time-series predictive ability. Control variables condition fund performance on
the characteristics of the stocks held. The long term performance of average holdings drives some
of the classical measures, while predictive ability drives others. A “buy-and-hold drift,” where
portfolio weights increase over time in the higher alpha stocks, affects performance measures.
Investor flows respond to average performance net of the buy-and-hold drift.
Wayne E. Ferson
Department of Finance
and Business Economics
University of Southern California
3670 Trousdale Parkway Suite 308
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0804
and NBER
ferson@marshall.usc.edu
Junbo L. Wang
School of Business
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, Louisiana
junbowang@lsu.edu
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28238

2
Introduction
Estimates of holdings-based fund performance measures are viewed as predictive panel
regressions. For each fund, the future excess returns of the stocks held are regressed on the lagged
portfolio weights on the stocks. The panel regression coefficient for a fund measures its
performance. An informed manager’s portfolio weights should predict the stock returns with a
positive coefficient (Grinblatt and Titman, 1989a). Classical performance estimates implicitly use
such panel regressions, and we show that being explicit about this provides several new insights.
The returns and/or weights are benchmarked or demeaned in the classical measures and the special
cases depend on how this is done. We study the portfolio change measure of Grinblatt and Titman
(GT, 1993), the Characteristic Selectivity measure of Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman and Wermers
(DGTW, 1997), the Conditional Weight Measure of Ferson and Khang (CWM, 2002) and the
stochastic discount factor measure of Ferson and Mo (FM, 2016).
Understanding these “classical” measures as special cases of a panel regression allows us to
apply various approaches to clustering, fixed effects and control variables. This is important
because funds may deviate substantially from common assumptions in panel regression models,
such as iid model innovations. Control variables produce characteristics-based versions of
conditional performance evaluation (Ferson and Schadt, 1996), but instead of conditioning on
macroeconomic factors, the panel naturally asks if the performance of a fund is driven by the
charactersitcs of the stocks it holds. This is a central question in studies like Carhart (1997),
Wermers (2003), Zheng (1999), Sapp and Tiwari (2004), Sheng, Simutin and Zhang (2019) and
Matalin-Saez (2020). We illustrate using the stocks’ dividend yields as the control, and find that it
removes a finding that high-yield funds perform better.
We examine the use of fixed effects in the panel regressions. Time fixed effects produce

3
measures of performance in excess of an equally-weighted portfolio, and a common intercept has
the same effect. More interestingly, stock fixed effects decompose the performance measures into
the dynamic, time-series information in funds’ portfolio weights and the average cross-sectional
information. Time-series predictive ability (TSA) is defined as the average across stocks, of the
covariances between the current portfolio weights and future stock returns. TSA reflects both
factor timing and short-term security selection information. The Average Abnormal Return (AAR)
is the fund abnormal return based on its average weights. The average weights are a proxy for the
long term asset allocation policy (e.g., Brinson, Hood and Bebower (BHB, 1986) and Brinson,
Singer and Beebower, 1991). Thus, the AAR is interpreted as a long-run measure of performance
driven by fund policy or style. One of our insights is that the classical performance measures reflect
both components of performance.
A fund with larger AAR on average overweights the high and underweights the low alpha
stocks. Many “quant” portfolios have this feature, focusing the investment policy on cross-
sectional patterns in average abnormal returns such as size, book-to-market, momentum and
“fundamental” security characteristics associated with alphas in the popular models. The AAR has
received little attention in the literature. However, we find that the AAR is the largest component
of the abnormal performance in some of the holdings-based measures (DGTW, FM). These
measures pay more attention to funds’ long-term policy or style than to efforts to predict short term
returns. For other measures (GT, CWM) the TSA is the dominant component, capturing mainly
ability to predict returns in the short term. A panel regression view of the measures naturally
isolates the TSA and AAR components.
The panel approach reveals a lagged stochastic regressor bias, similar to that described by
Stambaugh (1999) and Hjalmarsson (2008), when there are stock fixed effects. We evaluate