AGGREGATE-DEMAND AMPLIFICATION OF SUPPLY DISRUPTIONS:
THE ENTRY-EXIT MULTIPLIER
Florin O. Bilbiie
Marc J. Melitz
WORKING PAPER 28258

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
AGGREGATE-DEMAND AMPLIFICATION OF SUPPLY DISRUPTIONS:
THE ENTRY-EXIT MULTIPLIER
Florin O. Bilbiie
Marc J. Melitz
Working Paper 28258
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28258
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2020, Revised November 2022
We thank Susanto Basu, Cristiano Cantore, Vasco Carvalho, Giancarlo Corsetti, Russell Cooper,
Ryan Decker, Andrea Ferrero, Francesco Furlanetto, Jordi Galí, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Basile
Grassi, Antoine Lepetit, Sara Moreira, Anthony Savagar, Petr Sedlacek, Riccardo Silvestrini,
Vincent Sterk, Paolo Surico, Mathias Thoenig, and Michael Woodford, as well as participants in
numerous seminars and conferences for useful comments and discussions. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Florin O. Bilbiie and Marc J. Melitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Aggregate-Demand Amplification of Supply Disruptions: The Entry-Exit Multiplier
Florin O. Bilbiie and Marc J. Melitz
NBER Working Paper No. 28258
December 2020, Revised November 2022
JEL No. E31,E32,E40,E60
ABSTRACT
Due to its impact on nominal firm profits, price rigidity amplifies the response of entry and exit to
adverse supply shocks, such as COVID-19. This “entry-exit multiplier” triggers substantial
magnification of the welfare losses due to negative supply shocks—especially when wages are
also rigid. This is in stark contrast to the benchmark New Keynesian model (NK), which predicts
a positive output gap in response to that same shock under the same monetary policy.
Endogenous entry-exit thus radically changes the consequences of nominal rigidities. In addition
to the aggregate-demand amplification of supply disruptions, our model also reconciles the
response of hours worked across the NK and RBC models. And unlike the standard NK model,
our model can also be used to evaluate how monetary expansions can alleviate or even eliminate
the negative output gap induced by supply disruptions.
Florin O. Bilbiie
University of Cambridge
florin.bilbiie@gmail.com
Marc J. Melitz
Department of Economics
Harvard University
215 Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
mmelitz@harvard.edu

1 Introduction
When and how do nominal rigidities amplify supply disruptions? That is, when do negative
supply shocks generate an aggregate-demand recession, understood as a greater fall in the level
of output and income relative to the benchmark case without nominal rigidities? We show that
thisisaninherentfeatureofabusinesscyclemodelwithendogenousentry-exitandproductvariety—
whereas the standard “New Keynesian” model with no entry (hereafter NK) predicts a positive
output gap in response to a negative productivity shock. The endogenous responses of entry-
exit associated with those nominal rigidities thus plays a key role in delivering this important
business cycle comovement and in shaping the design of monetary policy in response to it. The
key intuition is that nominal rigidities also distort the extensive margin. We start with the simplest
pared-downmodelinorderhighlighthoweachchanneloperates. Wethenbuilduplayersleading
toourfullmodelinordertoquantitativelyassesstheimportanceofouramplificationchanneland
additionallyincorporateananalysisofmonetarypolicy.
TheeconomicrecessionfollowingtherecentCOVID-19crisisisarecentexamplehighlighting
theimportanceoftheextensivemargin,giventheassociatedverysharpresponsesinbusinessen-
tryandexit. Theincreaseinexitexhibitedduringthattimereachedhithertounseenmagnitudes:
in the spring of 2020, one third of small businesses closed down and many of the consumer or
intermediateinputvarietiescustomarilyconsumedbyhouseholdsandfirmshavesimplybecome
unavailable.1 At the same time, a deep recession developed, with most macroeconomists agree-
ing that this reflected a fall of output below potential, i.e. a negative “output gap”. The negative
supply impulse that we consider as a metaphor for the COVID-19 crisis is a classic negative pro-
ductivity shock: a downward shift in the production function associated with severe restrictions
ontheavailabilityofinputs.
We first show that the response of entry-exit to such supply shocks is amplified in a model
withsticky prices, whenfirms cannotoptimallyadjust pricesinresponse to productivityshocks:
1Real-timedatafromWomply(Chettyetal,2020)showsthat30%ofU.S.smallbusinessescloseddowninthefirst
quarterof2020,and7to10%stayedclosedthroughout2020andmostof2021.DatafromHomebase,Craneetal(2021)
paintsasimilarpicture. Entrydatathatwouldparallelthisfortheproductionsideisunavailable; existingreal-time
measuresofbroad"entry"suchastheCensusBureau’sBusinessFormationStatisticsdiscussedinHaltiwanger(2020)
areunlikelytoreflect"real"entrytranslatingfullyintojobsandproduction.Thatmeasureofnewbusinessapplications
alsofellby40%attheonsetofthecrisis,tothenrecovertounprecedentedlevelsthroughoutQ2andQ3;however,this
wasnotreflectedintheQ2andQ3entrydatafromtheBusinessEmploymentDynamicsthatcameoutsubsequently.
1