RULES, DISCRETION, AND CORRUPTION IN PROCUREMENT:
EVIDENCE FROM ITALIAN GOVERNMENT CONTRACTING
Francesco Decarolis
Raymond Fisman
Paolo Pinotti
Silvia Vannutelli
WORKING PAPER 28209

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RULES, DISCRETION, AND CORRUPTION IN PROCUREMENT:
EVIDENCE FROM ITALIAN GOVERNMENT CONTRACTING
Francesco Decarolis
Raymond Fisman
Paolo Pinotti
Silvia Vannutelli
Working Paper 28209
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28209
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2020, Revised February 2023
We thank seminar audiences at Kellogg School of Management - Northwestern University,
University of Montreal and SIOE 2019. We also thank Juan Ortner and Giancarlo Spagnolo for
helpful comments. Decarolis gratefully acknowledges financial support from the European
Research Council (ERC-2015-StG-679217). The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Francesco Decarolis, Raymond Fisman, Paolo Pinotti, and Silvia Vannutelli. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Rules, Discretion, and Corruption in Procurement: Evidence from Italian Government Contracting
Francesco Decarolis, Raymond Fisman, Paolo Pinotti, and Silvia Vannutelli
NBER Working Paper No. 28209
December 2020, Revised February 2023
JEL No. D72,D73,H57,K42
ABSTRACT
The benefits of bureaucratic discretion depend on the extent to which it is used for public benefit
versus exploited for private gain. We study the relationship between discretion and corruption in
Italian government procurement auctions, using a confidential database of firms and procurement
officials investigated for corruption by Italian enforcement authorities. We show that discretionary
procedure auctions (those awarded based on negotiated rather than open bidding) are associated
with corruption only when accompanied by limits to competition. We further show that, while
these “corruptible” discretionary auctions are chosen more often by officials who are themselves
investigated for corruption, they are used less often in procurement administrations in which at
least one official is investigated for corruption. These findings fit with a framework in which more
discretion leads to greater efficiency as well as more opportunities for theft, and a central monitor
manages this trade-off by limiting discretion for high-corruption procedures and locales. Overall,
our results suggest that competition may allow procurement authorities to extract the benefits of
discretion while limiting the resultant risks of abuse.
Francesco Decarolis Paolo Pinotti
Bocconi University Bocconi University
Via Sarfatti 25 Via Rontgen 1
Milan, 20136 20136 Milan
Italy ITALY
and EIEF and fRDB and also BAFFI-CAREFIN Centre
francesco.decarolis@unibocconi.it paolo.pinotti@unibocconi.it
Raymond Fisman Silvia Vannutelli
Department of Economics Kellogg Global Hub
Boston University Northwestern University
270 Bay State Road, 304A 2211 Campus Drive
Boston, MA 02215 Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER and NBER
rfisman@bu.edu silvia.vannutelli@northwestern.edu

I Introduction
Governments often face a trade-off in the oversight and constraints they impose on
lower-level bureaucrats in carrying out their functions. Officials may use discretion to
better serve the public’s interests, or exploit it for personal gain. The appropriate level of
discretion depends on the benefits of an agent’s informational advantage relative to the
costs from his exploiting discretion for personal gain. From a public welfare perspective,
theagencyproblemiscomplicatedbyyetanotherlayerofdelegation–politiciansorhigh-
level officials who determine the extent of discretion available to lower-level officials may
be overly risk-averse, to the extent that the electorate is more attentive to corruption
scandals rather than an efficient provision of public goods. Such incentives – whether
electoral or promotion-related – may then lead to insufficient delegation and discretion.
In this paper, we study both the determinants and consequences of discretion in the
context of government procurement in Italy. Procurement accounts for a large fraction of
government expenditure worldwide; for example, for OECD countries the procurement-
to-spending ratio held steady at around 30 percent during 2007-2015 (OECD [2017]).
Furthermore, corruption is thought to result in substantial “leakage” from procurement
expenditures, even in more developed (and less corrupt) countries.1 Thus, understanding
how procurement rules might impact corruption is of interest in its own right, in addition
to serving as an apt setting for studying the trade-offs associated with discretion in
government bureaucracies more generally.2
Our work is enabled by the use of a confidential database obtained from the Agenzia
Informazioni e Sicurezza Interna (AISI), the Italian equivalent of the FBI. The database
lists individuals that have been flagged by the AISI as suspected of various crimes, in-
cluding corruption. By linking this list to administrative data on the top employees and
ownersofItaliancompanies,weclassifyafirmasinvestigated forcorruptionifatleastone
employee or owner was flagged by the AISI for suspected corruption. We then link the
resultantfirm-level databasetoinformation onover200,000procurementauctionsforthe
constructionandmaintenanceofpublicinfrastructureheldthroughoutItalyduring2000-
2016. The data include the near-universe of auctions involving the two most frequently
procuredtypesofcontracts: thoseinvolvingeithercivicbuildingsorroads, highways, and
bridges. These data allow us to observe whether investigated firms participated in or won
each auction. Finally, we complement these firm-level data with similar information on
1A study sponsored by the European Commission reports that, in projects that were found to have
been corrupted, 13 percent of expenditures were lost due to corruption (Ferwerda and Deleanu [2013]).
2Agency problems in procurement extend beyond governments. For example, in a recent working
paper,Bergmanetal.[2021]documentstheadverseconsequencesoffavoritisminhospitals’procurement
of medical services.
1