NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE GENDER GAP AMONG TOP BUSINESS EXECUTIVES
Wolfgang Keller
Teresa Molina
William W. Olney
Working Paper 28216
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28216
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2020, Revised December 2022
We thank David Autor, Linda Bell, Catherine Eckel, Caroline Fry, Lata Gangadharan, Claudia
Goldin, Dan Hamermesh, Beata Javorcik, Petra Moser, Paul Oyer, Jenna Stearns, Owen
Thompson, and seminar participants at WEAI and UH Manoa for helpful comments. Financial
support from NSF under grant SMA-1360207 is gratefully acknowledged. Declarations of
interest: none. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Wolfgang Keller, Teresa Molina, and William W. Olney. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Gender Gap Among Top Business Executives
Wolfgang Keller, Teresa Molina, and William W. Olney
NBER Working Paper No. 28216
December 2020, Revised December 2022
JEL No. G30,J33,M14,M52
ABSTRACT
This paper examines gender differences among top US business executives using a large
executive-employer matched data set spanning the last quarter century. Female executives make
up 6% of the sample and exhibit more labor market churning — both higher entry and higher exit
rates. Unconditionally, women earn 26% less than men, which decreases to 8% once executive
characteristics, firm characteristics, and in particular job title are accounted for. We find that
female executives are disproportionately represented in firms with more temporal flexibility and
female-friendly corporate cultures, but this does not explain the gender pay gap. Rather, corporate
culture is correlated with gender pay gaps within firms; specifically the within-firm gender pay
gap is significantly smaller at female-friendly firms.
Wolfgang Keller William W. Olney
Department of Economics Department of Economics
University of Colorado, Boulder Williams College
Boulder, CO 80309-0256 24 Hopkins Hall Dr
and NBER Williamstown, ma 01267
Wolfgang.Keller@colorado.edu wwo1@williams.edu
Teresa Molina
University of Hawaii at Manoa
Saunders Hall 515A
2424 Maile Way
Honolulu, HI 96822
tmolina@hawaii.edu

1 Introduction
Convergence between men and women in terms of employment and compensation has been well
documented, butthisconvergenceisnotcompleteandprogresshasnotbeenuniform. Forinstance,
women are underrepresented in the corporate business world and at the top of the income distribu-
tion more generally, where relatively large gender wage gaps remain (Blau and Kahn, 2017; Goldin,
2014; Guvenen et al., 2020).1
This paper examines gender gaps in executive representation and compensation. By focusing
on top business executives, we are studying an occupation where gender gaps are relatively large
and a point in workers’ careers when these gaps tend to widen.2 Thus, our analysis offers unique
insights and broader lessons on potential impediments to female employment and pay equity. We
expand on existing work by exploring the extent to which corporate culture and preferences for
temporal flexibility can explain executive gender gaps in entry, exit, and compensation.
We utilize a large executive-firm matched data set covering publicly traded U.S. firms over
the last quarter century. The dataset combines executive-level information from ExecuComp and
firm-level information from Compustat, which both come from company filings with the Securities
and Exchange Commission (SEC). We complement this with the KLD Research and Analytics’
corporate social responsibility index, which has firm-level information on temporal flexibility and
corporate culture.
Our analysis begins by examining the gender gap in executive employment. Women represent
6% of top business executives. The share of women has steadily increased over time, but it still
remains low at 10% by the end of the sample period. This increase over time has been driven by
higher entry rates for women compared to men.3 Interestingly, however, exit rates are also higher
forwomen,whichindicatesthereismorelabormarketchurningforfemaleexecutives. Thissuggests
that, in addition to the promotion and recruitment of women, the retention of female executives is
important.
Next, we examine how temporal flexibility and corporate culture relate to gender gaps in entry
1This is not specific to the United States. See for example Albrecht et al. (2003) and Arulampalam et al. (2007).
2Forexample,Bertrandetal.(2010)findthatthecompensationofmaleandfemaleMBAsisthesameimmediately
after graduation but diverges thereafter.
3Entryoccurswhenthepersonbecomesanewtop5executiveatafirm,andexitiswhenthepersonisnolonger
a top 5 executive at that firm.
2

and exit rates. To quantify temporal flexibility we utilize the KLD measure of whether the firm
offers flextime benefits; to quantify corporate culture we use the KLD measure of firm diversity
(the extent to which a firm has hired and promoted women and minorities in leadership positions)
and whether the firm has ever had a female CEO.
Overall, temporal flexibility and female-friendly corporate culture are rare in this profession,
which could explain the low numbers of female executives, especially if women value temporal flexi-
bility more than men do or derive more disutility from competitive, male-dominated environments.
Indeed, we find that female executives are disproportionately found in flexible and female-friendly
firms. In addition, female entry rates are higher at flexible firms, and female exit rates are lower
at female-friendly firms.
In addition to the gender employment gap, we also explore gender differences in compensation
among these top business executives. Unconditionally, women earn 26% less than men. The pay
gap falls to 15% after accounting for the characteristics of the executive (including experience,
education, and age), and remains fairly constant after the addition of industry fixed effects, firm
fixed effects, and a range of time-varying firm controls. The pay gap falls by about half after
controlling for the job title of the executive. Accounting for all of these individual, firm, and job
characteristics, we still find a conditional gender pay gap of about 8%. In other words, female
executives with similar experience and education, working at similar firms, and doing similar jobs
earnlessthantheirmalecolleagues. Wealsofindthattheconditionalpaygaphassteadilydecreased
over our sample period.
Temporal flexibility and corporate culture may contribute to the gender pay gap in two ways.
First, a compensating wage differential framework predicts that gender gaps can arise from women
selecting into firms that provide these amenities and pay lower wages on average.4 While we do
show that female executives tend to end up in firms offering temporal flexibility and a female-
friendly corporate culture, this sorting of men and women across firms is not responsible for the
genderpaygap. Specifically, theestimatedpaygapremainsstableacrossspecificationsthatcontrol
for firm flexibility, firm culture, and also firm fixed effects.
Second, flexibility and corporate culture could generate gender pay gaps within firms: if women
4Goldin(2014),GoldinandKatz(2016),andBlauandKahn(2017)makethisargumentwithrespecttotemporal
flexibility.
3