NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CENTRAL BANK DIGITAL CURRENCY:
WHEN PRICE AND BANK STABILITY COLLIDE
Linda Schilling
Jesús Fernández-Villaverde
Harald Uhlig
Working Paper 28237
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28237
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2020
The contribution of Linda Schilling has been prepared under the Lamfalussy fellowship program
sponsored by the ECB and was originally named “Central bank digital currency and the
reorganization of the banking system.” We thank Agnese Leonello and an anonymous ECB
referee for very insightful comments. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the ECB. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Linda Schilling, Jesús Fernández-Villaverde, and Harald Uhlig. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Central Bank Digital Currency: When Price and Bank Stability Collide
Linda Schilling, Jesús Fernández-Villaverde, and Harald Uhlig
NBER Working Paper No. 28237
December 2020
JEL No. E58,G21
ABSTRACT
A central bank digital currency, or CBDC, may provide an attractive alternative to traditional
demand deposits held in private banks. When offering CBDC accounts, the central bank needs to
confront classic issues of banking: conducting maturity transformation while providing liquidity
to private customers who suffer “spending” shocks. We analyze these issues in a nominal version
of a Diamond and Dybvig (1983) model, with an additional and exogenous price stability
objective for the central bank. While the central bank can always deliver on its nominal
obligations, runs can nonetheless occur, manifesting themselves either as excessive real asset
liquidation or as a failure to maintain price stability. We demonstrate an impossibility result that
we call the CBDC trilemma: of the three goals of efficiency, financial stability (i.e., absence of
runs), and price stability, the central bank can achieve at most two.
Linda Schilling Harald Uhlig
Ecole Polytechnique CREST Dept. of Economics
5 Avenue le Chatelier University of Chicago
Palaiseau, Fran 91120 1126 E 59th Street
France Chicago, IL 60637
and CEPR and CEPR
lin.schilling@gmail.com and also NBER
huhlig@uchicago.edu
Jesús Fernández-Villaverde
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
The Ronald O. Perelman Center
for Political Science and Economics
133 South 36th Street Suite 150
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and CEPR
and also NBER
jesusfv@econ.upenn.edu

1 Introduction
Many central banks and policymaking institutions, such as the Bank of Canada, the Bank
of England, the Bank for International Settlements, the ECB, the IMF, the People’s Bank
of China, the Sveriges Riksbank, and the G30, are openly debating the introduction of
a central bank digital currency, or CBDC (Barrdear and Kumhof, 2016; Bech and Garratt,
2017;Chapmanetal.,2017; Lagarde,2018; Ingves,2018; Kahnetal.,2019; Davoodalhosseini
et al., 2020; Auer and Böhme, 2020; Auer et al., 2020; Group of 30, 2020).
The introduction and adoption of CBDCs have the potential to be a watershed for the
monetary and financial systems of advanced economies. Since at least the classic formulation
of Bagehot (1873), central banks have viewed their primary tasks as maintaining stable
prices and ensuring financial stability through their role as lenders of last resort. With a
CBDC, two additional and significant aspects come into play. First, a CBDC may become
an attractive alternative to traditional demand deposits in private banks for all households
and firms. Second, and as a result, the central bank may be transformed into a financial
intermediary that needs to confront classic issues of banking such as maturity transformation
and the exposure to a demand for liquidity induced by “spending” shocks (runs) of its private
customers.1
Inthispaper, weseektomodeltheinterplayofthesenewandtraditionalrolestoevaluate
the advantages and drawbacks of introducing a CBDC concerning the subsequent reorga-
nization of the banking system and its consequences for monetary policy, allocations, and
welfare. To do so, we build on the classical model by Diamond and Dybvig (1983), which
emphasizes a bank’s role in maturity transformation: banks pool resources and finance long-
term projects with demand deposits that can be withdrawn at a short time horizon to meet
liquidity shocks. By offering risk-sharing, banks enable allocations that are not attainable
under autarky. Yet, the optimal amount of risk-sharing requires banks to be prone to runs.
Can maturity transformation still occur at the socially optimal level with a CBDC? Can a
central bank do better and, for instance, avoid runs? Do new trade-offs arise?
1While both deposit-making and lending to the public by a central bank can be accomplished without a
CBDC (as has often happened in the past; see Fernández-Villaverde et al., 2020, for historical examples),
theoperationallogisticswithoutdigitalmeansaretoocumbersomeinalarge, moderneconomytorepresent
a likely policy option. Also, from the perspective of our paper, it is mainly irrelevant whether the deposits
and loans in the CBDC are run directly by the central bank or by financial institutions that implement the
directives of the central bank.
1

We depart from the original formulation of the Diamond and Dybvig model in a crucial
aspect. While Diamond and Dybvig (1983) consider intermediation with private banks, a
CBDCimpliescentralbankintermediation. Thisdifferenceisconsequentialbecauseacentral
bank can control the price level. For example, a central bank can issue additional units of a
CBDC to cover losses in its loan portfolio, implicitly diffusing the costs of the credit losses
among all holders of the currency. To allow for this feedback mechanism between the loan
portfolio and the price level, we modify the basic Diamond and Dybvig (1983) model by
imposing the condition that all contracts are nominal. We assume that real goods can only
be traded against money, implicitly setting a form of a cash-in-advance constraint in the
tradition of Svensson (1985) and Lucas and Stokey (1987), but suited to the digital world.
In fact, a cash-in-advance constraint is more relevant in a CBDC world because other means
of payment, such as the transfer of private deposits, might have disappeared.
In our model, classic bank runs may still occur due to a rationing problem, when liqui-
dating illiquid real assets at a given price level. But since the central bank controls the price
level and contracts are nominal, it can avoid rationing if it prefers. By issuing more currency,
the monetary authority can always deliver on its obligation. But a simple “quantity theory
of money intuition” implies that avoiding excess liquidation of real assets by issuing more
currency implies sacrificing inflation targeting. Thus, our model illustrates how runs on a
central bank can manifest themselves in two ways: either as a classic run, caused by the
rationing of real assets, or as a run on the price level.
This dual nature of bank runs is part of a more general phenomenon. Imagine that the
central bank has three goals: efficiency, financial stability (i.e., absence of runs), and price
stability. We demonstrate an impossibility result that we call the CBDC trilemma: of its
three goals, the central bank can achieve at most two; see Figure 1. As the first part of
the trilemma, we prove that the central bank can always implement the socially optimal
allocation in dominant strategies while deterring runs by credibly threatening high inflation
whenevernominalspendingisexcessive. Thisthreatisimplementedbylimitingtherealasset
liquidation in the case of a run, thereby rendering spending by patient agents suboptimal
ex-post. Since depositors are rational, the central bank’s inflation threat deters runs ex-ante
such that high inflation only occurs off the equilibrium path. This result contrasts with the
Diamond and Dybvig model, where banks do not have the option of changing the aggregate
price level in response to a run. Therefore, there, runs can occur as equilibrium phenomena,
2