NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DYNAMIC BANKING AND THE VALUE OF DEPOSITS
Patrick Bolton
Ye Li
Neng Wang
Jinqiang Yang
Working Paper 28298
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28298
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2020, Revised September 2021
We are grateful to helpful comments from Jason Allen, Adrien d’Avernas, Juliane Begenau
(discussant), Markus Brunnermeier, Peter DeMarzo, Jason Donaldson, Itamar Drechsler
(discussant), Philip Dybvig, Isil Erel, Xavier Gabaix, Zhiguo He (discussant), Ji Huang
(discussant), Sebastian Infante, Bart Lambrecht, Anil Kashyap, Naveen Khanna, Arvind
Krishnamurthy, Bernadette Minton, Cyril Monnet (discussant), Dirk Niepelt (discussant),
Christian Opp (discussant), Guillermo Ordoñez, Jonathan Payne (discussant), Monika Piazzesi,
Alexi Savov (discussant), Dejanir Silva (discussant), René Stulz, Anjan Thakor, Quentin
Vandeweyer, Matías Vieyra (discussant), Larry Wall (discussant), Mike Weisbach, Chao Ying
(discussant), Haoxiang Zhu and seminar/conference participants at Biennial International
Association of Deposit Insurers Conference, BI-SSE Asset Pricing & Financial Econometrics
Conference, Cambridge Corporate Finance Theory Symposium, CESifo Macro Money &
International Finance, China International Conference in Finance, China International Conference
in Macroeconomics, European Finance Association 2021, FOM Virtual Corporate Finance
Fridays, Fed-Maryland Short-Term Funding Markets 2021, Midwest Finance Association 2021,
NBER Summer Institute 2021, Northern Finance Association 2021, Society for Economic
Dynamics 2021, Ohio State University, and Washington University in St. Louis Annual
Corporate Finance Conference. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Patrick Bolton, Ye Li, Neng Wang, and Jinqiang Yang. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Dynamic Banking and the Value of Deposits
Patrick Bolton, Ye Li, Neng Wang, and Jinqiang Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 28298
December 2020, Revised September 2021
JEL No. E44,G21,G32
ABSTRACT
We propose a dynamic theory of banking where the role of deposits is akin to that of productive
capital in the classical q-theory of investment. As a cheap source of leverage, deposits typically
create value for banks, but the marginal q of deposits can be negative. Deposit accounts commit
banks to accept any inflows and outflows, so that banks cannot perfectly control leverage. Such
uncertainty destroys value when banks have insufficient equity capital to buffer shocks. Our
model lends itself to a re-evaluation of leverage regulations and offers new perspectives on
banking in a low interest-rate environment.
Patrick Bolton Neng Wang
Columbia Business School Columbia Business School
804 Uris Hall 3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 812
New York, NY 10027 New York, NY 10027
and NBER and NBER
pb2208@columbia.edu nw2128@columbia.edu
Ye Li Jinqiang Yang
The Ohio State University Shanghai University of Finance
Fisher College of Business and Economics
2100 Neil Ave Guoding Rd. 777
Fisher Hall 846 Shanghai, 200433
Columbus, OH 43210 China
li.8935@osu.edu yang.jinqiang@mail.sufe.edu.cn

1 Introduction
During the unfolding COVID-19 pandemic U.S. banks have undergone unprecedented balance-
sheet expansions as a result of massive inflows into deposit accounts. Most dramatically, deposits
of US banks increased by $865 billion just in April 2020 alone. From Q4 2019 to Q1 2020, JP-
Morgan Chase experienced an increase of 18% of its deposit base, and the deposit liabilities of
CitigroupandBankofAmericaincreasedby11%and10%,respectively.1 Contrarytotheconven-
tionalwisdom,abundantfundingliquiditydidnotbenefitbankvaluationorstimulatelending. The
bankingsectorisamongtheslowestsectorstorecoverfrompandemicequityvaluationlows.
We show that large deposit inflows are both an opportunity and a challenge for banks. De-
posit account is a source of cheap funding. Depositors accept relatively low interest rates under
banks’ deposit market power (Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl, 2017) and for the convenience of
using deposits as means of payment.2 But the consequence of allowing depositors to freely move
fundsinandoutoftheiraccountsisthatbankscannotperfectlycontrolthesizeofdepositbase.
Facing equity issuance costs (Myers and Majluf, 1984), banks are endogenously averse to
risk in its equity capital. Therefore, deposit-flow shocks present a challenge to bank risk man-
agement. By bringing in cheap funding, a positive (inflow) shock boosts the current earnings.
However, it also injects risk in the future earnings and trajectories of equity capital because it is
uncertain whether the new deposits will stay in the customers’ accounts or not. In contrast, a
negative(outflow)shockcausesinvoluntarycontractionofbothriskandreturnonequity.
TheequityK todepositX ratio(denotedby“k ≡ K/X”)emergesasthekeystatevariable
that drives the bank’s decisions. The numerator K represents the bank’s risk-taking capacity,
while the denominator X measures the size of deposits as cheap sources of financing and scales
thedeposit-flowshocks. Theratioisendogenouslyboundedabovebyoptimaldividendpayoutand
below by costly equity issuances. The bank’s endogenous risk aversion decreases in k. When k is
high, the bank has a sufficient equity buffer and can take advantage of deposits as cheap financing
1See “U.S. Banks are ‘Swimming in Money’ as deposits increase by 2 trillion dollars amid the coronavirus” by
HughSon,CNBCJune21,2020. Suchdepositinfluxalsohappenedinthefinancialcrisisof2007–2008.
2Arecentliteratureincorporatesthemoneypremiumintomacroeconomicandbankingmodels(Stein,2012;DeAn-
geloandStulz,2015;KrishnamurthyandVissing-Jørgensen,2015;Nagel,2016;Begenau,2020)
1

(relativetobonds). Whenkislow,depositinflowsbecomeproblematicbecausethepositiveimpact
oncurrentearningsisoverwhelmedbytheconcernovertheuncertaintythatnewdepositstransmit
into future earnings. When k is near the equity issuance (lower) bound, such concern is acute and
themarginalvalueofdepositstobankshareholders(“marginaldepositq”)turnssharplynegative.
Moreover, deposit inflows may not induce more lending when k is low. The bank earns a
netinterestmargin,which canbedecomposedintotheriskpremium fromlendingandthedeposit
spread (the wedge between the risk-free bond rate and the lower deposit rate). Both sources of
profits are risky. The optimal lending policy is characterized by a formula akin to the portfolio
choice of Merton (1969), but with an endogenous k-dependent measure of risk aversion. Deposit
inflows bring more cheap funding to lend but raise the endogenous risk aversion by lowering k.
By increasing deposit risk exposure, deposit inflows reduce the bank’s capacity to take on more
lendingrisk. Neartheequityissuance(lower)boundfork,depositinflowscanevencausethebank
toscalebacklendingandallocatemoredepositsintorisk-freebonds.
Wemodelthedepositstockasastochasticprocesspartiallycontrolledbythebankthroughits
deposit rate. Deposits are effectively long-duration debts as Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl (2021)
have observed, but in our model, the maturities are random. The inability to fully control the size
of liabilities makes bank balance-sheet management conceptually very different from that of non-
depository intermediaries and nonfinancial firms. In our model and as documented by Drechsler,
Savov, and Schnabl (2017), the deposit base has random yet persistent flows. When k is high, the
bank raises deposit rate in an effort to attract more deposits, just like nonfinancial firms investing
in their capital stock. In effect, the optimal deposit-rate policy resembles the investment policy in
Hayashi (1982). When k is low, risk concern dominates, so that the bank lowers its deposit rate in
anefforttoforestallanyunintendedbalance-sheetexpansionduetodepositinflowshocks.
Anotherrealisticfeatureofourmodelisalowerboundforthedepositrate. Anaturalbound
is zero, because depositors can always withdraw and hoard fiat money witha zero nominalreturn.
This lower bound is increasingly binding in the current low-rate environment (Heider, Saidi, and
Schepens, 2019). Although a lower bound is not required to generate endogenous risk aversion
in our model, it further limits the bank’s ability to adjust the deposit flows, strengthening the
2