NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SMART(PHONE) INVESTING? A WITHIN INVESTOR-TIME ANALYSIS OF NEW
TECHNOLOGIES AND TRADING BEHAVIOR.
Ankit Kalda
Benjamin Loos
Alessandro Previtero
Andreas Hackethal
Working Paper 28363
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28363
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2021
We thank Shlomo Benartzi, Juhani Linnainmaa, Ulrike Malmendier, Brian Melzer, and seminar
participants at Indiana University and BI Norwegian Business School for helpful comments and
discussions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Ankit Kalda, Benjamin Loos, Alessandro Previtero, and Andreas Hackethal. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Smart(Phone) Investing? A within Investor-time Analysis of New Technologies and Trading
Behavior.
Ankit Kalda, Benjamin Loos, Alessandro Previtero, and Andreas Hackethal
NBER Working Paper No. 28363
January 2021
JEL No. G11,G40,G50
ABSTRACT
Using transaction-level data from two German banks, we study the effects of smartphones on
investor behavior. Comparing trades by the same investor in the same month across different
platforms, we find that smartphones increase purchasing of riskier and lottery-type assets and
chasing past returns. After the adoption of smartphones, investors do not substitute trades across
platforms and buy also riskier, lottery-type, and hot investments on other platforms. Using
smartphones to trade specific assets or during specific hours contributes to explain our results.
Digital nudges and the device screen size do not mechanically drive our results. Smartphone
effects are not transitory.
Ankit Kalda Alessandro Previtero
Kelley School of Business Kelley School of Business
1309 E 10th St Indiana University
Indiana University 1309 E. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47405 Bloomington, IN 47405
akalda@iu.edu and NBER
aleprevi@indiana.edu
Benjamin Loos
TUM School of Management Andreas Hackethal
Arcissstrasse 21 Goethe University Frankfurt
Munich 80333 Grüneburgplatz 1 House of Finance
Germany 60323 Frankfurt a.M. Germany
beni.loos@gmail.com hackethal@gbs.uni-frankfurt.de

1 Introduction
Technology has dramatically changed how retail investors trade, from placing orders
using direct dial-up connections in the 1980s or Internet-based trading in the 1990s to
the more recent rise of robo-advisers. With few exceptions, the introduction of these
1
new technologies is generally associated with a decline in investor portfolio efficiency.
Whethergoodorbadforinvestors,itisacceptedthatnewtechnologiesinfluenceinvestor
behavior. The empirical evidence in these studies comes from some comparisons of in-
vestorbehaviorbeforeandaftertheadoptionofthenewtechnology,potentiallycontrasted
with the behavior over time of another group that did not adopt the technology. Under
the assumption that, absent the innovation, investors would have behaved in the exact
same way, a common interpretation of this evidence is that new technologies influence
investorsand changetheir behavior. An alternativeexplanation isthat investors,instead,
adoptthenewtechnologybecausetheyarewillingtochangetheirtradingbehaviorinthe
2
first place. Even if we could randomly assign the new technology to investors, it would
still not be straightforward to conclude that the new technology changes the overall in-
vestor portfolio. If investors manage investments across different accounts or platforms,
they could decide to substitute across technologies. Therefore, observing trades on one
platformmightnotbeinformativeoftheoverallinvestortradingbehavior.
Whilepreviousstudieslackthedatatodistinguishbetweenthesealternativeinterpre-
tations,theirimplicationsare,however,starklydifferent. Ifthenewtechnologyinfluences
investorpreferencesandbeliefs,absentthetechnologyinvestorswouldhavenotchanged
theirtradingbehavior. If,instead,itfulfillsuntappedinvestordemand,thenthenewtech-
1For example, when moving to online trading, investors increased turnover and reduced performance
(BarberandOdean,2002). Morerecentstudiesdocument,instead,thatrobo-adviserscouldreduceinvest-
mentmistakes(seeD’Acunto,PrabhalaandRossi,2019;Loosetal.,2020).
2D’Acunto, Prabhala and Rossi (2019) use the randomness in investors answering their phone to the
marketingenrollmentcallsasaplausiblyexogenousshocktotheprobabilityofjoiningtherobo-advisor.
1

nology at best accelerates or makes less costly a change in investor behavior that would
have happened anyway. Analogously, the new technology could just fulfill substitute
demand, if investors substitute trades across different platforms. Therefore, simple com-
parisons of investor behavior pre- and post-adoption or analyses of trades on one single
platform could vastly overestimate the effects of the new technology. Furthermore, the
policy implications could not be any more different. Is the technology helping investors
to achieve their goals by facilitating their trades? Or is technology influencing adopters
3
inprofoundwaysthatcouldstrayinvestorsawayfromtheiroriginalgoals?
Inthispaper,weuseuniquedataonGermanhouseholdstoovercometheseempirical
challenges and to weigh in on the question if technology drives changes or just fulfills
untapped or substitute investor demand. Our data comes from two large German retail
banks that have introduced trading applications for mobile devices. For over 15,000
bank clients that have used these mobile apps in the years 2010-2017, we can observe all
holdingsandtransactions,and,moreimportant,thespecificplatformusedforeachtrade
(e.g.,personalcomputervs. smartphone). Theseuniquefeaturesofthedataprovefruitful
forouranalyses. Thatis,wecanconductallourmaintestscomparingtradesdonebythe
same investor in the same month across different platforms. Moreover, we can directly
testforsubstitutioneffects.
We present four set of results. First, we study if the use of smartphones induces
differences in the riskiness of trades. Comparing trades by the same investor in the
same year-month, we find that the probability of purchasing risky assets increases in
smartphone trades compared to non-smartphone ones. Analogously, smartphone trades
involve assets with higher volatility and more positive skewness. This evidence is best
4
summarizedbyouranalysesoflotterytypestocks. Smartphonesincreasetheprobability
3Ina2020articletitled“RobinhoodHasLuredYoungTraders,SometimesWithDevastatingResults”,theNew
York Times features a series of stories of investors that have lost substantial amount of money trading off
theirmobilephones.
4Following Kumar (2009), we define as lottery-type stocks those assets with below median prices and
2