NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PRIVATE AND PUBLIC INVESTMENTS IN BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH
Maya M. Durvasula
Lisa Larrimore Ouellette
Heidi L. Williams
Working Paper 28349
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28349
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2021
We are very grateful to Ryan Broll, Gideon Moore, Maya Roy, and Ralph Skinner for research
assistance, and to Bhaven Sampat for very helpful comments. Financial support from NIA grant
P01AG005842 (to the NBER), the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the Smith Richardson
Foundation, and the National Science Foundation Graduate Fellowship Program is also gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w28349.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Maya M. Durvasula, Lisa Larrimore Ouellette, and Heidi L. Williams. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Private and Public Investments in Biomedical Research
Maya M. Durvasula, Lisa Larrimore Ouellette, and Heidi L. Williams
NBER Working Paper No. 28349
January 2021
JEL No. I1,O3
ABSTRACT
Recent policy attention has focused on proposals to reduce prices for drugs that have received
public funding. From an implementation perspective, such policies rely on public disclosure of
government support for research. In this paper, we highlight two conceptual problems with past
attempts to measure these public disclosures, and construct a new data set which corrects for
these problems. Our corrected measures suggest that under-reporting of public research support
is less of an issue than previously thought.
Maya M. Durvasula Heidi L. Williams
Stanford University Department of Economics
mdurvas@stanford.edu Stanford University
579 Jane Stanford Way
Lisa Larrimore Ouellette Office 323
Stanford Law School Stanford, CA 94305
559 Nathan Abbott Way and NBER
Stanford, CA 94305 hlwill@stanford.edu
ouellette@law.stanford.edu

Private and Public Investments in Biomedical Research
By MAYA DURVASULA, LISA LARRIMORE OUELLETTE, AND HEIDI WILLIAMS*
* Stanford University Department of Economics (Durvasula and In recent years, much public debate has
Williams) and Stanford Law School (Ouellette); Stanford, CA 94305
focused on policies to reduce prices for drugs
(maya.durvasula@stanford.edu; ouellette@law.stanford.edu;
hlwill@stanford.edu). We are very grateful to Ryan Broll, Gideon that have received public funding, such as
Moore, Maya Roy, and Ralph Skinner for research assistance, and to
through reasonable pricing agreements.3 In
Bhaven Sampat for very helpful comments. Financial support from
NIA grant P01AG005842 (to the NBER), the Alfred P. Sloan practical terms, implementation of such
Foundation, the Smith Richardson Foundation, and the National
policies relies on public disclosure of
Science Foundation Graduate Fellowship Program is also gratefully
acknowledged. government support for research. Under the
1980 Bayh-Dole Act, recipients of federally
Many scientific discoveries have roots in
funded research grants must include a
both public research support and investment by
statement in the text of any resulting patent
private firms. Perhaps nowhere are these dual
applications referencing the granting agency
development paths more common than in
and the specific grant number to provide notice
biomedical research markets. On the more
that the government has certain rights in the
basic research end, the privately funded clinical
invention (including a nonexclusive license).4
trials for drugs like Novartis’s Gleevec built on
Previous work by the Government
decades of government-funded research on
gene mutation and cell-signaling.1 On the more Accountability Office (GAO 1999) and Rai and
Sampat (2012) has argued that these
applied research end, Moderna’s SARS-CoV-2
“government-interest statements” are under-
vaccine has received heavy financial support
from both the US National Institutes of Health reported. However, two conceptual problems
have plagued past attempts to gauge the extent
(NIH) and the Biomedical Advanced Research
of this under-reporting.
and Development Authority (BARDA),
First, “certificates of correction,” issued by
building on substantial private funding to
develop its mRNA platform.2 the US Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO)
1 Secretary of Health and Human Services. Sampat (forthcoming) places
See Azoulay et al. (2019) for more on this example.
these modern-day debates in a historical context.
2
See Sherkow et al. (2020) for more on this example. 4
More precisely, Bayh-Dole states that federal funding agreements
3
See Contreras (2020) for more on one example of reasonable must contractually require grant recipients to include this information
pricing agreements, which were briefly imposed by the US NIH in in patent applications and to execute nonexclusive licenses confirming
response to controversy over the pricing of novel drugs for AIDS. In the government’s rights in the invention; see 35 U.S.C. § 202(c)(6) and
1999, Representative Sanders introduced a bill (H.R. 626) that would 37 C.F.R. § 401.14(f). Some funding agencies also imposed this
have required institutions developing new drugs based on federally reporting requirement before Bayh-Dole.
funded research to enter into reasonable pricing agreements with the

to address mistakes in patent grants, can add how common are public funding disclosures
disclosures of public funding to existing via certificates of correction or parent-induced
patents. GAO (1999) mentions this possibility coverage of continuations? Second, do these
in passing, and James Love – with the non- two channels appear to be quantitatively
profit Knowledge Ecology International (KEI) important in assessing the completeness of
– has documented three examples of such public funding disclosures? We close by
corrections adding public funding disclosures. highlighting some key policy issues that
For example, KEI publicized an 18-year lag emerge from our analysis.
between the approval of a patent on a drug
developed by Novartis and the addition of a I. Data construction
correction disclosing public funding (KEI Our data construction combines publicly
2017; Love 2019). However, to the best of our available administrative records and datasets
knowledge this phenomenon has not been from the USPTO, the FDA, and the NIH to
systematically investigated.5 document patterns in public research support
Second, several legal and regulatory sources for all new drugs (“new molecular entities”)
suggest that disclosures of public funding in approved by the FDA from 1981 to 2014. For
“parent” patents apply to derived continuation each of the 638 drugs approved over this
(“child”) patents. This suggests that simple period, we collect data about the drug’s
counts of government-interest statements in approval path from FDA records and measure
continuation patents may lead to an patents associated with the drug using the
underestimate of public funding disclosures. FDA’s Orange Book.6
In this paper, we construct new data which Following Sampat and Lichtenberg (2011)
allows us to shed light on two key questions and building on the methodology in de
about public funding disclosures in the sample Rassenfosse et al. (2019), we identify all
of patents linked to drugs approved by the US patents granted between 1981 and 2020,
Food and Drug Administration (FDA). First, including all patents listed in the FDA’s
5 annual version of the publication. One of us (Williams) digitized the
Love analyzed certificates of correction between 2000 and 2015,
historical Orange Book patent and exclusivity tables for years 1985-
but did not break out certificates of correction related to disclosure of
2016 (no Orange Book was published in 1986), based on PDF versions
public funding (Love 2017).
obtained via a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request; that data
6
Patents are recorded in the so-called Orange Book (the FDA’s is available here: https://www.nber.org/research/data/orange-book-
Approved Drug Products with Therapeutic Equivalence Evaluations) patent-and-exclusivity-data-1985-2016. Since Orange Book patent
but are removed when they expire, so constructing a complete set of listings began in 1985, we are unable to determine if drug patents were
patents from the Orange Book requires reconstructing a list from each listed and removed before 1985.