NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE UNHOLY TRINITY:
REGULATORY FORBEARANCE, STRESSED BANKS AND ZOMBIE FIRMS
Anusha Chari
Lakshita Jain
Nirupama Kulkarni
Working Paper 28435
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28435
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2021
We thank workshop participants at Columbia University, UNC-Chapel Hill, the Reserve Bank of
India, the IIM Calcutta-NYU Stern India Conference, Norges Bank, and the FDIC for helpful
comments and suggestions. We thank Viral Acharya, Arvind Panagariya, Jagdish Bhagwati,
Pravin Krishna, Suresh Sundaresan, Manju Puri, the late Subir Gokarn, Yasser Boualam, Rakesh
Mohan, and Krishnamurthy Subrahmanian for helpful discussions. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Anusha Chari, Lakshita Jain, and Nirupama Kulkarni. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Unholy Trinity: Regulatory Forbearance, Stressed Banks and Zombie Firms
Anusha Chari, Lakshita Jain, and Nirupama Kulkarni
NBER Working Paper No. 28435
February 2021
JEL No. E58,G21,G28
ABSTRACT
During the global financial crisis, the Reserve Bank of India enacted forbearance measures that
lowered capital provisioning rates for loans under temporary liquidity stress. Matched bank-firm
data reveal that troubled banks took advantage of the policy to also shield firms facing serious
solvency issues. Perversely, in industries and bank portfolios with high proportions of failing
firms, credit to healthy firms declined and was reallocated to the weakest firms. By incentivizing
banks to hide true asset quality, the forbearance policy provided a license for regulatory arbitrage.
The build-up of stressed assets in India’s predominantly state-owned banking system is consistent
with accounting subterfuge.
Anusha Chari Nirupama Kulkarni
Department of Economics, CB #3305 Research Director
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill CAFRAL, Research Department
Chapel Hill, NC 27599 Reserve Bank of India Main Building,
and NBER Mezzanine Floor,
achari@unc.edu Shahid Bhagat Singh Road,
Fort, Mumbai 400 001
Lakshita Jain nirupama.kulkarni@gmail.com
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
laksh21@email.unc.edu

1 Introduction
Regulatory forbearance can create dueling incentives.1 On the one hand, forbearance pro-
vides a risk management tool for the temporarily problematic loans of viable firms. It allows
otherwise solvent firms facing temporary liquidity shortages to remain in operation. On
the other hand, forbearance can lead to a misallocation of credit enabling banks to keep
non-performing assets on their balance sheets and zombie firms afloat (Caballero, Hoshi,
and Kashyap, 2008, Peek and Rosengren, 2005, Acharya et al., 2019, Blattner, Farinha, and
Rebelo, 2019). Forbearance as a means to shield non-performing assets can therfore reduce
bank incentives to appropriately provision for and manage credit risk in loan portfolios.
This paper investigates the role of regulatory forbearance in propagating the misallo-
cation of credit in India, the world’s fifth-largest economy. The paper examines whether
the forbearance measures enacted by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI)2 during the global
financial crisis effectively handed over a license for banks to engage in regulatory arbitrage.
We investigate whether the measures provided banks with an incentive to hide true asset
quality, and therefore the build-up of stressed assets in the banking system is a by-product of
accounting subterfuge. Using both bank and firm-level data, our primary goal is to examine
the externalities and costs generated by asset quality forbearance.
To provide some context, the share of non-performing and restructured assets in India’s
banking system rose significantly between 2008 and 2018.3 Before the global financial crisis
India had the lowest non-performing asset (NPA) ratios amongst G-20 nations—by 2018,
it had the highest NPA ratio. India’s NPA ratio is also higher than its emerging market
counterparts.4 The data show falling profitability and capital provisioning ratios accompa-
nied by a collapse in credit, especially for state-owned banks (Figure 1 and Figure IA.1). A
1Forbearancereferstotheloanconcessionsortemporaryrepaymentreliefgrantedbycreditorsorlenders
to alleviate short-term financial difficulties facing borrowers. The temporary difficulties typically arise from
special economic or legal circumstances facing borrowers or adverse external shocks such as financial crises.
2TheReserveBankofIndiafunctionsasthecentralbankofIndiaandalsotheregulator. Inmanyother
countries, separate agencies perform central banking and regulatory functions.
3https://www.epw.in/journal/2018/34/perspectives/non-performing-assets-commercial-banks.html
4https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/business/india-business/only-4-major-nations-have-higher-bad-
loans-than-india/articleshow/62275553.cms
1

contemporaneous development is the declining credit quality of Indian firms—the aggregate
interest coverage ratio declined significantly while leverage remained unchanged suggesting
that the debt service capacity of the Indian corporate sector declined measurably over this
period.5
The rationale for the asset quality forbearance was to provide temporary relief for capital
provisioning requirements associated with loans given to firms facing liquidity problems dur-
ing the crisis. Specifically, subject to some conditions, the forbearance measures permitted
loan accounts of firms to retain their ‘standard’ or good standing classification post restruc-
turing due to missed payments (Master Circular - Prudential Norms on Income Recognition,
Asset Classification and Provisioning Pertaining to Advances, 2009).6 In the absence of
forbearance, these assets would be immediately classified as non-performing and subject to
higher capital provisioning requirements.7 In this paper we investigate whether regulatory
forbearance was used by banks to assist low-liquidity firms, the intended beneficiaries, or
whether the policies also allowed banks to shield firms facing solvency issues, the unintended
beneficiaries.
Along with rising shares of non-performing assets, we see zombie firms emerging on a
large scale in the Indian corporate sector. Thus, the system suffers from a twin balance sheet
problem where both the banking sector and the corporate sector are under financial stress.
In Europe, Acharya et al. (2019) show that while zombie lending is initially successful at
keepingtroubledborrowersalive,manyzombiefirmslikelyfailwhenforbearanceisultimately
withdrawn. In 2016, for approximately 40% of the our sample of non-financial firms the
5Inastudy,Ansari,Khandelwal,andPrabhala(2016)findthatoverthesampletimeperiod,theaggregate
interest coverage ratio for the corporate sector as a whole changes from a peak of 6.92 in 2007 to nearly half
at 3.38 by 2015.
6See Part B in https://rbi.org.in/scripts/NotificationUser.aspx?Id=5090&Mode=0
7Prior to 2008, commercial bank loan portfolios under the RBI’s asset classification norms were broadly
classified as “standard” (assets in good standing) or non-performing assets (NPAs). Additional sub-
classifications of NPAs depending on over-due principal and/or interest, further categorized bank assets
as sub-standard, doubtful and loss assets. Standard advances restructured for delays or non-payment were
immediately re-classified as sub-standard and NPAs re-classified to further lower categories such as from
sub-standard to doubtful and so on.
2