NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHAT EXPLAINS DIFFERENCES IN FINANCE RESEARCH PRODUCTIVITY
DURING THE PANDEMIC?
Brad M. Barber
Wei Jiang
Adair Morse
Manju Puri
Heather Tookes
Ingrid M. Werner
Working Paper 28493
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28493
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2021
We are very grateful to Annette Clark, the Executive Committee of the American Finance
Association (AFA), and in particular AFA President Ken Singleton for his guidance and
encouragement throughout this project. We would like to thank Cam Harvey, Jennifer Koski, and
participants at the 2021 AFFECT reception for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Brad M. Barber, Wei Jiang, Adair Morse, Manju Puri, Heather Tookes, and Ingrid M.
Werner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

What Explains Differences in Finance Research Productivity During the Pandemic?
Brad M. Barber, Wei Jiang, Adair Morse, Manju Puri, Heather Tookes, and Ingrid M. Werner
NBER Working Paper No. 28493
February 2021
JEL No. G0,G01
ABSTRACT
Using a survey of AFA members, we analyze how demographics, time allocation, production
mechanisms, and institutional factors affect research production during the pandemic. Consistent
with the literature, research productivity falls more for women and faculty with young children.
Independently and novel, extra time spent teaching (much more likely for women) negatively
affects research productivity. Also novel are the results that concerns about feedback, isolation,
and health have large negative research effects, disproportionately affecting junior faculty and
PhD students. Finally, faculty facing greater concerns about employers’ finances report larger
negative research effects and more concerns about feedback, isolation and health.
Brad M. Barber Manju Puri
Graduate School of Management Fuqua School of Business
One Shields Avenue Duke University
3218 Gallagher Hall 100 Fuqua Drive
University of California Durham, NC 27708-0120
Davis, CA 95616 and NBER
bmbarber@ucdavis.edu mpuri@duke.edu
Wei Jiang Heather Tookes
Graduate School of Business Yale School of Management
Columbia University New Haven, CT 06520-8200
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 803 heather.tookes@yale.edu
New York, NY 10027
and NBER Ingrid M. Werner
wj2006@columbia.edu Fisher College of Business
Ohio State University
Adair Morse 2100 Neil Avenue
University of California, Berkeley Columbus, OH 43210
545 Student Services Bldg, #1900 werner.47@osu.edu
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
morse@haas.berkeley.edu
An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28493

1. Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic has rapidly upended modern life, tested the infrastructure of higher education
globally, and pushed professors and administrators to their productive limits. While there is now hope that
effective vaccines will bring an end to the current state of chaos, there still may be long-term consequences
for higher education. In this paper, we explore three main channels that might disparately affect the research
productivity of faculty (and Ph.D. students) and hence their long-term career outcomes, which are primarily
dependent on successful research records. First, we consider disruptions to time allocations since the
pandemic resulted in sharp disruptions in time allocations and these disruptions are significantly associated
with faculty characteristics such as seniority, gender and family structure. Second, we consider production
mechanisms that affect research productivity beyond time allocation like the inability to obtain feedback,
concerns about isolation, or concerns about physical or mental health. These production mechanisms likely
affect productivity per unit of time input and thus can contribute to reductions in research independent of
time allocations. We expect these mechanisms to vary with faculty characteristics like seniority, gender and
family structure. Finally, we consider institutional factors, such as the perceived financial condition of the
institution and tenure clock extension policies, and examine their impact on research productivity. To
preview our results, we find all three factors (time, production, and institutional mechanisms) play an
important role in explaining variation in the effect of the pandemic on research productivity. Our results
raise concerns that the pandemic will have long-lasting and disparate impact on, and thus shift the
representation of, various groups in the faculty population.
Our study builds exclusively on data from a voluntary survey that we sent to the membership of the
American Finance Association (AFA) on October 26, 2020. We asked members to evaluate the impact of
the pandemic on their own research productivity and on the time spent on research and related activities.
Because individuals with university-related positions comprise 85.4% of the 1,440 responses, we focus the
analysis solely on this group. Most of the survey responses are reported in Likert scales (from 1 to 5), which
is accommodated by the ordered logistic models. The empirical approach allows us to examine the impact
of predetermined variables (gender and family structure), rank (senior, junior, student), and mechanisms
(time, production, and institutional factors), holding other things constant and allows for formal analyses
of potentially important interactions. Because the pandemic hit everyone by complete surprise, and because
the regressors in our models represent mostly pre-existing characteristics, endogeneity should not be a
major concern in interpreting the regression results.
During the pandemic, most faculty report a negative effect on research, but importantly for our analysis
there is considerable variation in this effect. While 78.1% of faculty respondents report decreases in
research productivity and 60% report spending less time on research, there are also 14.5% of faculty who
report increases in research productivity and 21.5% report spending more time on research. The variation
1

in research effects relates to predetermined factors – family structure and gender. Research productivity of
women and faculty with children, especially very young ones (ages 0 to 5), is particularly harmed by the
pandemic, and the two factors seem to work independently without a significant interaction effect. That is,
presence of young children affects research production during the pandemic by similar degree for men and
for women, but women are still more negatively impacted for given family structure. The career and
professional implications of these effects are important. Women, in particular senior women, are already
an underrepresented group within the academic finance profession, and thus achievements attributed to
efforts to ameliorate the disparity in recent years could see a set-back post-pandemic. Also set back are
junior faculty of both genders, as they are more likely to have young children and experience professional
isolation. Junior faculty are the group for whom current research productivity will have the greatest impact
on future career outcomes. Thus, on both counts, the impact of the magnitudes of distortions may have
profound effects on research and on the profession as a whole.
We then turn the main question we address in this paper: What mechanisms generate disparate effects
on research productivity? The pandemic and the resulting lockdowns and social distancing requirements
greatly affected how academics spend their time. Faculty need to devote more time to teaching, as they
work to adopt entirely new models of remote and hybrid teaching. Faculty with children may spend more
of their time navigating school and day care closures or they may have increased responsibilities when their
adult children return home. To shed light on the time allocation mechanisms driving the negative research
effects, we asked respondents to report the changes in time allocation to tasks other than research. The time
allocation questions are particularly telling, given the hard budget constraint of 24 hours a day. As expected,
we find that faculty with children spend more time on childcare and domestic chores while cutting back on
time spent on research, leisure, and sleep. In contrast, time spent on teaching is unaffected by the presence
of children, because teaching is a task with fixed deadlines which requires immediate attention.
What is less expected is our finding that women spend more time teaching and less time on research
after controlling for family structure. While increased time spent on teaching should be expected for all
faculty given the rapid transition to online instruction, the fact that women report a bigger increase in their
teaching burden than men unfortunately further exacerbates the gender gap in research productivity. Given
the substantial evidence of bias against women (especially junior women) in teaching evaluations (e.g.,
Rivera and Tilcsk, 2019; Mengel, Sauermann, and Zolitz, 2019), the pressure to gain favorable teaching
ratings – an important component in tenure and promotion considerations – may elicit more effort from
women, compared to men, on teaching at the expense of time for research (e.g., Winslow, 2010). Moreover,
female professors tend to experience more demands and special requests from students as students continue
to perceive and expect female professors to be more nurturing than male professors (El-Alayli, Hensen-
Brown, and Ceynar, 2018). The pandemic, and ensuing major transition of mode of teaching, only
2