NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
UNEVEN GROWTH: AUTOMATION'S IMPACT ON INCOME
AND WEALTH INEQUALITY
Benjamin Moll
Lukasz Rachel
Pascual Restrepo
Working Paper 28440
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28440
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2021
We thank Daron Acemoglu, Fabrizio Perri, Matt Rognlie, Richard Rogerson, Stefanie
Stantcheva, Ivan Werning and seminar participants at various institutions for useful comments
and Gabriel Zucman for kindly providing some tabulations from the dataset constructed by
Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2018). We also thank Benny Kleinman, Nils Lehr and Max Vogler for
outstanding research assistance. The views presented here are solely those of the authors and do
not represent the views of the Bank of England or its policy committees. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research. Moll received funding for this project from the Leverhulme Trust and the
European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant number No.
GA: 865227.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Benjamin Moll, Lukasz Rachel, and Pascual Restrepo. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Uneven Growth: Automation's Impact on Income and Wealth Inequality
Benjamin Moll, Lukasz Rachel, and Pascual Restrepo
NBER Working Paper No. 28440
February 2021
JEL No. E21,E22,E24,E25,J31
ABSTRACT
The benefits of new technologies accrue not only to high-skilled labor but also to owners of
capital in the form of higher capital incomes. This increases inequality. To make this argument,
we develop a tractable theory that links technology to the personal income and wealth
distributions – and not just that of wages – and use it to study the distributional effects of
automation. We isolate a new theoretical mechanism: automation increases inequality via returns
to wealth. The flip side of such return movements is that automation is more likely to lead to
stagnant wages and therefore stagnant incomes at the bottom of the distribution. We use a multi-
asset model extension to confront differing empirical trends in returns to productive and safe
assets and show that the relevant return measures have increased over time. Automation accounts
for part of the observed trends in income and wealth inequality and macroeconomic aggregates.
Benjamin Moll Pascual Restrepo
London School of Economics Department of Economics
Houghton Street Boston University
London WC2A 2AE 270 Bay State Road
United Kingdom Boston, MA 02215
b.moll@lse.ac.uk and NBER
pascual@bu.edu
Lukasz Rachel
Bank of England
Threadneedle Street
London, EC2R 8AH
United Kingdom
lukasz.rachel@bankofengland.co.uk
An online appendix is available at: http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28440

Introduction
Over the past forty years, economic growth in many advanced economies has been unevenly
distributed. In the United States, while the aggregate economy has grown at roughly two
percent per year, income percentiles corresponding to the lower half of the distribution have
stagnated. At the same time, incomes at the 95th percentile have roughly doubled and top
1 percent incomes have roughly tripled.1
One potential driver of these trends that is often cited by pundits and policy makers
alike is technical change, and in particular the automation of tasks performed by labor. A
large literature in macro and labor economics has studied how technology and automation
affect the distribution of labor incomes.2 But not all income is labor income and capital is
an important income source, particularly at the top of the distribution where incomes have
increased the most. Existing theories therefore paint an incomplete picture of technology’s
implications for overall income inequality. This shortcoming is particularly acute when
it comes to automation, technical change that substitutes labor with capital, and which
therefore increases the importance of capital in the economy.
Wearguethatthebenefitsofnewtechnologies—andinparticularautomationtechnologies—
accruenotonlytohigh-skilledlaborbutalsotoownersofcapitalintheformofhighercapital
incomes. Thisincreasesinequality. Tomakethisargument,wedevelopatractableframework
that allows us to study the impact of technology on factor prices and the personal income
and wealth distributions—and not just that of wages—and use it to study the distributional
effects of automation.
Our framework provides a complete characterization of how technology and, more gen-
erally, changes in the economy’s production and market structure affect the personal distri-
bution of income, wages, and capital ownership, as well as macroeconomic aggregates.3 We
achieve this by assuming that households differ in their skills and household wealth accumu-
lation is subject to random dissipation shocks which leave them with zero assets and only
their labor income, thereby capturing the hazards of accumulating and maintaining a for-
tune. Dissipation shocks allow us to deviate in a tractable fashion from models that admit
a representative household (like variants of the neoclassical growth model) and introduce
two key features relative to such models that are crucial for understanding how automation
affects inequality and aggregates.4 First, our theory generates well-defined and tractable
steady-state distributions for wealth and income. Second, the long-run supply of capital
1See for example Census Bureau (2015) and Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2018).
2See for example Katz and Murphy (1992), Krusell et al. (2000) and Autor, Katz and Kearney (2006)
3Importantly, ours is a theory of the personal income distribution and not just of the factor income
distribution. The latter type of theory – for example “two class models” with capitalists and workers –
cannot speak to a number of empirical regularities in developed countries, for example that individuals at
the top of the labor income distribution typically also earn substantial capital incomes (and vice versa).
4Ournotionof“modelsthatadmitarepresentativehousehold”allowsforskillheterogeneityandincludes
models that assume there are different skill types but these are all members of the same representative
household, and models where Gorman aggregation holds (see Theorem 5.2 in Acemoglu, 2009).
1

is less than perfectly elastic and therefore determines the long-run effect of technology on
returns to wealth (prices) and the amount of capital used in production (quantities).
The framework underscores two key and novel channels through which technology affects
income inequality and contributes to the pattern of uneven growth described above. First,
automation increases wealth and capital income inequality by raising returns to wealth.
Second, relative to theories in which returns are unaffected, automation is more likely to lead
to stagnant wages and, therefore, stagnant incomes at the bottom of the income distribution.
The key to understanding both results is that the long-run capital supply in our model is
upward-sloping. Automation increases the demand for capital relative to labor and, because
supply is upward-sloping, this demand shift permanently increases returns to wealth. The
first part, that automation directly increases wealth and income inequality, then follows
because some households receive a higher return on their assets and grow their fortunes
more rapidly. The second part—that wages are more likely to stagnate—follows because
some of the productivity gains from automation do not accrue to workers but rather to
owners of capital in the form of a higher return to their wealth. Neither of these mechanisms
would be operational in textbook representative household models, in which the long-run
capital supply is perfectly elastic and therefore returns are unaffected by technology.
We first illustrate these mechanisms using a simple baseline model and later extend this
model in a number of directions. In the baseline model, capital is the only asset in the
economy and all households earn the same return on their wealth. We obtain two main
analytical results that illuminate how automation affects inequality.
First, the steady-state return exceeds the discount rate by a premium p×σ×α , where
net
p is the arrival rate of dissipation shocks, σ is the inverse of the intertemporal elasticity
of substitution, and α is the net capital share – an object that rises with automation.
net
Therefore, in contrast to textbook representative household models in which this return
equals the (fixed) discount rate, the return in our model increases with automation.
Second, the steady-state wealth accumulation process of individual households generates
an exact Pareto distribution for both effective wealth (the sum of financial and human
wealth) and income conditional on wages.5 In equilibrium, tail inequality – as measured
by the inverse of the Pareto shape parameter – simply equals the net capital share α ,
net
meaning that both top income and wealth inequality increase with automation.6 Intuitively,
the gap between the return to wealth and the discount rate determines the speed at which
individual households accumulate wealth in the absence of a dissipation shock, which in
turn determines the thickness of the wealth distribution. In equilibrium, this gap equals the
premiump×σ×α andthereforethenetcapitalshareα showsupinthetailindexofthese
net net
distributions. This result illustrates in a transparent fashion the new mechanism emphasized
above that automation contributes to income inequality by permanently increasing returns
5Because of dissipation shocks, there is churn at the individual level even though aggregate capital is
constant in steady state: households accumulate wealth over time but lose it with some probability.
6We also show that the scale parameter of these Pareto distributions is determined by wages which is
another channel through which automation affects income and wealth inequality.
2