NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SOCIAL AND GENETIC EFFECTS ON EDUCATIONAL PERFORMANCE IN EARLY
ADOLESCENCE
Martin A. Isungset
Dalton Conley
Henrik D. Zachrisson
Eivind Ystrøm
Alexandra Havdahl
Pål R. Njølstad
Torkild H. Lyngstad
Working Paper 28498
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28498
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2021
This research is part of the OPENFLUX project and the EQOP projects, which both received
funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020
research and innovation program (Grant agreements No. 818420 and No. 818425 respectively).
The Norwegian Mother, Father and Child Cohort Study is supported by the Norwegian Ministry
Cambridge, MA 02138 Services and the of Health and Care Services and the Ministry of Education and Research. We are grateful to all
the participating families in Norway who take part in this on-going cohort study. We thank
the Norwegian Institute of Public Health (NIPH) for generating high-quality genomic data.
This research is part of the HARVEST collaboration, supported by the Research Council of
Norway (#229624). We also thank the NORMENT Centre for providing genotype data,
funded by the Research Council of Norway (#223273), South East Norway Health Authority
and KG Jebsen Stiftelsen. We further thank the Center for Diabetes Research, the University of
Bergen for providing genotype data and performing quality control and imputation of the
data funded by the ERC AdG project SELECTionPREDISPOSED, Stiftelsen Kristian
Gerhard Jebsen, Trond Mohn Foundation, the Research Council of Norway, the Novo
Nordisk Foundation, the University of Bergen, and the Western Norway health Authorities
(Helse Vest) (to PRN). AH was supported by grants from the South-Eastern Norway Regional
Health Authority (#2018059 and #2020022) and the Research Council of Norway (#288083
and #274611). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Martin A. Isunget, Dalton Conley, Henrik D. Zachrisson, Eivind Ystrøm, Alexandra
Havdahl, Pål R. Njølstad, and Torkild H. Lyngstad. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Social and Genetic Effects on Educational Performance in Early Adolescence
Martin A. Isunget, Dalton Conley, Henrik D. Zachrisson, Eivind Ystrøm, Alexandra Havdahl,
Pål R. Njølstad, and Torkild H. Lyngstad
NBER Working Paper No. 28498
February 2021
JEL No. I24
ABSTRACT
Research into the intergenerational transmission of educational advantage has long been criticized
for not paying sufficient attention to genetics. This study is based on the Norwegian Mother,
Father and Child Cohort Study (MoBa) and administrative register data on 25000 genotyped
Norwegian children and their parents. We assess and disentangle the relative importance of
genetics and social background for children’s standardized academic test scores. Norway offers a
particularly interesting context for intergenerational transmission, as the welfare state and
educational system is designed to provide equal opportunity structures for children. The results
point to genetics only confounding the parent status-offspring achievement relationship to a small
degree, to ‘genetic nurture’ effects being small, and pro-vide no evidence of neither Scarr-Rowe
interactions in test scores nor parent-child genotype interactions. Even in a universal welfare state
with relatively low levels of inequality, there are two systems of ascription, one genetic and one
social, and these are largely independent of each other.
Martin A. Isunget Alexandra Havdahl
University of Oslo University of Oslo
Postboks 1096 Postboks 1094
Blindern Blindern
Bergen 0317, Norway Oslo 0317, Norway
m.a.isungset@sosgeo.uio.no alexandra.havdahl@psykologi.uio.no
Dalton Conley Pål R. Njølstad
Department of Sociology University of Bergen
Princeton University Postboks 7804
153 Wallace Hall Bergen 7020, Norway
Princeton, NJ 08544 Pal.Njolstad@uib.no
and NBER
dconley@princeton.edu Torkild H. Lyngstad
Department of Sociology and Human Geography
Henrik D. Zachrisson University of Oslo
University of Oslo Harriet Holters hus
Postboks 1140 Moltke Moesvei 31
Blindern Oslo 0851, Norway
Oslo 0318, Norway t.h.lyngstad@sosgeo.uio.no
h.d.zachrisson@isp.uio.no
Eivind Ystrøm
University of Oslo
Postboks 1094
Blindern
Oslo 0317, Norway
eivind.ystrom@psykologi.uio.no
Supplementary materials are available at
https://data.nber.org/data-appendix/w28498/norway_supplement.pdf

1
introduction
An abiding interest of social scientists is the extent to which successful parents
transmitsocialadvantagestotheirchildren(BlauandDuncan1967;Lareau2011).
Awell-establishedresearchliteraturehasshownthatsuchtransmissionofadvan-
tage takes place in industrialized societies despite the hypothesized waning im-
portance of ascription, and that the educational system is at the center of these
transmissionprocesses(BreenandJonsson2005).Researchershaveconsidereda
wide range of different factors and mechanisms possibly involved in generating
the relatively higher achievement and attainment of children of more educated
parents, such as family income for purchasing of educationally-relevant goods
(Teachman 1987), relative risk aversion (Van de Werfhorst and Hofstede 2007),
parentingstyles(RoksaandPotter2011),culturalcapital(Jæger2009,2011),and
schoolquality(DuncanandMurnane2014).
By and large, social and economic research has emphasized social explana-
tions as to how the effect of family background on educational outcomes emer-
ges. That the social influence of family background may be confounded by gen-
eticshasbeenknownforthebetterpartofthelastcentury(Burks1928;Eckland
1967; Marks 2013). Yet, most social scientists studying intergenerational trans-
mission have not availed themselves of genetically informed data and research
designs. The large literature from behavior genetics has shown that nearly eve-
ry individual-level outcome of interest is heritable to some degree (Freese 2008;
Poldermanetal.2015;Turkheimer2000).Socialscientists’relativelackofinterest
in genetics and its potential role as confounder, moderator or mediator of soci-
al effects may be due to lack of access to such data, a tradition for skepticism to
biological explanations in general, or more specific doubts about the validity of
geneticallyinformeddesignssuchastwinstudies.
Untilfairlyrecently,mostgeneticallyinformeddesignsavailabletosocialscien-
tists were twin designs or similar designs that predicated on indirectly inferring
geneticrelatednessfrompedigrees.Now,withtechnologicaladvancesingenetics
and a rapidly increasing availability of genetic data, some scholars have argued
thatweareenteringanewageof“sociogenomics”–thecombinationofgenetics
andsocialscience(ConleyandFletcher2017;Freese2018;MillsandTropf2020).
Atanyrate,socialscientistsarebecomingincreasinglyawareoftherolegenetics
mayplayinintergenerationaltransmissionprocesses.Asmall,butgrowingsoci-

2
al science literature using direct measurements of genetics to study educational
outcomes has emerged (see e.g. Conley et al. 2015; Belsky et al. 2016; Liu 2018).
These studies have exploited recent advances in molecular genetic methods and
measurementtoassesstheroleofgeneticconfoundingofparentalinfluenceson
educationalattainmentusingpolygenicscores,summarymeasuresofanindivi-
dual’s genetic dispositions for a trait. The results thus far have allowed genetics
a role in adult educational attainment, but not found support for strong genetic
confounding of the relationship between parents’ education (or SES) and child-
ren’s own education in adulthood. Mechanisms that are suggested to produce
intergenerational correlations in educational outcomes should, however, chiefly
operateinlifestagesearlierthanadulthood,asadmissionstohighereducationat
leastpartlyaredecidedonthebasisofearlierachievement.Theremayalsobeinte-
ractionsbetweenachild’sgeneticdispositionsandtheparent’ssocialandgenetic
characteristics. One type is the the Scarr-Rowe interaction where lower SES fa-
milyenvironmentsledtosuppressionofheritability(Scarr-Salapatek1971;Turk-
heimer et al. 2003), another is the possibility of genotype-genotype similarities,
where relationships between children and offspring with above-average genetic
similarityareparticularlyconduciveoflearning.Understandingtherolegenetic
dispositionsofparentsandchildreninhowhowsucheffectscomeaboutisapri-
meinteresttoresearchersinthestratification,family,andgeneticsfieldsalike.
Most contributions to the existing literature in the genetics–social stratifi-
cation field analyze data from the United States or the United Kingdom. These
societies have relatively high levels of inequality and provision of education is
less standardized. In contrast, we analyze data from Norway, a fairly egalitarian
context with a universal school system with very few students attending priva-
te schools, relatively low variations in school quality (Hermansen, Borgen, and
Mastekaasa 2020), and a strong social welfare system (Esping-Andersen 1999).
Allthesefactorscouldinprinciplereducetheimportanceofparents’socialcha-
racteristicsontestscoresbecausechildrenareprovidedwithmoreequalopport-
unities, and those opportunities are to a lesser extent than in most other socie-
tiesafunctionoftheirfamilybackground.Norwayrepresentsaninterestingcon-
trastonthepoliticaleconomydimensiontotheUSandUKstudies,whereboth
inequalities in the school system and the intensity of social stratification are ge-
nerallyhigher.
The present study offers several contributions to the literature. We estimate
geneticandsocialintergenerationaleffectsoneducationalachievementusingthe
oneofthelargestgenetic-triodatasetswithmeasuredgenotypesofbothparents
and offspring available, the Norwegian Mother, Father and Child Cohort Study