NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
OPTIMAL BAILOUTS IN BANKING AND SOVEREIGN CRISES
Sewon Hur
César Sosa-Padilla
Zeynep Yom
Working Paper 28412
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28412
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2021, Revised April 2026
We thank Mark Aguiar, Manuel Amador, Yan Bai, Javier Bianchi, Markus Brunnermeier, Pablo
D'Erasmo, Alok Johri, Illenin Kondo, Leonardo Martinez, Enrique Mendoza, Yun Pei, Fabrizio
Perri, Linda Tesar, Jing Zhang, two anonymous referees, and participants at numerous conference
and seminar presentations for comments and insightful discussions. This research was supported in
part through a grant from Villanova University and computational resources provided by the Big-
Tex High Performance Computing Group at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Dallas, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. First draft:
February 2020.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Sewon Hur, César Sosa-Padilla, and Zeynep Yom. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Optimal Bailouts in Banking and Sovereign Crises
Sewon Hur, César Sosa-Padilla, and Zeynep Yom
NBER Working Paper No. 28412
January 2021, Revised April 2026
JEL No. E32, F34
ABSTRACT
We study optimal bailout policies amidst banking and sovereign crises. Our model features
sovereign borrowing with limited commitment, where domestic banks hold government debt and
extend credit to the private sector. Bank capital shocks can trigger banking crises, prompting the
government to consider extending guarantees over bank assets. This poses a trade-off: Larger
bailouts relax financial frictions and increase output, but increase fiscal needs and default risk
(creating a ‘diabolic loop’). Optimal bailouts exhibit clear properties. The fraction of banking
losses the bailouts cover is (i) decreasing in government debt; (ii) increasing in aggregate
productivity; and (iii) increasing in the severity of banking crises. Even though bailouts mitigate
the adverse effects of banking crises, the economy is ex ante better off without bailouts: Having
access to bailouts lowers the cost of defaults, which in turn increases the default frequency, and
reduces the levels of debt, output, and consumption.
Sewon Hur Zeynep Yom
Yonsei University Villanova University
Economics Department zeynep.yom@villanova.edu
sewonhur@gmail.com
César Sosa-Padilla
University of Notre Dame
Department of Economics
and NBER
csosapad@nd.edu

1 Introduction
Recent European debt crises highlighted the ‘diabolic loop’ between sovereign risk and bank
risk. On the one hand, the Irish bailout of 2008 illustrated how bailouts and asset guarantees
can shift financial risk to the government (Acharya et al., 2014). On the other hand, the
Greek debt crisis of 2012 showed how sovereign risk can weaken banks’ balance sheets due
to overexposure to government debt (Sosa-Padilla, 2018). In the presence of this diabolic
loop, how much—if at all—should the government intervene to ‘save’ the domestic banking
sector during banking crises?
To answer this question, we build a quantitative model that features a rich interaction
between sovereign and banking risk. To mitigate the adverse effects of banking crises, which
reduce credit to the private sector and thereby decrease output, the government may find
it optimal to bail out banks. Bailouts come with a trade-off, boosting liquidity and output
during banking crises while increasing sovereign debt and default risk. Sovereign defaults
weaken banks’ balance sheets, completing the ‘diabolic loop.’ In this environment, we find it
optimal—from an ex ante perspective—to ban bailouts. Absent bailouts, the diabolic loop
is weakened, and this consideration dominates the ex post benefits of bailing banks out.
Wemodelbailoutsascontingentguaranteesoverbankcapital. Thisisguidedbyempirical
evidence from the recent European sovereign debt crisis. In Section 2, we document that the
issuance of sovereign guarantees is the most prevalent form of intervention during banking
crises. Among European countries, the average share of government guarantees relative to
GDP is three times larger than the average share of direct capital transfers during banking
crises—a relationship that does not hold during normal times.
Every period, the economy observes the realization of a productivity shock and a bank
capital shock, which represents the fraction of bank capital that could become lost if a
banking crisis materialized. In response, the government chooses the amount of potential
capital losses to guarantee. These guarantees (bailouts) are financed with a mix of new
borrowing and distortionary taxation. The government lacks commitment to repay, and if
it should default, it temporarily loses access to new borrowing and cannot extend bailouts.
We calibrate our model using data from European countries facing sovereign risk. Our
model matches salient moments in the data, both targeted and untargeted. We show that
the occurrence of a banking crisis increases the default probability (from 0.5 to 0.7 percent
annually), resulting in sovereign spreads that are higher (from 0.7 to 0.9 percent) and more
volatile (from 0.6 to 1.0 percent). From an ex post perspective, the government finds it
optimal to issue bailouts (i.e. contingent guarantees) that are on average 1.7 percent of
1

GDP during banking crises.
We further validate the model by comparing its dynamics around banking crises with
the data. We find that banking crises are associated with sharp output contractions and
sovereign yield spikes. Furthermore, governments that experience a banking crisis with high
debtlevelsfacedeeperandlongerrecessionarydynamicsandhigherspreads. Thesedynamics
are consistent with the data.
Using the calibrated model, we study the ex post optimal properties of bailouts. Other
things equal, the fraction of banking losses that the bailouts would cover: (i) increases with
the severity of the banking crisis, because the impact of bank capital shocks is nonlinear—
small shocks negligibly affect lending to the private sector, whereas large shocks can generate
a severe private credit crunch absent government intervention; (ii) decreases relative to the
level of government debt, since a more indebted government has less fiscal space to prop
up banking sector assets; and (iii) increases with aggregate productivity, since the better
the economy’s overall state, the more valuable credit is and the cheaper it is to borrow to
provide the guarantees.
Our model has implications for the design of institutions that govern bailouts. Is it
optimal from an ex ante perspective to allow governments to bail out the banking sector,
knowing that this may lead to higher default risk? We find that the costs of bailouts (higher
sovereign risk) outweigh the benefits (ability to increase liquidity during banking crises).
Even though the welfare gains of maintaining access to bailouts are state-contingent, we find
that for the empirically relevant cases (i.e., economies with moderate to high initial debt
levels), the country is better off banning bailouts altogether. This is because governments
without the ability to issue bailouts face better borrowing opportunities ex ante.
Whydoesrulingoutbailoutsimprovebondprices? Theanswerisinthedefaultcosts: An
economy without bailouts endogenously features larger default costs, which in turn allows it
to have higher levels of debt, output, and consumption than an economy with bailouts, on
average. The endogenous default costs in our model are given by reduced liquidity (because
banks’ holdings of government debt become non-performing), which leads to reduced out-
put. This reduced liquidity continues once the government regains access to credit markets
(because it does so with zero debt). However, the severity of this reduced liquidity depends
on whether the government has access to bailouts: If bailouts are available, the government
can use them to prop up liquidity and increase output immediately after re-entering from a
default. This is why access to bailouts lowers the costs of default, reduces government debt
capacity and average consumption, and decreases welfare.
We show that our main findings are robust to a broad set of modeling choices and
2