NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW THE NEW FED MUNICIPAL BOND FACILITY CAPPED
MUNI-TREASURY YIELD SPREADS IN THE COVID-19 RECESSION
Michael D. Bordo
John V. Duca
Working Paper 28437
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28437
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2021
The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas or the Federal Reserve System. We thank Amy Chapman, Jai
Cunningham, Owen Humpage, Joe Tracy, Meredith Walker, Michael Weiss, Barrie Wigmore,
Mark Wynne, and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas for comments,
input, and suggestions. Any remaining errors are those of the authors. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Michael D. Bordo and John V. Duca. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

How the New Fed Municipal Bond Facility Capped Muni-Treasury Yield Spreads in the Covid-19
Recession
Michael D. Bordo and John V. Duca
NBER Working Paper No. 28437
February 2021
JEL No. E40,E50,G21
ABSTRACT
For over two centuries, the municipal bond market has been a source of systemic risk, which
returned early in the Covid-19 downturn when borrowing from securities markets became costly
for many private and public entities, and some found it difficult to borrow at all. Indeed, just
before the Fed announced its unprecedented intervention into the municipal (muni) bond market,
spreads of muni over Treasury yields rose in line with the unemployment rate and appeared
headed to levels not seen since the Great Depression, when real municipal gross investment
plunged 35 percent below 1929 levels. To prevent a repeat, the Fed created the Municipal
Liquidity Facility (MLF) to purchase newly issued, (near) investment grade state and local
government bonds at normal ratings-based interest rate spreads over Treasury bonds plus a fee of
100 basis points, later reduced to 50 basis points. Despite a modest take-up, the MLF has
effectively capped muni spreads at near normal levels plus the Fed fee and limited the extent to
which interest rate spreads could have amplified the impact of the Covid pandemic. To establish
the MLF the Fed needed Treasury indemnification against default losses. There are concerns about
whether the creation of the MLF could undermine the efficiency of the bond market if the facility
lasts too long and could induce moral hazard among borrowers. How the MLF will be unwound
will affect these downside aspects and help answer the question whether the program’s benefits
exceed its costs.
Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu
John V. Duca
Department of Economics
Oberlin College
Rice Hall
10 N.Professor St.
Oberlin, OH 44074
and Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas
jduca@oberlin.edu

In the early weeks of the Covid-19 pandemic, U.S. state and local governments
encountered difficulty in issuing bonds, as reflected in increased spreads between yields on Baa-
rated municipal and 10-year Treasury bonds (henceforth, the “muni spread,” shown in Figure 1).
Markets became concerned about pandemic damage to the real economy (which can be proxied
by the unemployment rate), impairing state budgets and raising financial risk premiums. Through
the first week in April 2020, these spreads initially rose in line with the weekly, insured
unemployment rate drawn from the initial claims for unemployment report (adjusted to be
consistent with the more commonly used monthly unemployment report). Based on the strong
positive correlation between the muni spread and the weekly unemployment rate, it appeared that
spreads would have continued rising in step with the unemployment rate absent Fed intervention.
This occurred as state and local governments needed to borrow. The governments faced
large retail sales tax revenue losses arising from Covid shutdowns and slower brick and mortar
retail sales, coupled with likely decreases in income and property tax revenues and higher
pandemic-related medical and relief spending.1 If state and local governments could not borrow,
they could have been forced into more dramatic spending cuts and layoffs than occurred.2 Stress
in the muni market goes back to the nineteenth century long before the Federal government became
the dominant branch of government. Indeed, when bond market stresses—reflected in a widening
of the muni-Treasury spread—occurred during the Great Depression, state and local governments
slashed their investment spending and trimmed consumption spending (Figure 2).3 As discussed
in Appendix A, one lesson from the Great Depression is that distress in the municipal bond market
1 Clemens and Veuger (2020) estimate that the pandemic will reduce state revenues by an average of 11.5 percent,
translating into about ½ percentage point of GDP. Chernick, Copeland, and Reschovsky (2020) estimate that 2020
revenue losses for 150 largest cities would range from 5.5 in a less severe scenario to 9 percent in a more severe one.
2 Haughwout, Hyman, and Lieber (2020) note that state and local governments accounted for 8.5 percent of GDP in
2019, which was higher than the 3.8 percent of GDP from final purchases of the federal government.
3 Figure 2 plots the yield spread between Aaa-rated muni and long-term Treasury bonds, whereas this study models
the muni spread based off the average Baa-rated muni bond, whose yield series was not available before 1971.
1

Percent Percent
Post CFMA UpshiftSpread
20 18
18
16
16
14
14
12
12 InsuredUnemployment
Rate (right axis)
10 10
8 8
Fed
6 Announces
Muni-TR spread Muni Facility 6
4 (left axis) (MLF)
4
2
2
0
-2 0
Figure 1: Spread between Baa-rated Municipal and 10 Year Treasury Bonds Yields Rises
with the Unemployment Rate Until the Fed Announced its Municipal Liquidity Facility
(NBER recessions are shaded. Sources: Moody’s, Federal Reserve, and authors’ calculations)
percent, spread percent, growth rate
6 20
Baa-Treasury
Yield Spread
(left axis)
5 10
4 0
State& Local Gov't.
Real Consumption
Spending (right axis)
3 -10
2 -20
State& Local Gov't.
1 -30
Real Gross
Investment Spending
(right axis)
0 -40
1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935
Figure 2: In the Great Depression, State & Local Governments Spending Cuts Were
Mainly in Gross Investment After Default Spreads Widened
(Sources: BEA, Moody’s, Federal Reserve, and authors’ calculations)
2