NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHY DID BANK STOCKS CRASH DURING COVID-19?
Viral V. Acharya
Robert F. Engle III
Maximilian Jager
Sascha Steffen
Working Paper 28559
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28559
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2021, Revised September 2023
We thank Jennie Bai, Tobias Berg, Allen Berger, Christa Bouwman, Gabriel Chodorow-Reich,
Olivier Darmouni, Darrell Duffie, Ruediger Fahlenbrach, Anna Kovner, Kevin Raghet, Rafael
Repullo, Phil Strahan, Daniel Streitz, René Stulz, Anjan Thakor, Josef Zechner and participants at
the 2020 Federal Reserve Stress Testing Conference and seminar participants at the Annual
Columbia SIPA/BPI Bank Regulation Research Conference, Banco de Portugal, Bank of
England, SFS Cavalcade 2022, CAF, EFA 2021, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, NYU Stern
Finance, RIDGE Workshop on Financial Stability, University of Southern Denmark, University
of Durham, Villanova Webinars in Financial Intermediation, the Volatility and Risk Institute,
World Bank, WU Vienna, for comments and suggestions and Sophie-Dorothee Rothermund and
Christian Schmidt for excellent research assistance. Robert Engle would like to thank NSF
2018923, Norges Bank project “Financial Approach to Climate Risk” and Interamerican
Development Bank Contract #C- RG-T3555-P001 for research support to the Volatility and Risk
Institute of NYU Stern. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Viral V. Acharya, Robert F. Engle III, Maximilian Jager, and Sascha Steffen. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Why Did Bank Stocks Crash During COVID-19?
Viral V. Acharya, Robert F. Engle III, Maximilian Jager, and Sascha Steffen
NBER Working Paper No. 28559
March 2021, Revised September 2023
JEL No. G01,G21
ABSTRACT
A two-sided "credit-line channel" – relating to drawdowns and repayments – explains the severe
drop and partial subsequent recovery in bank stock prices during the COVID-19 pandemic. Banks
with greater exposure to undrawn credit lines saw larger stock price declines but performed better
before the pandemic and after the policy interventions. Despite deposit inflows, high drawdowns
led to reduced bank lending, suggestive of capital encumbrance upon drawdowns. Repayments of
credit lines unencumbered capital which explains the stock price recovery starting Q2 2020. Bank
provision of credit lines resembles writing deep out-of-the-money put options on aggregate risk,
and we propose how to incorporate this feature into bank capital stress tests.
Viral V. Acharya Maximilian Jager
Stern School of Business Frankfurt School of Finance & Management
New York University Adickesallee 32-34
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-65 60322 Frankfurt am Main
New York, NY 10012 Germany
and CEPR m.jager@fs.de
and also NBER
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu Sascha Steffen
Frankfurt School of Finance & Management
Robert F. Engle III Adickesallee 32-34
Department of Finance, Stern School of Business 60322 Frankfurt
New York University, Salomon Center Germany
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-160 s.steffen@fs.de
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
rengle@stern.nyu.edu

1. Introduction
Since the global financial crisis (GFC) of 2008--09, banks have greatly expanded their liquidity
provision through credit lines to the United States (U.S.) non-financial sector. Panel A of Figure
1 shows that bank credit lines for the U.S. publicly listed firms increased from 0.7% of GDP in
2009 to 5.7% of GDP in 2019 leading to a substantial build-up of drawdown risk on bank
balance-sheets. This risk materialized in March 2020 amid the outbreak of the COVID-19
pandemic and subsequent government-imposed lockdowns. Firms’ cash flows dropped, in
some cases by as much as 100%, while operating and financial leverage remained sticky,
causing bond markets to freeze. As a consequence, U.S. firms with pre-arranged credit lines
from banks drew down their undrawn facilities with a far greater intensity than in past
recessions (Panel B of Figure 1), specifically the prospective fallen angels or BBB-rated and
junk-rated firms (Panel C of Figure 1).
[Figure 1 about here]
Recent data show that firms benefited from having such access to pre-arranged credit lines
during the pandemic when capital market funding froze (e.g., Acharya and Steffen, 2020a;
Chodorow-Reich et al., 2022; Greenwald et al., 2023).1 On the flip side, however, banks faced
unprecedented aggregate risk in the form of a correlated demand for credit-line drawdowns; an
important but not well-appreciated consequence is that banks’ share prices crashed and
persistently underperformed those of non-financial firms as well as non-bank financial firms
(Panel D of Figure 1).
In this paper, we investigate causes and consequences of this crash of bank stocks during
the COVID-19 pandemic and highlight a central role played by banks’ credit-line business.
1 Within three weeks, public firms drew down more than USD 300bn, with drawdowns particularly concentrated
among riskier BBB-rated and non-investment-grade firms. For instance, Ford Motor Company drew down its
credit lines in March 2020, withdrawing USD 15.4bn. With USD 20bn in cash, credit lines significantly impacted
its liquidity. Originally, Ford paid 15bps for undrawn credits and 125bps for drawn credits. However, after a
downgrade to non-investment grade, these fees increased substantially by 67% and 40% respectively. Li et al.
(2020) show – using FDIC’s Call Report data which includes drawdowns by private firms – that total drawdowns
amounted to more than USD 500bn.
1

Specifically, we ask what are the possible transmission channels through which the drawdowns
affected bank stock returns and ultimately banks’ intermediation functions for the real
economy? What was the role of credit line repayments for the recovery of bank stock prices in
the second quarter of 2020 following the stark decline in 2020Q1? Which aspects of these
channels during the COVID-19 episode are different compared to prior stress episodes such as
the GFC? Lastly, we ask how bank regulation can incorporate the relevant channels of
transmission from bank credit lines to financial fragility to safeguard against the attendant risks
in future?
At the core of our analysis is a new and comprehensive measure of the balance-sheet
liquidity risk of banks defined as undrawn commitments plus wholesale finance minus cash or
cash equivalents (all relative to assets). Our null hypothesis is that investors price liquidity risk
according to their expectations regarding the possible credit line drawdowns during crises.
However, these expectations might naturally deviate from realized drawdowns in times of
stress. At the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, capital markets froze increasing rollover
risk for all, but particularly for riskier, firms. Firms responded by drawing down credit lines
with significantly higher intensity and magnitude compared to the global financial crisis (GFC)
2007-2008. For example, the average drawdown rate in Q1 2020 was 37% and in Q4 2008 29%.
The cross-section of stock-price declines of banks as a function of their ex-ante exposure to
drawdown risk (during COVID) can therefore be intrepreted as reflecting the difference
between expected and realized drawdown risks.
Consistent with this hypothesis, we find that our measure of the liquidity risk of banks
helps understand the decline of bank stock prices, especially during the first phase of the
pandemic from January 1, 2020 until March 3, 2020, i.e., before decisive monetary and fiscal
support measures were introduced.2 A one-standard-deviation increase in liquidity risk
2 See in particular Kovner and Martin (2020) on the range of special facilities set up by the Federal Reserve (Fed)
to provide liquidity to a range of fixed-income markets.
2