NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CEO STRESS, AGING, AND DEATH
Mark Borgschulte
Marius Guenzel
Canyao Liu
Ulrike Malmendier
Working Paper 28550
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28550
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2021
We thank Martijn Cremers, Allen Ferrell, Kevin J. Murphy, and Emmanuel Saez for sharing their
data. We thank Grigory Antipov, Moez Baccouche, Sid-Ahmed Berrani, and Jean-Luc Dugelay
for sharing their age estimation software. We also thank Tania Babina, Xavier Gabaix, Kevin J.
Murphy, Christopher Parsons, as well as seminar and conference participants at the 2018 briq
Workshop on Skills, Preferences, and Educational Inequality, University of Bonn; the 2018
Berkeley-Stanford Joint Behavioral Economics Mini-Conference; the 2019 NBER Organizational
Economics Fall Conference; the 2019 Finance, Organizations and Markets (FOM) Conference;
the 2020 American Finance Association Annual Meeting; Berkeley Haas; Yale SOM; the
University of Illinois at Chicago; the University of Minnesota; and¸˛the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Mark Borgschulte, Marius Guenzel, Canyao Liu, and Ulrike Malmendier. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

CEO Stress, Aging, and Death
Mark Borgschulte, Marius Guenzel, Canyao Liu, and Ulrike Malmendier
NBER Working Paper No. 28550
March 2021
JEL No. G01,G3,I10,J01
ABSTRACT
We estimate the long-term effects of experiencing high levels of job demands on the mortality
and aging of CEOs. The estimation exploits variation in takeover protection and industry crises.
First, using hand-collected data on the dates of birth and death for 1,605 CEOs of large, publicly-
listed U.S. firms, we estimate the resulting changes in mortality. The hazard estimates indicate
that CEOs’ lifespan increases by two years when insulated from market discipline via anti-
takeover laws, and decreases by 1.5 years in response to an industry-wide downturn. Second, we
apply neural-network based machine-learning techniques to assess visible signs of aging in
pictures of CEOs. We estimate that exposure to a distress shock during the Great Recession
increases CEOs’ apparent age by one year over the next decade. Our findings imply significant
health costs of managerial stress, also relative to known health risks.
Mark Borgschulte Canyao Liu
UIUC Economics Yale School of Management
214 David Kinley Hall 165 Whitney Avenue
1407 W Gregory Dr New Haven, CT 06511
Urbana, IL 61801 canyao.liu@yale.edu
markborg@illinois.edu
Ulrike Malmendier
Marius Guenzel Department of Economics
The Wharton School 549 Evans Hall # 3880 University
University of Pennsylvania of California, Berkeley Berkeley,
Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall CA 94720-3880
3620 Locust Walk and NBER
Philadelphia, PA 19104 ulrike@econ.berkeley.edu
mguenzel@wharton.upenn.edu

1. INTRODUCTION
Jobdemands andwork-relatedstressare increasinglyrecognizedtobe keydeterminantsof
populationhealthandwell-being.1 AsKaplanandSchulhofer-Wohl(2018)document,the
amountofstressexperiencedatworkhassteadilygrownsinceatleastthe1950s,evenas
shiftsinthecompositionofoccupationshavereducedjob-relatedphysicalpainandtiredness
fortheaverageworker. Healthresearchersarguethatstress,andthedamageitcauses,isthe
mechanismunderlyingmanyhealthdisparities(Cutleretal. 2006,PickettandWilkinson
2015,Putermanetal. 2016,Snyder-Mackleretal. 2020).
Yet,there islittlequasi-experimental evidence thatlinks jobdemandsand stressorsat
work directly to health outcomes. While stress arising from social hierarchies, especially
intheworkplace,hasbeenproposedasanexplanationforthestrongrelationshipbetween
socioeconomic status and life expectancy, causal evidence on, for example, the effect of
promotionsis limitedand reachesmixed conclusions(Boyce andOswald 2012,Anderson
andMarmot2012,JohnstonandLee2013).
Akeyreasonforthelackofcausalevidenceisthatitischallengingtodisentanglethe
health effects of job stressors from those of income losses and financial hardship (Smith
1999). Inthispaper,weovercometheseidentificationhurdlesbyfocusingonCEOsoflarge
publiclytradedcompanies. CEOs inthissamplearewealthyandunlikelytobe affectedby
financialhardshipseveniftheylosttheirjob. Thus,thesettingoftopcorporatejobsallows
ustoisolatedirecteffectsonhealthfromindirecteffectsduetofinancialconstraints.
TheCEOpositionisasuitablecandidatetoanalyzework-relatedstressasCEOswork
longhours,makehigh-stakesdecisionssuchaslayoffsorplantclosures,andfaceuncertainty
in times of crisis (Bandiera et al. 2020, Porter and Nohria 2018). They are closely moni-
tored and criticized when their firm is underperforming, and media frequently reports on
“overworked[and]overstressed”CEOs.2 Needlesstosay,lower-rankedandnon-corporate
positionmightentailsignificantlyhigherlevelsofstress. (Wecanthinkof“life-or-death”
jobs, such as emergency room doctors and airline pilots, but also of minimum-wage and
temporary jobs withrigid schedules, such as deliverydrivers.) Our analysis doesnot speak
1 See,e.g.,Marmot(2005)andGansterandRosen(2013). Avastliteratureinpsychology,medicine,and
biologyassociateschronicstresswithchangesinhormonelevels,brainfunction,cardiovascularhealth,DNA,
anddeleterioushealthoutcomes(McEwen1998,Epeletal. 2004,Sapolsky2005).
2 See CNN’s Route to the Top segment (cnn.com/2010/business/03/12/ceo.health.warning/index).
Cf.alsoHarvardBusinessReviewon“HowTopCEOsCopewithConstantStress”(hbr.org/2011/04/how-
top-ceos-cope-with-constan) and expert psychologists offering “Strategies for CEOs to reduce stress”
(vistage.com/research-center/personal-development/20200402-ceo-stress).
1

tothequestionofwhichtypeofoccupationscomewiththehighestpersonal cost. Instead,
it exploits plausibly exogenous variation in job demands within the CEO group to help
establishandquantifytheinfluenceofjobdemandsonhealthoutcomes.
That said, the CEO context is of interest in its own right for at least two reasons.
First,CEOsbeartheultimateresponsibilityforthesuccessofthefirmandsatisfactionof
employees. Giventheiroverarchingimportancewithintheirfirms,itmattershowincentives
and performance affect CEOs personally. Second, the health implications of CEOs’ job
demands affect their ability to stay on the job and, if anticipated, their willingness to
select into the CEO job. Our analysis might thus speak the prevalence of certain CEO
characteristicsandpossiblefeedbackeffects: AreaspiringCEOs(over-)confidentabouttheir
health? ArewomenvastlyunderrepresentedintheC-suitenotonlybecauseofdiscrimination
butalsobecausethey(correctly)anticipatethehealthcostsofassumingsuchpositions?
We assemble new measures of health outcomes to investigate the link between CEO
stressandhealth. Bystress,wedonotmeanabiomedicalanalysisinthesenseofmeasuring
adrenalineorcortisollevels.3 Instead,buildingonthepopularnotionofstress,weexploit
periodsofindustry-widedistressandvariationintheintensityofCEOmonitoringtocapture
variation in work-related stress. We estimate the effect on CEOs’ life expectancy and
agingpatterns. OuranalysisusesnewdataonthelifespanofCEOsandanewdatasetof
photographsofCEOs’faces,combinedwithrecentvisualmachinelearning(ML)techniques
toestimatetheeffectsonvisiblesignsofaging. TheMLtechniquesareapromisingavenue
for the assessment of work-induced strains in broader samples and, to the best of our
knowledge,wearethefirsttointroducethemintotheeconomicliterature. Ourapplication
illustratestheirpotentialforthestudyofhealthandagingtocomplementstandardmeasures
basedonmortality,hospitaladmissions,orsurveyresponses.
Ouranalysishasthreemainparts. Inthefirstpart,werelatevariationintheintensityof
CEOmonitoringduetocorporate-governancelegislationtoCEOmortality. Inthesecond
part,weexploitvariationinjobdemandsduetoindustry-leveldistressshocks,andalsostudy
theeffectonCEOmortality. Inthethirdpart,wecontinuetoexploitindustry-leveldistress
shocks,herefromthe GreatRecession,andrelatethemtovisiblesignsof accelerated aging,
identifiedbyneural-networkbasedMLestimations.
Inthefirstpartoftheanalysis,thesourceofidentifyingvariationisthestaggeredpassage
3 Stressarisesfromexperiencingdemandswithoutsufficientresourcestocope(LazarusandFolkman
1984). Biomedically, changes in hormones and other bodily processes due to stress can cause long-term
damageandaccelerateaging(Brondoloetal. 2017,Franceschietal. 2018,Kennedyetal. 2014).
2