NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BIG PUSH IN DISTORTED ECONOMIES
Francisco J. Buera
Hugo Hopenhayn
Yongseok Shin
Nicholas Trachter
Working Paper 28561
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28561
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2021
We thank Andy Atkeson, Ariel Burstein, Ezra Oberfield, Michael Peters, and participants at
several seminars and conferences for comments and suggestions. We thank Eric LaRose, Reiko
Laski and James Lee for outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
or the Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Francisco J. Buera, Hugo Hopenhayn, Yongseok Shin, and Nicholas Trachter. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Big Push in Distorted Economies
Francisco J. Buera, Hugo Hopenhayn, Yongseok Shin, and Nicholas Trachter
NBER Working Paper No. 28561
March 2021
JEL No. E23,L16,O14,O25
ABSTRACT
Why don't poor countries adopt more productive technologies? Is there a role for policies that
coordinate technology adoption? To answer these questions, we develop a quantitative model that
features complementarity in firms' technology adoption decisions: The gains from adoption are
larger when more firms adopt. When this complementarity is strong, multiple equilibria and
hence coordination failures are possible. More important, even without equilibrium multiplicity,
the model elements responsible for the complementarity can substantially amplify the effect of
distortions and policies. In what we call the Big Push region, the impact of idiosyncratic
distortions is over three times larger than in models without such complementarity. This
amplification enables our model to nearly fully account for the income gap between India and the
US without coordination failures playing a role.
Francisco J. Buera Yongseok Shin
Department of Economics Department of Economics
Washington University in St. Louis Washington University in St. Louis
One Brookings Drive One Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130 St. Louis, MO 63130
and NBER and NBER
fjbuera@wustl.edu yshin@wustl.edu
Hugo Hopenhayn Nicholas Trachter
UCLA Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
Department of Economics 701 E Byrd Street
Los Angeles, CA 90095 Richmond, VA 23219
and NBER trachter@gmail.com
hopen@econ.ucla.edu

1 Introduction
Many countries have industrialized and grown rapidly by adopting modern technologies.
Why don’t poor countries adopt more productive technologies? What policies can effectively
promote technology adoption? The standard view emphasizes the role of distortions or
barriers to technology adoption (e.g., Parente and Prescott, 1999; Hsieh and Klenow,
2014; Cole et al., 2016; Bento and Restuccia, 2017). According to this view, eliminating
the distortions is the obvious policy response. An alternative view emphasizes the role
of complementarity and coordination failures: Firms in poor countries use unproductive
technologies because other firms use unproductive technologies, even though the gains
from adoption increase with the number of adopters so that they will all benefit from a
coordinated decision to adopt. According to this view, policies can have large aggregate
effects by coordinating firms’ decisions. This view has a long tradition in policy circles (e.g.,
Rosenstein-Rodan, 1943; Hirschman, 1958) and is supported by more recent theoretical
works (e.g., Murphy et al., 1989; Matsuyama, 1995; Ciccone, 2002). However, there
have been few quantitative analyses, if any, of the coordination failure view of economic
development. Our paper bridges these two paradigms in a quantitative framework.
This paper makes two contributions. First, our theoretical analysis goes beyond
determining the existence of multiple equilibria to show that, even if they do not exist,
complementarity in technology adoption can amplify the effect of distortions and policies.
Second, our quantitative analysis based on aggregate and micro-level data examines the
empirical relevance of multiple equilibria and coordination failures and, more important,
shows the economic significance of the amplification channel in the absence of multiple
equilibria. In what we call the Big Push region, the impact of idiosyncratic distortions is
over three times larger than in models without such complementarity. This amplification in
our model helps account for the vast income gap between poor and rich countries without
coordination failures playing a role.
In our model, firms are ex-ante heterogeneous, produce differentiated goods, are subject
to idiosyncratic distortions, and are connected to one another through input-output linkages.
Firms first choose whether or not to pay a fixed cost and enter the market. Active firms can
operate a traditional technology or, upon paying adoption costs, a more productive modern
technology.
We first theoretically analyze the conditions under which the complementarity in firms’
technology adoption decisions can amplify the effect of policies and distortions and even
supportmultipleequilibria. Whenmorefirmsadopttheproductivetechnology, theaggregate
price falls, which has the direct effect of reducing the price and the profit of the marginal
2

adopter. However, the lower aggregate price also means a larger demand for the marginal
firm’s output, a lower cost of the intermediate input for production, and less expensive
goods portion of the adoption costs, raising the marginal adopter’s gains. If the latter forces
dominate the direct competition effect, we have complementarity.
More heterogeneity in firm productivity implies that the density of the firms near the
adoption margin is smaller, implying a weaker feedback effect from the marginal firm’s
adoption to the aggregate economy and hence weaker complementarity.1 On the other
hand, idiosyncratic distortions correlated with firm productivity (i.e., more productive firms
being distorted more) compress the effective heterogeneity across firms, which strengthens
complementarity.
For simple versions of our model, we derive the conditions for amplification and
equilibrium multiplicity. What contributes to amplification are, consistent with the
discussions above: a small elasticity of substitution across differentiated goods, adoption
costs in goods rather than labor, a high intermediate input intensity of the modern
technology, small heterogeneity in firm productivity, and a close correlation between
idiosyncratic distortions and firm productivity. Multiplicity can be thought of as an extreme
form of amplification, and indeed the conditions for the existence of multiple equilibria are
stronger than those for amplification, a result corroborated by our richer quantitative model
that exhibits potent amplification even without multiple equilibria.
Next, we use aggregate and micro-level data from the US and India and conduct a
quantitative analysis. The US is an undistorted benchmark, and India is a large developing
country for which relevant micro-level data is available. The full version of our model has
several layers, but it is tractable enough that most of the parameters can be identified
transparently from the data. In spite of the potential presence of multiplicity, under the
assumption that the data comes from an equilibrium where adopters and non-adopters
coexist, the values of the key model parameters are obtained in closed form from the
establishment size distribution.
The quantitative analysis has three main results. First, although our calibration targets
the moments from the establishment size distribution but not the income level of either
country, the model generates nearly as large an income gap between the US and India—a
factor of seven—as in the data, due to the higher adoption costs and degrees of idiosyncratic
distortions in India, whose impact is amplified by the complementarity. Second, the US is in
the unique equilibrium region but India is in the multiplicity region. However, India is found
to be in the good (or high adoption/output) equilibrium, and hence coordination failures do
1This may explain why multiplicity results in this literature invariably come from models with
homogeneous firms. In contrast, firm heterogeneity is an essential element of our quantitative strategy.
3