NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A WELFARE ANALYSIS OF COMPETITIVE INSURANCE MARKETS WITH VERTICAL
DIFFERENTIATION AND ADVERSE SELECTION
W.Bentley MacLeod
Working Paper 28565
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28565
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2021
This paper evolved from a set of comments on Geruso et al. (2019) for the NBER Health
Conference, Lugano, Switzerland, June 2019. I would l like to thank Jon Skinner for inviting me
to participate and to Janet Currie, Kate Ho, Tim Layton, Michael Geruso, Mark Shepard, Ashley
Swanson and the Princeton IO/Health seminar for helpful comments and discussions. Thomas
Braun, Utkarsh Kumar, Suneil Parimoo and Roman Rivera provided helpful research assistance
on this project. There are no sources of external funding for this research. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by W. Bentley MacLeod. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

A Welfare Analysis of Competitive Insurance Markets with Vertical Differentiation and Adverse
Selection
W. Bentley MacLeod
NBER Working Paper No. 28565
March 2021
JEL No. D01,D21,D41,I11,I13,L15
ABSTRACT
A feature of many insurance markets is that they combine vertical differentiation (all consumers
prefer high to low-coverage policies) and adverse selection (high cost customers prefer high-
coverage plans). Building on Novshek and Sonnenschein (1978) and Azevedo and Gottlieb
(2017), this paper characterizes the competitive equilibria in a vertically differentiated market
characterized by adverse selection. This provides a simple, dynamic model of the market, along
with their welfare consequences over time in response to policy changes. The model makes
predictions consistent with recent evidence on the ACA exchange in the US (Frean et al. (2017)).
Moreover, it provides a complete characterization of the health insurance “death spiral”. The
death spiral leads to an inefficient outcome, but does not lead to a complete breakdown of the
market. Rather, it predicts a large number of plans, with coverage that falls with an individual’s
willingness to pay. It is shown that introducing a minimum coverage standard combined with an
insurance mandate cannot restore efficiency. The optimal system depends on both the valuation
of public funds and the social value of insurance. Depending on these parameters, a number of
different types of systems may be optimal, including a single payer system with mandatory
participation for all, such as the Canadian system, a mixed private-public system, as one sees in
many countries, or a pure, free market system.
W. Bentley MacLeod
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, MC 3308
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
wbmacleod@wbmacleod.net
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28565

1. Introduction
Healthcare markets in the United States are one of the most complex and intensely studied mar-
kets in economics. They are characterized by a number of market failures, particularly adverse
selection and moral hazard, that in turn make it difficult to assess appropriate policy interventions.
The recent literature has focused on how existing policy instruments can bring about marginal
improvements in performance. This leaves open the question of what would an optimal market
structure look like? This paper addresses this question using a stylized dynamic model of a com-
petitive market with adverse selection. The dynamics not only provide a method to compute the
equilibria, they also sign the comparative static effect of policy changes. Using this framework one
can compare a variety of market structures, including a free-entry equilibrium that captures the
well known “death spiral” (Cutler and Reber (1998)), a minimum coverage standard, a tax man-
date, a public system, and a mixed market/public system. A feature of the welfare analysis is that
the perceived costs of public funds is allowed to vary. Depending on one’s attitudes toward public
expenditures, the optimal system varies between a pure single payer public supplier system and a
mixed market/public system.
Geruso and Layton (2017) observe that there are two distinct approaches to the study of markets
with adverse selection, depending upon whether contracts are fixed or endogenous. The fixed
contracts approach typically assumes that there are one or two choices available to consumers. The
benefit of this approach is that it can easily be confronted with data. Einav et al. (2010) use the
single contract case to study the welfare impact of inefficient price policies on welfare. Handel et al.
(2015) use Handel (2013) to extend Einav et al. (2010) to the case of two contracts, with prices
determined by the Riley (1979) equilibrium concept. They find that adverse selection may lead to
fullunravelingofthemarket, asCutlerandReber(1998)foundfortheHarvardhealthplan. Geruso
et al. (2019) also study a two contract model to estimate the differential effects of regulation on
the extensive margin (decision to buy insurance) and the intensive margin (the choice between a
high-coverage and low-coverage plan).
The endogenous contracts approach builds upon the work of Akerlof (1970) and Rothschild and
Stiglitz (1976). Their results are largely negative — in many cases adverse selection leads to the
non-existenceofanequilibriumandmarketfailure. AzevedoandGottlieb(2017)showthatonemay
solvethisproblemwithaperfectlycompetitivemodelwithfreeentryofproductsthatallowsforsome
“behavioral types”. The competitive equilibrium is given by the limit of a behavioral equilibrium as
the number of behavioral types approaches zero. They prove the existence of an equilibrium and
show that they are able to calibrate their model to estimate the effect of an insurance mandate.
However, they did not do an extensive welfare analysis of alternative market structures.1
The next section outlines a welfare analysis of a two consumer type model with endogenous
entry of products with different coverage levels. This illustrates how allowing product entry can
ensure the existence of an equilibrium at which all types are served. The results of this section are
later contrasted with the results with a continuum of consumer types to illustrate the role that the
distribution of consumer characteristics plays in determining the appropriate policy intervention. A
1Azevedo and Gottlieb (2017) suggest that this is a question for future research.
2

dynamic formulation of the equilibrium is introduced. This approach solves the existence problem
because existence depends upon the solution to a differential equation, that are known to exist for a
wide set of conditions.2 Empirically, such an approach also generates predictions on how the system
adjusts in real time to shocks.
Sections 2-5 use the revelation principle from mechanism design theory to build a dynamic com-
petitive model with adverse selection (Myerson (1979)). A difficulty with the original Rothschild
andStiglitz(1976)modelisthatitisnon-linear, makingitverydifficulttogeneralize. Inthispaper,
a linear model with vertically differentiated produces is introduced, along the lines of Gabszewicz
and Thisse (1979). This allows one focus upon the effects that adverse selection has on market
equilibria, and also allows for a closed form solution to the model. Finally, it is shown, via the
revelation principle, that one can move between price and quantity representations of the market
allocation.
Section 6 uses these ideas to illustrate the two-margin issue that has been explored in the health
economics literature (Geruso et al. (2019)). Section 7 extends the model to allow for the free entry
of products with different qualities. It is shown that an equilibrium exists that is characterized by
a large number of different quality products, with low valuation consumers choosing low quality
products. At this equilibrium all consumer types are served, but the outcome is Pareto inefficient.
Sections 8 and 9 study interventions that might enhance efficiency. Section 8 looks at the effect
of minimum quality standards and an insurance mandate (a penalty for not purchasing insurance),
a widely used solution to the adverse selection problem. It is shown to be dominated by the free
entry equilibria. Section 9 allows for government subsidies. The size of these subsidies depends
upon the dead-weight cost of raising government revenue. When the costs of revenue collection are
low, the optimal system is a pure public system. An unregulated free-entry system is optimal when
the cost of government funds is very high.
These solutions are derived based upon measured consumer surplus, and hence ignores negative
externalities that arise from having low levels of health care for low income individuals. Section
10 solves for the optimal subsidy levels when one incorporates this negative externality into the
objective function. It is shown that with pure vertical differentiation, it is optimal to have a single
high quality plan that is available to all consumers. The quality of the plan is a function of the cost
of public funds, and the social value that is associated with the provision of health care to all. The
final section discusses shortcomings and possible extensions of this model.
2. A Two Type Example
The main analysis in the paper assumes that there are a continuum of consumer types that leads
to smooth, downward sloping demand curves, and is standard in this literature. The innovation is
to allow for a continuum of quality levels. Before going to the full analysis, this section outlines
the implications of a continuum of coverage levels in a simple, two consumer type framework. In
addition to illustrating how the market works with free entry of products, it highlights the role that
2See MacLeod (1985) for a discussion of how the introduction of dynamics and adjustment costs provide a method
for equilibrium selection. On existence see Hirsch and Smale (1974).
3