NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FLATTENING THE CURVE:
PANDEMIC-INDUCED REVALUATION OF URBAN REAL ESTATE
Arpit Gupta
Vrinda Mittal
Jonas Peeters
Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Working Paper 28675
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28675
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2021
The authors would like to thank Zillow, VenPath, Realtor, Pulsenomics, and Safegraph for providing
data. The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2021 by Arpit Gupta, Vrinda Mittal, Jonas Peeters, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Flattening the Curve: Pandemic-Induced Revaluation of Urban Real Estate
Arpit Gupta, Vrinda Mittal, Jonas Peeters, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
NBER Working Paper No. 28675
April 2021
JEL No. G12,R12,R23,R51
ABSTRACT
We show that the COVID-19 pandemic brought house price and rent declines in city centers, and
price and rent increases away from the center, thereby flattening the bid-rent curve in most U.S.
metropolitan areas. Across MSAs, the flattening of the bid-rent curve is larger when working
from home is more prevalent, housing markets are more regulated, and supply is less elastic.
Housing markets predict that urban rent growth will exceed suburban rent growth for the
foreseeable future.
Arpit Gupta Jonas Peeters
Stern School of Business New York University
44 West 4th Street 318 6th Street
New York, NY 10012 Apt 7
agupta3@stern.nyu.edu Brooklyn, NY 11215
jonas.jp.peeters@gmail.com
Vrinda Mittal
Columbia Business School Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall Columbia University
New York City, NY 10027 Graduate school of Business
VMittal22@gsb.columbia.edu Uris Hall, office 809
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
svnieuwe@gsb.columbia.edu

I Introduction
Cities have historically been a major source of growth, development, and knowledge
spillovers (Glaeser, 2011). In developing and developed countries alike, rising urban-
ization rates (United Nations, 2019) have led to increased demand for real estate in city
centers and contributed to problems of housing affordability (Favilukis, Mabille, and
VanNieuwerburgh,2019),especiallyinsuperstarcities(Gyourko,Mayer,andSinai,2013).
Theinelasticityofhousingsupplyinurbancentersmeansthatalargefractionofeconomic
growth in the last few decades has accrued to property owners, rather than improving
the disposable income of local workers (Hornbeck and Moretti, 2018; Hsieh and Moretti,
2019).
Thislong-standingpatternreversedin2020astheCOVID-19pandemicledmanyres-
idents to flee city centers in search of safer ground away from urban density. This urban
flight was greatly facilitated by the ability, indeed the necessity, to work from home. Of-
fice use in downtown areas was still below 25% in most large office markets at the end
of 2020, with New York City at around 10%, and San Francisco lower still, turning many
temporary suburbanites into permanent ones.1 We document that this migration had a
large impact on the demand for suburban relative to urban real estate, and differential
priceimpactindifferentlocationswithinmetropolitanareas.
Animportantquestioniswhetherrealestatemarketswillreturntotheirpre-pandemic
state or be changed forever. There is much uncertainty circling around this question. Ex-
isting survey evidence indicates an increased willingness by employers to let employees
work from home, and increasing desire to do so from employees, but without much ev-
idence on lost productivity.2 In this paper, we argue that by comparing the changes in
1AccordingtoJLL,U.S.officeoccupancydeclinedbyarecord84millionsquarefeetin2020,propelling
thevacancyrateto17.1%atyear-end. Inaddition,thesubleasemarketgrewby50%in2020,anincreaseof
47.6millionsquarefeet(JonesLangLaSalle,2020).
2AsurveyofcompanyleadersbyGartnerfoundthat80%plantoallowemployeestoworkremotelyat
least part of the time after the pandemic, and 47% will allow employees to work from home full-time. A
PwCsurveyof669CEOsshowsthat78%agreethatremotecollaborationisheretostayforthelong-term.
In a recent FlexJobs survey, 96% of respondents desire some form of remote work; 65% of respondents
1

house prices—which are forward looking—versus rents in city centers and the suburbs,
wecanglanceanearlyanswertothisdifficultquestion.
We begin by documenting how urban agglomeration trends have shifted in the wake
of the COVID-19 pandemic. The central object of interest is the bid-rent function, or the
land price gradient, which relates house prices and rents to the distance from the city
center. Prices and rents in the city center tend to be higher than in the suburbs, with
the premium reflecting the scarcity of land available for development (including due to
regulatorybarriers),closerproximitytoworkplaces,urbanamenities,andagglomeration
effects. While bid-rent functions are typically downward sloping, we document striking
changes in the slope of this relationship since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic.
House prices far from the city center have risen faster than house prices in the center
between December 2019 and December 2020. Likewise, rents in the suburbs rose much
fasterthanrentsinthecenteroverthisperiod. Thenegativeslopeofthebid-rentfunction
hasbecomelessnegative. Inotherwords,thepandemichasflattenedthebid-rentcurve.
Figure 1 illustrates this changing slope. Each observation is the slope of the bid-rent
function for a particular month. Rents are on the left, house prices are on the right. The
bid-rent slope values are calculated by pooling all ZIP codes for the largest 30 metropoli-
tanareasintheU.S.,andobtainedmodelestimatesoftherelationshipbetweenlogprices
or log rents and log(1+distance) in a pooled regression with CBSA fixed effects and ZIP-
level control variables. Distance from city hall is expressed in kilometers. The elasticity
of price to distance changes from -0.127 pre-pandemic to -0.115 in December 2020. For
rents, the change in slope is much larger: from -0.04 to -0.004. The change in slope for
price means that house prices 50kms from the city center grew by 5.7 percentage points
morethanhousepricesinthecenter. Theslopechangeforrentscorrespondstosuburban
report wanting to be full-time remote employees post-pandemic, and 31% want a hybrid remote work
environment. Bloom(2020)findsthat42%oftheU.S.workforcewasworkingremotelyasofMay2020,and
Barrero,Bloom,andDavis(2020)estimatesthatthenumberofremoteworkingdayswillincreasefour-fold
in future years to 22%. Harrington and Emanuel (2020) finds positive treatment effects of working from
home,consistentwithBloom,Liang,Roberts,andYing(2015).
2