NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
COLLATERAL HETEROGENEITY AND MONETARY POLICY TRANSMISSION:
EVIDENCE FROM LOANS TO SMES AND LARGE FIRMS
Cecilia R. Caglio
R. Matthew Darst
Ṣebnem Kalemli-Özcan
Working Paper 28685
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28685
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2021, Revised February 2024
This is an extensively revised version of our 2019 paper with a different title. We would like to
thank Thomas Drechsel, Mark Gertler, Yueran Ma, Pablo Ottonello, and Thomas Winberry for
extensive comments. We also would like to thanks participants at NBER SI-EFG, NBER ME,
Berkeley, Brown, Columbia, Duke, MIT, NYU, AEA, ECB/CEPR for useful suggestions. We
thank Jacob Faber, Jacob Fahringer, Alvaro Silva, Ben Schmiedt, and Adam Tucker for their
invaluable research assistance. Kalemli-Özcan thanks NSF Grant 2018623 for support. The views
in this paper are solely those of the authors and do not reflect the views of the Federal Reserve
Board of Governors, anyone in the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Cecilia R. Caglio, R. Matthew Darst, and Ṣebnem Kalemli-Özcan. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Collateral Heterogeneity and Monetary Policy Transmission: Evidence from Loans to SMEs
and Large Firms
Cecilia R. Caglio, R. Matthew Darst, and Ṣebnem Kalemli-Özcan
NBER Working Paper No. 28685
April 2021, Revised February 2024
JEL No. E32,E44,E52,G20,O16
ABSTRACT
We study the role of heterogeneous financial frictions in investment and credit channels of
monetary policy, using firm-bank matched administrative data for the U.S. We find that collateral
heterogeneity in loan contracts explains the relaxing/tightening of financial constraints in
response to monetary shocks. Small and risky firms rely on their earnings and intangibles as
collateral, which means their leverage is backed by procyclical earnings. Monetary expansions
lower the marginal cost of funds for these firms and expand their borrowing capacity. Monetary
policy can be highly effective in economies dominated by small firms pledging their earnings and
intangibles as collateral, even though these firms have high default risk.
Cecilia R. Caglio Ṣebnem Kalemli-Özcan
Federal Reserve Board Department of Economics
cecilia.r.caglio@frb.gov University of Maryland
Tydings Hall 4118D
R.Matthew Darst College Park, MD 20742-7211
Federal Reserve Board and CEPR
1801 K St. NW Suite 6522 and also NBER
Washington, DC 20006 kalemli@econ.umd.edu
matt.darst@frb.gov

1 Introduction
The U.S. Federal Reserve over the past two years aggressively tightened monetary policy to
combat inflation, after a decade of easy policy. Yet, there is a lot of uncertainty surrounding
how the Fed’s policy tightening will impact aggregate credit growth, investment, and em-
ployment. Part of this uncertainty stems from the lack of systematic evidence on the role
that heterogeneity in financial frictions plays in the bank lending and investment channels of
monetary policy. This paper aims to fill this gap.
Using firm-bank matched administrative data for 2012Q3–2019Q4, we evaluate how mon-
etary policy shocks heterogeneously relax or tighten firms’ borrowing constraints, conditional
on bank and firm time-varying unobservables. We do this by zooming in on the exact form
of the financial friction in loan contracts that is important for the investment and credit
channels of monetary policy transmission. Performing an aggregation exercise, we show
that 60 percent of the effect of monetary shocks on credit growth during our time frame is
explained by the heterogenous financial frictions we identify.
We start by asking which firms are the most responsive to monetary policy changes, and
investigate how the heterogeneous responses relate to monetary policy’s role in relaxing or
tightening the financial frictions. Ottonello and Winberry (2020) show that the answer to this
questionistheoreticallyambiguous. Ontheonehand, highdefaultriskfirmssufferfromhigher
cost of funds. Thus, high default risk firms’ investment and borrowing may be less responsive
tomonetarypolicychanges. Ontheotherhand, thefinancialacceleratormechanismdeveloped
in the work of Bernanke and Gertler (1989), Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1996) argues
that monetary expansions (contractions) may flatten (steepen) the marginal cost of funds
curve by increasing (decreasing) cash flows and/or improving (deteriorating) collateral/asset
values. As a result, high risk firms may respond more to monetary shocks since these shocks
change their cost of funds relatively more than low risk firms.
We show that the sensitivity of marginal cost of funds to monetary policy shocks depends
on the type of collateral pledged by firms. High default risk firms respond more to monetary
shocks if their borrowing is secured by their earnings. Such collateral heterogeneity matters
in the aggregate because these most responsive high default risk firms in our data are small
firms, which in the U.S. comprise 99.6 percent of all firms.1 Our results imply that the effect
of monetary policy is larger in an economy full of small, high default risk firms.2 During
1See U.S. Census Bureau, Center for Economic Studies, Business Dynamics Statistics.
2Thus, our results are consistent with Ottonello and Winberry (2020) as they show that monetary policy
transmissionismorepowerfulinamodelwithfirmdefaultriskcomparedtoamodelwithoutanydefaultrisk.
1

contractions, the earnings of small and risky firms are lower and collateral values are lower.
In response, these firms borrow and invest less. By contrast, monetary expansions increase
earnings and raise collateral values, lowering the cost of funds. In response, firms increase
borrowing and investment. This channel we uncover is similar to the standard collateral
channel where procyclical asset values, such as real estate, change the borrowing capacity of
debt secured by such fixed assets. However, our channel operates via earnings-based collateral,
which is extensively pledged by small and risky firms.
Our paper makes three novel contributions. First, we utilize a representative U.S. firm-
level data set to analyze the heterogeneous responses of firms with and without financial
constraints to monetary policy shocks. We use two different financial constraint measures:
firm-level leverage as a measure of default risk, and loan-level collateral as a measure of access
to finance through its effect on cost of funds. We show that highly leveraged firms are more
responsive than low leveraged firms to monetary policy shocks. Moreover, firms who pledge
collateral are also more responsive to monetary shocks.
Second, we show that the relative responsiveness of financially constrained firms (high
leverage firms and/or firms who post collateral) to monetary shocks is driven by private
firms—a group that is largely composed of small-and-medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). By
contrast, highly leveraged publicly listed firms respond less to monetary policy shocks. In
addition, we show that public firms who pledge collateral also respond less. Our results on
public firms not only confirm the results in Ottonello and Winberry (2020)3 with two different
measures of financial frictions (firm- and loan-level), but they also demonstrate that both
leverage and collateral cannot capture changes in financial frictions in response to policy
shocks in the cross-section of public and private firms. Various studies document that firm
size is a better measure of financial frictions in the cross-section of firms (e.g. Gopinath,
Kalemli-Ozcan, Karabarbounis, and Villegas-Sanchez (2017), Gertler and Gilchrist (1994)),
but to measure the relaxation and/or tightening of financial frictions in response to policy
shocks, we need both the quantity and the price of credit, e.g. micro-level interest rates.
Thus, our third contribution is to measure the changes in financial frictions as a response
to monetary shocks, by investigating changes in marginal cost of funds through loan-level
spreads. We document that private firms’ and SMEs’ borrowing costs fall (rise) in response to
monetary expansions (contractions) on loans backed by earnings and intangibles as collateral.
On the other hand, large publicly listed firms that post collateral, regardless of what type of
collateral they pledge, have higher borrowing costs even under monetary expansions. We
3These authors showed that high leverage firms respond less to monetary shocks in Compustat dataset
that is composed of publicly listed firms.
2