NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
OPTIMAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE
Eduardo Dávila
Itay Goldstein
Working Paper 28676
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28676
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2021
We would like to thank Anat Admati, Alberto Bisin, Peter Diamond, Emmanuel Farhi,
Xavier Freixas, Douglas Gale, Gary Gorton, Kinda Hachem, Todd Keister, Deborah
Lucas, Gregor Matvos, Cecilia Parlatore, Manju Puri, Juan Carlos Quintero, Adriano
Rampini, Johannes Stroebel, Javier Suarez, Alexander Ufier, Tanju Yorulmazer and our
discussants Hengjie Ai, Ugo Albertazzi, Sebastian Di Tella, Huberto Ennis, Maryam
Farboodi, Martin Oehmke, Giorgia Piacentino, Rafael Repullo, Suresh Sundaresan, and
Francesca Zucchi for very helpful comments. We would like to especially thank Doug
Diamond for detailed feedback and for discussing the paper twice. We would also like to
thank seminar participants at the Financial Intermediation Barcelona GSE Summer Forum,
NYU Financial Economics Workshop, NYU Stern/NY Fed Financial Intermediation
Conference, Stanford GSB Financial Regulation Conference, University of Virginia,
Minnesota Corporate Finance Conference, FIRS Lisbon Conference, NBER SI Corporate
Finance, AFA Chicago Meetings, International Association of Deposit Insurers (IADI)
Conference, Bank of Italy/Bocconi Financial Stability and Regulation Conference, Maryland/Fed
Board Short Term Funding Markets Conference, Wisconsin Finance Junior Conference, Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), Diamond-Dybvig 36th Anniversary Conference at
Washington University in St. Louis, and AEA San Diego Meetings. Luke Min, Ryungha Oh, and
Flint O'Neil provided excellent research assistance. Itay Goldstein has been retained by a law
firm as an expert on a case involving a liquidity crisis and government intervention in a
European bank. This case has not influenced the research in this paper, and the research in this
paper has not influenced the case. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Eduardo Dávila and Itay Goldstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Optimal Deposit Insurance
Eduardo Dávila and Itay Goldstein
NBER Working Paper No. 28676
April 2021
JEL No. G01,G21,G28
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the optimal determination of deposit insurance when bank runs are possible.
We show that the welfare impact of changes in the level of deposit insurance coverage can be
generally expressed in terms of a small number of sufficient statistics, which include the level of
losses in specific scenarios and the probability of bank failure. We characterize the wedges that
determine the optimal ex-ante regulation, which map to asset- and liability-side regulation. We
demonstrate how to employ our framework in an application to the most recent change in
coverage, which took place in 2008.
Eduardo Dávila
Yale University
Department of Economics
28 Hillhouse Avenue, Room 304
New Haven, CT 06520-8268
and NBER
eduardo.davila@yale.edu
Itay Goldstein
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
itayg@wharton.upenn.edu
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28676

1 Introduction
Bank failures have been a recurrent phenomenon in the United States and many other countries
throughout modern history. A sharp change in the United States banking system occurred with the
introductionoffederaldepositinsurancein1934,whichdramaticallyreducedthenumberofbankfailures.
For reference, more than 13,000 banks failed between 1921 and 1933, of which 4,000 banks failed in 1933
alone. In contrast, a total of 4,057 banks failed in the United States between 1934 and 2014.1 In many
other countries, the design of deposit insurance schemes is still in progress and is the subject of ongoing
debates; see, e.g., Demirgüç-Kunt, Kane and Laeven (2014) for a recent account of deposit insurance
systems around the world. As of today, deposit insurance is a crucial pillar of financial regulation in
most economies and represents the most salient explicit government guarantee to the financial sector.
Despite its success in reducing bank failures, deposit insurance entails costs when it has to be paid
andaffectstheex-antebehaviorofmarketparticipants—theseresponsestothepolicyareoftenreferred
to as moral hazard. Hence, in practice, deposit insurance only guarantees a fixed level of deposits. As
shown in Figure 1, this level of coverage has changed over time in the US. Starting from the original
$2,500 in 1934, the nominal insured limit per account in the US has been $250,000 since October 2008.
A natural question to ask is how the level of this guarantee should be determined to maximize social
welfare. In particular, what is the optimal level of deposit insurance coverage? Are $250,000, the current
valueintheUS,and€100,000,thecurrentvalueinmostEuropeancountries,theoptimallevelsofdeposit
insurancecoveragefortheseeconomies? Howshouldemergingeconomiessettheirinsuredlimits? Which
variables ought to be measured to optimally determine the level of deposit insurance coverage in a given
economy?
This paper provides an analytical characterization, written as a function of observable or potentially
recoverable variables, which directly addresses these questions. Although existing research has been
effectiveatunderstandingseveralofthetheoreticaltradeoffsassociatedwithdepositinsurance, ageneral
frameworkthatincorporatesthemostrelevanttradeoffsandthatcanbeusedtoprovideexplicitguidance
to policymakers when facing these questions has been missing. With this paper, we provide a first step
in that direction.
We initially derive the main results of the paper in a version of the canonical model of bank runs of
Diamond and Dybvig (1983), augmented to consider depositors who hold different levels of deposits. In
our framework, banks offer a predetermined interest rate on a deposit contract to share risks between
early and late depositors in an environment with aggregate uncertainty about the profitability of banks’
investments. Due to the demandable nature of the deposit contract, depending on the aggregate state,
both fundamental-based and panic-based bank failures are possible. Mimicking actual deposit insurance
arrangements, weassumethatdepositsareguaranteedbythegovernmentuptoadepositinsurancelimit
of δ dollars and then focus on the implications for social welfare of varying the level of coverage δ. We
alsoassumethatanyfundingshortfallassociatedwithdepositinsurancepaymentsentailsadistortionary
1These values come from the FDIC Historical Statistics on Banking. Weighting bank failures by the level of banks’
assetsorcorrectingbythetotalnumberofbanksstillgeneratesasignificantdiscontinuityonthelevelofbankfailuresafter
the introduction of deposit insurance.
2

$300,000
$275,000
$250,000
$225,000
$200,000
$175,000
$150,000
$125,000
$100,000
$75,000
$50,000
$25,000
$0
1935 1940 1945 1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
Note: Figure 1 shows the evolution of the level of deposit insurance coverage between 1934 and 2018 in nominal and
real terms. Nominal values are from the FDIC. Real values are reported in 2012 dollars using a consumption expenditure
deflator.
Figure 1: Evolution of Deposit Insurance Coverage Limit
fiscal cost.
After characterizing how changes in the level of coverage δ affect equilibrium outcomes, in particular
depositors’ withdrawal choices and bank failure probabilities, we focus on the welfare implications of
varying δ. We initially characterize the marginal welfare change of varying the level of deposit insurance
coverage, which provides an exact test for whether it is desirable to increase or decrease the level of
coverage. In order to implement this test in practice, a policymaker would need detailed information on
individualdepositbalancesandconsumptionacrossdifferentscenarios. Whilegatheringthisinformation
is conceivable, the informational requirements on the policymaker would be large. To make our results
more applicable, we provide an approximate characterization of the marginal welfare change that can be
expressed in terms of a few sufficient statistics that can be constructed relying exclusively on bank-level
aggregates. The approximation of the marginal welfare change of varying the level of deposit insurance
coverage takes the form
dW =−Sensitivity of bank failure probability to an increase in δ×Consumption gain of preventing marginal failure
dδ
−Probability of bank failure×Expected marginal social cost of intervention.
(1)
Equation (1) embeds the fundamental tradeoffs regarding the optimal determination of deposit
insurance. On the one hand, when a marginal change in δ substantially reduces the likelihood of bank
failure at the same time that there are significant gains from avoiding a marginal bank failure, it is
optimal to increase the level of coverage. On the other hand, when bank failures are frequent and when
thesocialcostofex-postinterventionassociatedwiththem—forinstance, whenitisverycostlytoraise
resources through distortionary taxation — is substantial, it is optimal to decrease the level of coverage.
Our formulation in terms of sufficient statistics is appealing for three reasons. First, conceptually, we
3