NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DISCOUNT RATE RISK IN PRIVATE EQUITY:
EVIDENCE FROM SECONDARY MARKET TRANSACTIONS
Brian Boyer
Taylor D. Nadauld
Keith P. Vorkink
Michael S. Weisbach
Working Paper 28691
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28691
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2021
We are grateful to the partners at an anonymous intermediary for providing us with data. We
thank Ulf Axelson, Carter Davis, Pierre Collin-Dufresne, Brigham Frandsen, Jason Gull, Niklas
Hüther, Jonathan Jensen, Steve Kaplan, Arthur Korteweg, Josh Lerner, Stefan Nagel, Ludovic
Phalippou, Joseph Romano, Amit Seru, Tyler Shumway, Per Strömberg, Ayako Yasuda, Jeffrey
Wooldridge, two anonymous referees, and seminar and conference participants at Brigham
Young University, the University of Chicago Housing and Corporate Lending Conference,
Ensign Peak Advisors, the Finance Research Association, Lausanne, London Business School,
Miami, the NBER Corporate Finance Meetings, Ohio State, Singapore Management University,
Texas Tech, and the Wasatch Finance Conference, for useful comments and suggestions. We also
thank Greg Adams and Hyeik Kim for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Brian Boyer, Taylor D. Nadauld, Keith P. Vorkink, and Michael S. Weisbach. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Discount Rate Risk in Private Equity: Evidence from Secondary Market Transactions
Brian Boyer, Taylor D. Nadauld, Keith P. Vorkink, and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 28691
April 2021
JEL No. G11,G23,G24
ABSTRACT
Standard measures of private equity performance based on cash flows overlook discount rate risk.
An index constructed from prices paid in secondary market transactions indicates that private
equity discount rates vary considerably. While the standard alpha for our index is zero, measures
of performance based on cash flow data for funds in our index are large and positive. To illustrate
that results are not driven by idiosyncrasies of private equity secondary markets, we obtain
similar results using cash flows and returns of synthetic funds that invest in small cap stocks.
Ignoring variation in PE discount rates can lead to a misallocation of capital.
Brian Boyer Keith P. Vorkink
Marriott School of Management Finance Department
Brigham Young University Marriott School
Provo, UT 84602 Brigham Young University
bhb@byu.edu Office 634 TNRB
Provo, UT 84602-3113
Taylor D. Nadauld keith_vorkink@byu.edu
Department of Finance
Brigham Young University Michael S. Weisbach
Provo, Utah 84602 Department of Finance
taylor.nadauld@byu.edu Fisher College of Business
Ohio State University
2100 Neil Ave.
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
weisbach.2@osu.edu

1. Introduction
In recent decades, private equity (PE) has become an important asset class for investors.
A recent survey of institutional investors finds that 88% are invested in private equity, with nearly
a third having an allocation greater than 10% (Whyte (2017)). In the early 2000s, a secondary
market developed in which limited partners (LPs) can transact their stakes in private equity funds.1
Since data on secondary market prices are not publicly-available, investors and academics have
been limited to using data on cash-flows to evaluate the risk and return of private equity. As much
as half of the variation for public equity returns, however, is driven by news about discount rates
(Campbell (1991). Further, all variation in dividend price ratios for public equity corresponds to
variation in discount rates, not variation in expected cash flows (Campbell and Shiller (1989),
Campbell (2011)).
These findings naturally lead to four important questions to consider. First, under what
conditions might performance measures based on cash flows overlook risk that arises from
variation in discount rates? After all, asset prices are not arbitrary and should ultimately be
determined by the properties of the underlying cash flows. Second, to what extent do discount
rates for private equity vary? The marginal PE investor may very well differ from the marginal
investor in other asset classes in terms of preferences, sophistication, sentiment, and risk aversion
that are all important determinants for discount rates. Moreover, the organizational structure of
private equity may generate unique risk dynamics. Third, how does variation in PE discount rates
impact standard performance measures such as CAPM alpha and beta, relative to other measures
of performance based on cash flows? And fourth, what kind of investor cares about variation in
PE discount rates?
To answer the first question, we explore the relationship between the GPME of Korteweg
and Nagel (2016) and the standard one-period Euler condition that depends on market prices. The
GPME is unique among PE performance evaluation measures in that it is well grounded in asset
pricing theory. We highlight that it represents a first order condition for optimal asset allocation
and is equivalent to the net present value (NPV) of cash flows over the life of the investment. We
illustrate that the implicit beta in the discount factor for GPME, however, is a cash flow yield beta
1 While secondary market liquidity was limited in the nascent years of the secondary market, liquidity has grown
substantially over the past decade.
1

with the growth in investor marginal utility. In contrast, the standard Euler equation represents the
one-period NPV using market prices, in which the implicit beta is a total return beta. We further
show that if discount rates vary over time, then GPME generally reflects the unconditional one-
period NPV plus a term representing PE discount rate risk: the covariance of PE discount rates
with the growth in investor marginal utility. Such risk impacts the one-period NPV, but not the
GPME.
We then turn to the second and third questions mentioned above to investigate variation
in private equity discount rates and determine the impact of this form of discount rate risk on
performance evaluation measures. To do so we use data obtained from a large intermediary in this
market to evaluate the risk and return of private equity funds in a similar manner to the way in
which investors regularly use public equity markets to understand the risk and return of publicly
traded companies. Using these data, we construct market-based indices for buyout funds. By
comparing the performance of our indices with that of standard NAV-based indices and an index
based on listed private equity companies, we obtain new insights about the performance of private
equity. In contrast to much of the existing literature, our transaction-based indices suggest that
buyout funds do not outperform public markets on a risk-adjusted basis.2
A difficulty in constructing an index using our secondary market data for private equity is
accounting for the facts that no fund trades in every period, and many funds do not trade at all. In
the subsample of funds that could be matched with cash flow data from the Preqin database, there
are 839 buyout transactions for 287 unique funds from 2006 through 2018, implying that the
average fund trades 2.9 times in our sample, conditional trading at all. Moreover, the funds that do
trade are not randomly chosen, and sample selection could potentially affect inferences from
empirical analysis if not controlled for econometrically.
We explicitly account for the possibility that specific types of funds may trade more often
than others by using the approach of Heckman (1979). On a large sample of buyout funds, we
estimate the parameters of an econometric model using observed transaction prices. We use this
model each period to create an inferred price for every fund in our population every period,
including those that do not transact. We then construct our transactions-based index from these
2 For example, current evidence suggests buyout funds outperform on a risk-adjusted basis (Higson and Stucke (2012),
Harris, Jenkinson, and Kaplan (2014), and Robinson and Sensoy (2016))..
2