NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE DISTRIBUTION OF INVESTOR BELIEFS, STOCK OWNERSHIP AND STOCK
RETURNS
Gikas Hardouvelis
Georgios Karalas
Dimitri Vayanos
Working Paper 28697
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28697
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2021
We thank George Leledakis, Dong Lou, Anna Pavlova, Luca Pezzo, Christopher Polk, Spyros Skouras
and Michela Verardo, as well as seminar participants at Amherst, Athens, Bristol, Carlos III, Cyprus
and Piraeus for helpful comments. Financial support from Comunidad de Madrid (Programa Excelencia
para el Profesorado Universitario, convenio con Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, V Plan Regional
de Investigacion Cientifica e Innovacion Tecnologica) and the LSE Paul Woolley Centre is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2021 by Gikas Hardouvelis, Georgios Karalas, and Dimitri Vayanos. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Distribution of Investor Beliefs, Stock Ownership and Stock Returns
Gikas Hardouvelis, Georgios Karalas, and Dimitri Vayanos
NBER Working Paper No. 28697
April 2021
JEL No. G10,G11,G12,G23
ABSTRACT
We study theoretically and empirically the relationship between investor beliefs, ownership
dispersion and stock returns. We find that high dispersion, measured by high breadth or low
Herfindahl index, forecasts returns positively for large stocks, as in Chen, Hong and Stein (2002),
but negatively for small stocks. We explain that relationship in a difference-of-opinion model in
which stocks differ in the size of investor disagreements and the extent of belief polarization.
These differences are characterized by range and kurtosis, respectively. Proxying investor beliefs
by analyst forecasts, we find that range and kurtosis affect ownership dispersion in the way that
our model predicts.
Gikas Hardouvelis Dimitri Vayanos
Department of Finance Department of Finance, OLD 3.41
University of Piraeus London School of Economics
Karaoli kai Dimitriou 80 Houghton Street
Piraeus 18534 London WC2A 2AE
Greece UNITED KINGDOM
Ghardouv@unipi.gr and CEPR
and also NBER
Georgios Karalas d.vayanos@lse.ac.uk
Department of Business Administration
University Carlos III of Madrid
Calle Madrid, 126B
Getafe (Madrid) 28903
Spain
gkaralas@emp.uc3m.es

1 Introduction
Does the distribution of an asset’s ownership across investors contain information about the asset’s
future returns? Why do some assets have a narrow and some a broad investor base, and do assets
with a different investor base perform differently? Two influential theories link the distribution of
assetownershiptopricesandreturns. Thefirsttheory, formulatedbyChen, Hong, andStein(2002,
CHS), emphasizes differences of opinion across investors, combined with short-sale constraints.
According to that theory, which builds on Miller (1977) and Harrison and Kreps (1978), large
disagreements across investors about an asset’s payoff result in the asset being held only by the
most optimistic investors. Since optimists push the asset price up, a narrow investor base indicates
an overvaluated asset with low future returns. The second theory, formulated by Merton (1987) as
the investor-recognition hypothesis, emphasizes costs of entering asset markets, due to learning or
constraints. According to that theory, an asset for which entry costs are high attracts few investors
and trades at a deep discount because of imperfect risk-sharing. Hence, a narrow investor base
indicates an undervalued asset with high future returns.
Empirical work can help distinguish between the opposite predictions of the two theories. CHS
findthatstockswithanarrowinvestorbaseearnlowfuturereturns. Diether,Malloy,andScherbina
(2002) find that stocks for which analyst forecasts reveal large disagreements earn low returns.
These findings are consistent with the difference-of-opinion theory. Other findings are more consis-
tent with the entry-cost theory. For example, Hong and Kacperczyk (2009) find that social norms
prevent some institutional investors from holding stocks in “sin industries” (alcohol, gaming and
tobacco), and this raises the stocks’ future returns. Lou (2014) finds that increased advertising by
firms brings in more investors, raises their stock price and lowers their future returns.
In this paper we study theoretically and empirically the relationship between investor beliefs,
ownership dispersion and future returns. We confirm the findings of CHS for large stocks, but
document the opposite relationship for small stocks: a narrow investor base for a small stock
predicts high future returns. Hence, the informational content of investor base differs sharply
across size groups. Our finding seems puzzling in light of the empirical success of the difference-of-
opiniontheoryforlargestocks, especiallybecausetheeffectsimpliedbythattheoryarestrongerfor
small stocks. Indeed, since optimists are better able to absorb a smaller supply, the overvaluation
that they generate should be more severe for small stocks (Hong, Scheinkman, and Xiong (2006)).
We solve the puzzle by developing a model with a richer description of differences of opinion
than in previous literature. Stocks in our model differ not only in the average size of investor dis-
agreements, asintheliterature, butalsointheextenttowhichbeliefsarepolarized. Describingthe
distribution of investor beliefs in our model requires both the distribution’s range and its kurtosis.
1

Our richer description generates the relationship between ownership dispersion and asset returns
that we observe in the data. It also connects the difference-of-opinion theory to the seemingly
opposite theory based on entry costs because it emphasizes the imperfect risk-sharing mechanism.
Guided by our model, we examine empirically not only the relationship between ownership
dispersion and asset returns, but also that between the distribution of investor beliefs and own-
ership dispersion. Proxying investor beliefs by analyst forecasts, we find that both the range and
the kurtosis of the forecast distribution help explain ownership dispersion, and do so in the way
predicted by the model. Overall, our results suggest that a richer description of beliefs than in
previous literature is important for understanding the relationship between beliefs, ownership and
returns.
In our model, presented in Section 2, there are multiple stocks and multiple investors with
different beliefs and short-sale constraints. The distribution of investor beliefs for each stock takes
one of three forms. For baseline stocks, there are equal numbers of optimists and pessimists, and
some rational investors in the middle. For high-disagreement stocks, the numbers within each
category are the same, but optimists and pessimists hold more extreme beliefs. For polarizing
stocks, beliefs within each category are the same, but there are more optimists and pessimists (and
fewer rationals). Moving from baseline to high-disagreement stocks amounts to raising the range
of the distribution of beliefs, holding the kurtosis constant. Moving from baseline to polarizing
stocks amounts to lowering the kurtosis, holding the range constant. Stocks differ not only in the
distributionofinvestorbeliefs,butalsointheirsize,measuredbythenumberofsharesoutstanding.
We document polarization in the empirical distribution of analyst forecasts, which is bell-shaped
with two large peaks at the extremes (Figure 1, Section 4).
We use two measures of dispersion of ownership. The first is Breadth B, defined as the fraction
of investors who own a stock. The second is Herfindahl Index H, derived by squaring the fraction
of total supply of a stock owned by each investor and summing across investors. More disperse
ownership is associated with high values of B and low values of H.
Withinthesetofsmallstocks, B forbaselinestocksisthesameasforhigh-disagreementstocks,
and is smaller than for polarizing stocks. This is because optimists can fully absorb the supply of
small stocks, and polarizing stocks have the most optimists. Within the set of large stocks instead,
B for baseline stocks is larger than for the other two stock types. This is because optimists for
baseline stocks are the least able to absorb a large supply: they hold less extreme beliefs than
their counterparts for high-disagreement stocks, and are less numerous than their counterparts for
polarizing stocks. Hence, large baseline stocks are held by optimists and rationals, while large
stocks of the other two types are held only by optimists. Most of the comparisons on B carry over
to H (in the opposite direction).
2