NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BIG DATA IN FINANCE
Itay Goldstein
Chester S. Spatt
Mao Ye
Working Paper 28615
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28615
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2021
Ye acknowledges support from National Science Foundation grant 1838183 and the Extreme
Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE). The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Itay Goldstein, Chester S. Spatt, and Mao Ye. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Big Data in Finance
Itay Goldstein, Chester S. Spatt, and Mao Ye
NBER Working Paper No. 28615
March 2021
JEL No. G12,G14,G3
ABSTRACT
Big data is revolutionizing the finance industry and has the potential to significantly shape future
research in finance. This special issue contains articles following the 2019 NBER/ RFS
conference on big data. In this Introduction to the special issue, we define the “Big Data”
phenomenon as a combination of three features: large size, high dimension, and complex
structure. Using the articles in the special issue, we discuss how new research builds on these
features to push the frontier on fundamental questions across areas in finance – including
corporate finance, market microstructure, and asset pricing. Finally, we offer some thoughts for
future research directions.
Itay Goldstein Mao Ye
The Wharton School Department of Finance,
University of Pennsylvania Gies School of Business
3620 Locust Walk University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
Philadelphia, PA 19104 343K Wohlers Hall
and NBER 1206 South Sixth Street
itayg@wharton.upenn.edu Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
Chester S. Spatt maoye@illinois.edu
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890
and NBER
cspatt@andrew.cmu.edu

1. The “Big Data” Revolution
The Digital Age has created mountains of data that continue to grow exponentially. The
International Data Corporation estimates that the world generates more data every two days than
all of humanity generated from the dawn of time to the year 2003. This “big data” revolution is
reshaping the financial industry, as the Wall Street Journal writes: “Today, the ultimate Wall Street
status symbol is a trading floor comprising Carnegie Mellon Ph.D.s, not Wharton M.B.A.s.”2 This
industry transition has already started to affect the way we teach students. Along with the drop in
the number of Master of Business Administration (MBA) programs, as well as the decline in
applications and enrollment in MBA programs, 3 we see a surge of new programs such as Master
of Business Analytics (also MBA).
The impact of big data on academic research in finance is also starting to reveal itself, but
with it many questions emerge. The classical definition of big data as three Vs (volume, velocity,
and variety) has a strong relation to engineering and computer science, but it does not fully reflect
the opportunities and challenges that big data pose to research and practice in finance. What do
big data in finance actually mean? How can financial economists benefit from the big data
revolution? Do big data open new research topics for financial economists or allow us to answer
traditional questions in novel and more revealing ways? Is this really a revolution for finance
research or just a continuation of a gradual change? After all, large datasets always have been a
feature of research in finance.
In October 2018, the National Science Foundation (NSF) provided a joint grant to the
National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) and the National Center for Supercomputing
2 https://www.wsj.com/articles/the-quants-meet-the-new-kings-of-wall-street-1495389163 (Rogow, G., “Meet the
New Kings of Wall Street,” Wall Street Journal, May 21, 2017).
3 https://www.wsj.com/articles/elite-m-b-a-programs-report-steep-drop-in-applications-11571130001 (Cutter, C.,
“Elite MBA Programs Report Steep Drop in Applications,” Wall Street Journal, October 15, 2019).
1

Application (NCSA) at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign that aims to explore
answers to these questions. Part of the grant is dedicated to education and outreach and supports a
series of NBER conferences to explore the future of big data research in finance. The summer
conferences, organized by Toni Whited and Mao Ye, focus on tutorial sessions on big data
techniques and presentations of early ideas on big data. The winter conferences, organized by Itay
Goldstein, Chester Spatt, and Mao Ye, focus on completed papers using big data and related
methodologies.
This special issue of the Review of Financial Studies (RFS) on big data in finance includes
four papers from the first NBER/RFS Winter Conference on Big Data held on March 8, 2019, and
two other papers that are closely related to this theme. The RFS has the tradition of encouraging
scholars to pursue risky projects that have the potential to push the frontiers of research in finance.
The series of NBER/RFS Big Data Conferences and this special issue reflect the RFS’s efforts to
encourage the use of big data in finance studies and provide a natural complement to the RFS
FinTech initiative that was featured in a special issue in May 2019 (see Goldstein, Jiang, and
Karolyi (2019) for an introduction).
In this article, we try to define what the title “Big Data” includes in the context of finance
research. We then review the six articles included in the special issue, how they are related to each
other and to the general theme. Finally, we provide some thoughts for future research directions.
2. What is Big Data in Finance Research?
It is fairly clear that a definition of big data in finance research should be different from
ones that are used in engineering and statistics. Researchers in these disciplines focus on providing
facilities and tools to capture, curate, manage, and process data. Financial economists, on the other
hand, focus on applying these tools to address interesting economic questions. While it is risky to
2