NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DOES LEED CERTIFICATION SAVE ENERGY? EVIDENCE FROM
RETROFITTED FEDERAL BUILDINGS
Karen Clay
Edson R. Severnini
Xiaochen Sun
Working Paper 28612
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28612
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2021, Revised August 2023
We are grateful for invaluable comments and suggestions from two anonymous referees, Andrea
La Nauze, Josh Linn, Vivian Loftness, Kathleen Segerson, Yujie Xu, seminar participants at
Carnegie Mellon University, and conference participants at the Association for Mentoring and
Inclusion in Economics (AMIE)'s Workshop in Applied Microeconomics. We also gratefully
acknowledge financial support from the Heinz College at Carnegie Mellon University. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Karen Clay, Edson R. Severnini, and Xiaochen Sun. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Does LEED Certification Save Energy? Evidence from Retrofitted Federal Buildings
Karen Clay, Edson R. Severnini, and Xiaochen Sun
NBER Working Paper No. 28612
March 2021, Revised August 2023
JEL No. O31,Q41,Q48,Q52
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the causal impact of LEED (Leadership in Energy & Environmental Design)
certification on energy consumption among federally owned buildings that were retrofitted over
the period 1990-2019. Using a difference-in-differences propensity score matching approach, the
paper has two findings. First, despite energy savings being an explicit federal goal, LEED-
certified retrofits of federal buildings did not have statistically significant energy savings on
average. Second, LEED buildings with higher energy scores had greater energy efficiency post-
certification, and the improvements were economically meaningful. The absence of energy
savings on average appears to be driven by three factors—trade-offs across energy and other
areas in acquiring points for certification, possible changes in energy use after the official
performance period for LEED certification ended, and improvements in the energy efficiency of
all federal buildings.
Karen Clay Xiaochen Sun
Heinz College 4800 Forbes Avenue
Carnegie Mellon University Pittsburgh, PA 15213
5000 Forbes Avenue xiaoches@andrew.cmu.edu
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
kclay@andrew.cmu.edu
Edson R. Severnini
H.John Heinz III College
Carnegie Mellon University
4800 Forbes Ave #2114B
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and IZA
and also NBER
ersevernini@gmail.com

1 Introduction
Federal building energy efficiency efforts began in the 1990s and gained momentum in
the 2000s. The Energy Independence and Security Act was signed in 2007 “to improve
the energy performance of the Federal Government” (F.R., 2007), and defines high-
performance building as “a building that integrates and optimizes on a life cycle basis all
major performance attributes, including energy conservation.” In response to these regu-
lations, the U.S. General Services Administration (GSA) announced a $5.55 billion plan
in 2010 to achieve significant energy savings from their buildings. To implement this, the
federal government decided to use two third-party green building certification systems,
Green Globes and LEED (Leadership in Energy & Environmental Design), and not the
EPA’s Energy Star program (U.S. GSA, 2013). Although Green Globes certification was
permissible, almost all of the actual certifications were LEED certifications.
Whether LEED would generate actual energy savings in federal buildings is not a
priori clear. There might be selection bias in the buildings that are retrofitted. Even
controlling for selection bias, three other factors may play roles. First, decision makers
face budget constraints and so may choose to trade-off energy efficiency and non-energy
efficiency dimensions to acquire the points necessary for LEED certification. Second,
therecouldbebehavioralchangesfromoccupantsandbuildingaftercertification. Studies
haveshownthatbehavioralresponsessuchasincreasingheatingorcoolingorsub-optimal
maintenance can cut down the intended energy savings by more than 5% (Gillingham
et al., 2013). Third, there could be improvements in energy efficiency happening in
non-LEED federal buildings.
Inthisstudy, weexaminethecausalimpactofLEEDcertificationonenergyconsump-
tion among federally owned buildings that were retrofitted over the period 1990-2019.1 It
is worth noting that one common challenge in the green building literature is that many
certified buildings are new and data points become scarce when restricting the consump-
tion data to a longer period of time (Matisoff, Noonan and Flowers, 2016).2 Our paper
draws on energy use data for office buildings and courthouses owned by the federal gov-
ernment across the entire U.S. Specifically, we combine energy use data from the GSA’s
1Itisimportanttopointoutthatexistingbuildings canobtainLEEDcertificationasnewconstruction
if the retrofits exceed 60% of the building square footage.
2Notably, thefederalgovernmentpublishedacontractedthird-partyreportthatdrewconclusionson
only 22 buildings (Fowler et al., 2010).
1

Energy Usage Analysis System with data from the Green Building Information Gateway
and weather data from National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Buildings
in our sample represent 84% of the square footage of federally owned LEED certified
existing building space.
Following Eichholtz, Kok and Quigley (2010, 2013), we use a difference-in-differences
propensityscorematchingapproachtoestimatethecausaleffectofLEEDcertificationon
energy efficiency. Matching methods tackle selection on observables, and difference in dif-
ferences controls for the presence of unobservables that under normal circumstances may
lead to biased estimates. These methods address two issues – possible selection bias in
buildings that are retrofitted and the fact that LEED certified buildings tend to be much
larger than average. The difference-in-differences estimation compares buildings that
were LEED certified before and after certification with otherwise similar buildings that
were not LEED certified. We have a large never treated group, so staggered difference-in-
differences estimates are unlikely to be biased (Marcus and Sant’Anna, 2021). To verify
this, we provide supporting evidence from a Goodman-Bacon (2021) decomposition.
The paper has two main findings. First, despite energy savings being an explicit
federal goal, LEED-certified retrofits of federal buildings did not have a statistically
significant effect on energy savings on average. The point estimate for the causal impact
ofLEEDcertificationonenergyconsumptionis-3.0%,andwecannotruleouteffectsfrom
-12.0% to 6.0%. The evidence is consistent with three factors contributing to a lack of
savings. As we describe further below, we find evidence consistent with decision makers
making trade-offs in the face of budget constraints. The event study suggests there
may have been changes in energy use after the official performance period for LEED
certification ended. The data shows there were improvements in the energy efficiency of
all federal buildings.
Second, we find that LEED buildings with higher energy scores had statistically
significantly greater energy efficiency post-certification. Having a one standard deviation
higherenergyscoreisassociatedwith12.6%lowerenergyusageinallbuildingsand13.9%
lower usage in office buildings. Some other attributes, notably higher water scores, are
associated with lower energy efficiency post-certification. The decision makers involved
with retrofitting federal buildings face budget constraints, so greater expenditure on
waterreductionmayleadtolowerexpenditurealongotherdimensionsthatimpactenergy
2