NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ARBITRAGE CAPITAL OF GLOBAL BANKS
Alyssa G. Anderson
Wenxin Du
Bernd Schlusche
Working Paper 28658
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28658
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2021
Previously circulated under the title “Money Market Fund Reform and Arbitrage Capital.” We
thank Isha Agarwal, Nina Boyarchenko, John Campbell, Nicola Cetorelli, Mark Carlson, Douglas
Diamond, Victoria Ivashina, Anil Kashyap, Hanno Lustig, Thomas Mertens, Alan Moreira, Bill
Nelson, Romain Ranciere, Marc Saidenberg, Asani Sarkar, Philipp Schnabl, Antoinette Schoar,
Jeremy Stein, David Thesmar, Judit Temesvary, Adrien Verdelhan, Kairong Xiao, Yao Zeng; seminar
participants at Arrowstreet Capital, Boston University, Chicago Booth/Economics Department, CREI-
UPF, Duke Fuqua, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the Federal Reserve Board, Harvard
Business School, MIT Sloan, London Business School, UT Austin, University of Washington; and
conference participants at the AFA, the Columbia-BPI Conference on Banking Regulations, the
Columbia Junior Macro Conference, the ECB Conference on Money Markets and Central Bank
Balance Sheets, the Federal Reserve System Day Ahead Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, Federal Reserve Board, Federal Reserve System Committee on Financial Institutions,
Regulation and Markets, NBER IFM, the NYU Stern WAPFIN conference, the Oregon Summer
Finance Conference, the SFS Cavalcade, the UCLA Anderson Fink Center Conference on Financial
Markets, and the WFA for helpful comments and suggestions. This paper uses data licensed from
DTCC Solutions LLC, an affiliate of The Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation. Neither DTCC
Solutions LLC nor any of its affiliates shall be responsible for any errors or omissions in any DTCC
data included in this paper, regardless of the cause and, in no event, shall DTCC or any of its
affiliates be liable for any direct, indirect, special or consequential damages, costs, expenses, legal
fees, or losses (including lost income or lost profit, trading loses and opportunity costs) in connection
with this paper. We thank Anya Clowers for excellent research assistance.The views in this
paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the
views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, any other person associated
with the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All remaining
errors are our own.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2021 by Alyssa G. Anderson, Wenxin Du, and Bernd Schlusche. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Arbitrage Capital of Global Banks
Alyssa G. Anderson, Wenxin Du, and Bernd Schlusche
NBER Working Paper No. 28658
April 2021
JEL No. E4,F3,G2
ABSTRACT
We show that the role of unsecured, short-term wholesale funding for global banks has changed
significantly in the post-financial-crisis regulatory environment. Global banks mainly use such
funding to finance liquid, near risk-free arbitrage positions—in particular, the interest on excess
reserves arbitrage and the covered interest rate parity arbitrage. In this environment, we examine
the response of global banks to a large negative wholesale funding shock as a result of the U.S.
money market mutual fund reform implemented in 2016. In contrast to past episodes of wholesale
funding dry-ups, we find that the primary response of global banks to the reform was a cutback in
arbitrage positions that relied on unsecured funding, rather than a reduction in loan provision.
Alyssa G. Anderson Bernd Schlusche
Federal Reserve Board Federal Reserve Board
20th and Constitution Ave. NW 20th and C Streets
Washington, DC 20551 Washington DC 20551
alyssa.g.anderson@frb.gov bernd.schlusche@frb.gov
Wenxin Du
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
Wenxin.Du@chicagobooth.edu

Arbitrage Capital of Global Banks∗
Alyssa Anderson Wenxin Du Bernd Schlusche †
Federal Reserve Board Chicago Booth and NBER Federal Reserve Board
March 2021
Abstract
We show that the role of unsecured, short-term wholesale funding for global banks
has changed significantly in the post-financial-crisis regulatory environment. Global
banks mainly use such funding to finance liquid, near risk-free arbitrage positions—
in particular, the interest on excess reserves arbitrage and the covered interest rate
parity arbitrage. In this environment, we examine the response of global banks
to a large negative wholesale funding shock as a result of the U.S. money market
mutual fund reform implemented in 2016. In contrast to past episodes of wholesale
funding dry-ups, we find that the primary response of global banks to the reform
was a cutback in arbitrage positions that relied on unsecured funding, rather than
a reduction in loan provision.
Keywords: Money Market Mutual Funds, Wholesale Funding, Arbitrage
JEL Classifications: G2, F3, E4
∗Previously circulated under the title “Money Market Fund Reform and Arbitrage Capital.” We
thank Isha Agarwal, Nina Boyarchenko, John Campbell, Nicola Cetorelli, Mark Carlson, Douglas Di-
amond, Victoria Ivashina, Anil Kashyap, Hanno Lustig, Thomas Mertens, Alan Moreira, Bill Nelson,
Romain Ranciere, Marc Saidenberg, Asani Sarkar, Philipp Schnabl, Antoinette Schoar, Jeremy Stein,
David Thesmar, Judit Temesvary, Adrien Verdelhan, Kairong Xiao, Yao Zeng; seminar participants
at Arrowstreet Capital, Boston University, Chicago Booth/Economics Department, CREI-UPF, Duke
Fuqua, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the Federal Reserve Board, Harvard Business School,
MIT Sloan, London Business School, UT Austin, University of Washington; and conference participants
at the AFA, the Columbia-BPI Conference on Banking Regulations, the Columbia Junior Macro Con-
ference, the ECB Conference on Money Markets and Central Bank Balance Sheets, the Federal Reserve
System Day Ahead Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Federal Reserve Board, Federal Re-
serveSystemCommitteeonFinancialInstitutions,RegulationandMarkets,NBERIFM,theNYUStern
WAPFIN conference, the Oregon Summer Finance Conference, the SFS Cavalcade, the UCLA Anderson
FinkCenterConferenceonFinancialMarkets, andtheWFAforhelpfulcommentsandsuggestions. This
paper uses data licensed from DTCC Solutions LLC, an affiliate of The Depository Trust & Clearing
Corporation. Neither DTCC Solutions LLC nor any of its affiliates shall be responsible for any errors
or omissions in any DTCC data included in this paper, regardless of the cause and, in no event, shall
DTCC or any of its affiliates be liable for any direct, indirect, special or consequential damages, costs,
expenses, legal fees, or losses (including lost income or lost profit, tradinglosesand opportunity costs) in
connection with this paper. We thank Anya Clowers for excellent research assistance. The views in this
paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or any other person associated with the Federal
Reserve System. All remaining errors are our own.
†Anderson: Federal Reserve Board, 20th and C Streets NW, Washington, DC 20551. Email:
alyssa.g.anderson@frb.gov. Du: University of Chicago Booth School of Business and NBER, 5807 South
WoodlawnAvenue,Chicago,IL60637. Email: wenxin.du@chicagobooth.edu. Schlusche: FederalReserve
Board, 20th and C Streets NW, Washington, DC 20551. Email: bernd.schlusche@frb.gov.

1 Introduction
In addition to deposits, banks rely on short-term wholesale funding markets, such as the
marketsforfederalfunds, Eurodollars, certificatesofdeposit, commercialpaper, andrepos
to finance their operations.1 In contrast to deposits, which are often insured, wholesale
funding is more “fragile” and subject to sudden dry-ups (for example, Pérignon, Thesmar,
and Vuillemey, 2018; Kacperczyk and Schnabl, 2013). Such large negative wholesale
funding shocks have led to fire sales of assets, significant contractions in credit supply, and
elevated financial distress (for example, Diamond and Rajan, 2009; Shin, 2009; Schnabl,
2012; Chernenko and Sunderam, 2014; Ivashina, Scharfstein, and Stein, 2015).
In this paper, we document an important transformation of the role of unsecured
short-term wholesale funding for global banks in the post-financial-crisis regulatory envi-
ronment. In particular, many large global banks have transitioned to a business model in
which they mainly use unsecured wholesale funding to finance liquid assets as part of near
risk-free arbitrage positions. In other words, short-term wholesale funding has become
arbitrage capital for global banks. Through our analysis, we uncover about $1.5 trillion
of potential arbitrage capital for global banks. As a result of this business model, global
bankshavebecomemoreresilienttonegativewholesalefundingshocks, astheycanswiftly
reduce their arbitrage positions in response to wholesale funding dry-ups. However, the
use of wholesale funding as arbitrage capital also reduces the usefulness of short-term
wholesale funding in spurring lending to the real economy.
The changing nature of unsecured wholesale funding occurs against the backdrop of
significant regulatory reforms to the banking sector since the Global Financial Crisis
(GFC). Importantly, to address global banks’ vulnerability due to over-reliance on un-
secured wholesale funding, Basel III introduced the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) re-
1When we refer to “banks”, we mean the entire banking organization, not strictly the commercial
banking arm.
1