NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE BATTLE OVER PATENTS:
HISTORY AND THE POLITICS OF INNOVATION
Stephen H. Haber
Naomi R. Lamoreaux
Working Paper 28774
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28774
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2021
We are grateful for the support of Stanford University’s Hoover Institution Working Group on
Intellectual Property, Innovation, and Prosperity (Hoover IP2), which funded the series of
conferences that produced this introduction and the essays it describes. We have learned an
enormous amount from working with the authors of the essays: Jonathan Barnett, Christopher
Beauchamp, Sean Bottomley, Gerardo Con Diaz, Alexander Galetovic, B. Zorina Khan, Victor
Menaldo, and Steven Usselman. We have also benefited from the comments of participants in
the Hoover IP2 conferences, including Michael Andrews, Richard Epstein, Catherine Fisk,
Andrew Hall, Wesley Hartmann, Philip Hoffman, John Howells, Ron Katznelson, Benjamin
Kwitek, Ron Laurie, Ross Levine, Scott Masten, Damon Matteo, Douglas Melamed, Natasha
Nayak, Roger Noll, Lisa Larrimore Ouellette, Nicolas Petit, Paul Rhode, George Schultz, Henry
Smith, Richard Sousa, and Lew Zaretzki. We owe an especial debt of gratitude to Richard Sousa,
who Co-Directed Hoover IP2 with one of us (Haber) from its inception in 2013 until he retired in
2019, and Isabel Lopez, who served as Program Manager and Research Administrator of Hoover
IP2 from 2015 to 2019. Hoover IP2 benefited from unrestricted gifts to Stanford’s Hoover
Institution from InterDigital, Pfizer, and Qualcomm. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Stephen H. Haber and Naomi R. Lamoreaux. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Battle Over Patents: History and the Politics of Innovation
Stephen H. Haber and Naomi R. Lamoreaux
NBER Working Paper No. 28774
May 2021
JEL No. N4,N41,N42,N43,N44,O3,O34
ABSTRACT
This essay is the introduction to a book of the same title, forthcoming in summer of 2021 from
Oxford University Press. The purpose is to document the ways in which patent systems are
products of battles over the economic surplus from innovation. The features of these systems
take shape as interests at different points in the production chain seek advantage in any way they
can, and consequently, they are riven with imperfections. The interesting historical question is
why US-style patent systems with all their imperfections have come to dominate other methods
of encouraging inventive activity. The essays in the book suggest that the creation of a tradable
but temporary property right facilitates the transfer of technological knowledge and thus fosters a
highly productive decentralized ecology of inventors and firms.
Stephen H. Haber
Dept of Political Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6044
haber@stanford.edu
Naomi R. Lamoreaux
Department of Economics
Yale University
27 Hillhouse Ave., Rm. 39
Box 208269
New Haven, CT 06520-8269
and NBER
naomi.lamoreaux@yale.edu

The Battle Over Patents: History and the Politics of Innovation
Stephen Haber and Naomi R. Lamoreaux
There are a considerable number of patents issued annually from the Patent Office which
are of no force or value except for black-mailing and for interfering with the business of
parties competing with their owners.
[These patents] do not cover practical machines, but contain principles upon which other
more practical inventors have buil[t], and which are infringed by the other patent devices,
and are good for nothing except to be bought and speculated upon by those who are justly
called patent sharks ….
—J. H. Raymond, Secretary and Treasurer of the Western Railroad Association
Were it not for his use of the word “shark” instead of our more familiar term “troll,” J. H.
Raymond might be taken for someone complaining about the patent system in the present day.
The quotations, however, come from testimony he gave before the Committee on Patents of the
US Congress in the 1870s (US Senate 1878, pp. 123, 230). Raymond was lobbying
(unsuccessfully, it turned out) for a bill to reform the patent system and cure it of the evils
inflicted on the public by the “curse” of worthless patents. Whatever problems Raymond
attributed to the Patent Office’s granting of “about fifteen times as many patents as ought to
issue,” the failure of the reform effort did not prevent the United States from embarking on the
half century of rapid technological progress known as the Second Industrial Revolution. Nor did

2
it prevent the US from rising to world leadership in such new technologically advanced
industries as electricity, steel, telecommunications, and automobiles.1
As Raymond’s testimony suggests, complaints about the patent system—and about how
it could be abused to the detriment of legitimate businesses—are nothing new. Indeed, virtually
all the sources of market friction that critics seize upon today as pretexts for patent reform
(“patent thickets,” “patent trolls,” “patent holdup,” “excessive patenting,” and so on) were raised
as matters of concern in the nineteenth century. These complaints have resurfaced again and
again for the simple reason that the issues that underpin them have enormous consequences for
the distribution of the producer surplus from innovation. Basically stated, producer surplus is the
sum total of all the profits earned by the firms that make up the production chain for a good or
service.2 Innovators create surplus by developing new products that consumers want to buy or
by devising new ways to make existing products more cheaply, but ultimately the total amount of
surplus available to producers is determined by consumers’ demand for the final good or service.
Regardless of whether or not they are innovators, firms at the end of the production chain—that
is, those that sell the final good or service to consumers—want to retain as much of the producer
surplus as they can. Firms further up the chain, from the producers of raw materials to those that
make intermediate inputs, also want as much of the surplus as they can get, regardless of whether
they are innovators. Every firm in the production chain battles over the surplus, and they fight
1 The patent reform bill proposed, among other things, to institute renewal fees for patents, impose a statute
of limitations on infringement suits, and limit the damages that could be claimed for infringement. See US Senate
(1878), pp. 1-9. The additional quotations from Raymond’s testimony are from pp. 110 and 123. On the failure of
the legislation in Congress, see Usselman (1991). On the Second Industrial Revolution in the US, see Mowery and
Rosenberg (1989).
2 Economic surplus emerges from the purchase by consumers of a good or service that they value. It is
divided into producer surplus and consumer surplus. Consumer surplus is the difference between the maximum price
a consumer is willing to pay and the price that the consumer actually pays. Aggregate consumer surplus is the sum
of the consumer surplus for all individual consumers. Producer surplus is the amount that producers benefit by
selling a good or service at a market price that is higher than the lowest price that they would accept.