NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MORTGAGE LENDERS AND
THE GEOGRAPHIC CONCENTRATION OF FORECLOSURES
Stephen L. Ross
Yuan Wang
Working Paper 28781
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28781
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2021, Revised January 2022
An earlier version of this paper was entitled “High Cost Lenders and the Geographic Concentration
of Foreclosures”. The authors thank Bob Avery for inspiring the paper, and Morris Davis, Ingrid Ellen,
Fernando Ferreira, Kris Gerardi, Andra Ghent, Lauren Lambie-Hansen and additional conference and
seminar participants at the Econometric Society meetings, the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Kansas
City and New York, the Furman Center at New York University, and the Housing-Urban-Labor-Macro
Conference for providing advice on this research. The authors thank Gordon MacDonald, Kyle Mangum,
Yuan Wang, Ailing Zhang, and Samantha Minieri for outstanding research assistance. The analyses
presented in this paper use information provided by one of the major credit reporting agencies. The
credit agency has the legal right to view the research prior to its public release. However, the substantive
content of the paper is the responsibility of the authors and does not reflect the specific views of any
credit reporting agencies, nor does it reflect the views of Freddie Mac or its board of directors. This
work was supported by the Ford Foundation, the Research Sponsors Program of the Zell/Lurie Real
Estate Center at Wharton, and the Center for Real Estate and Urban Economic Studies at the University
of Connecticut. Professor Ross has worked in the past as a consultant on fair housing and fair lending
issues, but he has not done any consulting in this area within the last three years. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2021 by Stephen L. Ross and Yuan Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Mortgage Lenders and the Geographic Concentration of Foreclosures
Stephen L. Ross and Yuan Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 28781
May 2021, Revised January 2022
JEL No. D14,G01,G21,R21,R23
ABSTRACT
We use HMDA rate spread loans to identify lenders involved in riskier lending prior to the
foreclosure crisis. We develop a shift-share measure of changes in high rate spread share lender
representation in housing submarkets across origination years. While half the cross-sectional
correlation between foreclosure and high rate spread lender share is explained by borrower
observables, we find robust and stable estimates of the within housing submarket relationship
between foreclosure and predicted changes in market share. Estimates are not explained by local
housing price variation, rather evidence suggests servicer behavior in response to rising local
foreclosure rates as a mechanism.
Stephen L. Ross
Department of Economics
University of Connecticut
341 Mansfield Road, Unit 1063
Storrs, CT 06269-1063
and NBER
stephen.l.ross@uconn.edu
Yuan Wang
FreddieMac
McLean, VA
wangyuansdu@gmail.com

Mortgage Lenders and the Geographic Concentration of Foreclosures
Stephen L Ross, University of Connecticut and NBER
Yuan Wang, FreddieMac
A central feature of the U.S. foreclosure crisis is that effects were concentrated in specific
locations. Subprime lending was concentrated in low income and minority neighborhoods (Calem,
Gillen and Wachter 2004; Calem, Hershaff, Wachter 2004; Mayer and Pence 2009; Ghent,
Hernández-Murillo and Owyang 2014; Bayer, Ferreira and Ross 2014, 2018).1 Minority and low
income neighborhoods also experienced especially high foreclosure rates (Bayer, Ross and
Ferreira 2016; Ghent, Hernández-Murillo and Owyang 2014; Chan, Gedal, Been and Haughwout
2013; Geradi and Willen 2009; Fisher, Lambie-Hanson and Willen 2011; Edminston 2009).2
Finally, neighborhoods experiencing high foreclosure rates also tended to have high rates of
subprime lending leading up to the crisis (Reid and Laderman 2009; Mian and Sufi 2009; LaCour-
Little, Calhoun and Yu 2011; Reid, Bocian, Li and Quercia 2016).3
Subprime and other high risk lending almost certainly contributed to the spatial
concentration of foreclosures through either loans to riskier borrowers and/or loans with riskier
attributes. However, more limited research exists on whether the spatial concentration of lenders
engaging in such lending had effects on foreclosure above and beyond the specific loans
originated. Many papers document evidence of neighborhood spillovers from foreclosure (e.g.
Campbell et al., 2011; Gerardi et al., 2015; Gupta, 2016; Munroe and Wilse-Samson, 2013). While
1 This empirical regularity has been established using many different indicators including the Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD) subprime lender list, non-agency securitized lending, high cost lending
based on rate spread loans in the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data, and measures of ex-post foreclosure rates.
2 Ghent, Hernández-Murillo and Owyang (2014) find higher rates of foreclosure in low income neighborhoods, but
find lower rates of foreclosure in minority neighborhoods in their sample of privately securitized mortgages.
3 For recent reviews, see Foote and Willen (2018) and Chan, Haughwout and Tracy (2015). For a more general
discussion of redlining see Ross and Yinger (2002).
2

those spillover estimates arise from close proximity to a foreclosure (often within 250 feet) and
tend to be small in magnitude, a few recent papers suggest that these spillovers could have had
larger aggregate impacts (Mian, Sufi and Trebbi 2015; Huang, Nelson and Ross 2018; Gupta 2019;
Guren and McQuade 2020).
We examine the effect of geographic lending patterns using a shift-share approach based
on the composition of lending during an initial period, similar to Greenstone, Mas and Ngyuen’s
(2020) study of small business lending. We define mortgage lenders that appear heavily engaged
in “higher risk” lending using the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) rate spread variable,
i.e. mortgages with a substantial rate spread above the return on comparable maturity treasury
bonds (3 points above treasury yields). Both, Mayer and Pence (2008) and Chan, Haughwout, and
Tracy (2015) use rate spread mortgages as an indicator of subprime mortgage lending. Further,
Bayer, Ferreira and Ross (2018) conclude that lenders with a high share of rate spread loans served
a different segment of the market, having unusually high unexplained ex-post foreclosure rates.
We categorize lenders as having a high rate spread share, or as a short hand “high cost lenders”, if
20 percent or more of their mortgages were rate spread loans. We measure the high cost lender
share within housing submarkets using Public Use Microdata Areas (PUMAs), geographically
contiguous areas containing at least 100,000 people.4 As shown below (Table 2), high cost lender
share was much more volatile over time than traditional measures of underwriting risk, like loan
to value or debt to income ratios.
First, we document the correlation between foreclosures and the geographic concentration
of these high cost lenders using home purchase mortgages originated between 2004 and 2007 from
4 Our data agreement prevents the use of smaller geography like census tract. PUMA’s also have the advantage of
being at a scale well above the geographic level of the foreclosure spillovers studied by other papers. Further, this
geographic scale still captures dramatic variation in foreclosures.
3