NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHAT’S MISSING IN ENVIRONMENTAL (SELF-)MONITORING:
EVIDENCE FROM STRATEGIC SHUTDOWNS OF POLLUTION MONITORS
Yingfei Mu
Edward A. Rubin
Eric Zou
Working Paper 28735
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28735
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2021, Revised May 2022
We thank Michael Anderson, Trudy Ann Cameron, Jonathan M.V. Davis, Eric Edwards, Dave
Evans, Mary Evans (thanks to the Adopt-a-Paper program), Meredith Fowlie, Cynthia Giles,
Corbett Grainger, Andreas Hagemann, Alex Hollingsworth, Nicolai Kuminoff, Shanjun Li,
Julian Reif, Michelle M. Rubin, Ivan Rudik, Jay Shimshack, William Wheeler, Jianwei Xing,
officials at the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, and seminar participants at Arizona State
University, ASSA Annual Meeting, CU Environmental & Resource Economics Workshop, Jinan
University, Online Summer Workshop in Environment, Energy, and Transportation Economics,
Society for Benefit-Cost Analysis Annual Meeting, Symposium on Natural Resources
Governance for Young Scholars, and University of California Davis for helpful comments. All
errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Yingfei Mu, Edward A. Rubin, and Eric Zou. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

What’s Missing in Environmental (Self-)Monitoring: Evidence from Strategic Shutdowns
of Pollution Monitors
Yingfei Mu, Edward A. Rubin, and Eric Zou
NBER Working Paper No. 28735
April 2021, Revised May 2022
JEL No. C12,H77,Q53
ABSTRACT
Regulators often rely on regulated entities to self-monitor compliance, potentially creating
strategic incentives for endogenous monitoring. This paper builds a framework to detect whether
local governments skip air pollution monitoring when they expect air quality to deteriorate. The
core of our method tests whether the timing of monitor shutdowns coincides with the counties’ air
quality alerts – public advisories based on local governments’ own pollution forecasts. Applying
the method to a monitor in Jersey City, NJ, suspected of a deliberate shutdown during the 2013
“Bridgegate” traffic jam, we find a 33%reduction of this monitor’s sampling rate on pollution-
alert days. Building on large-scale inference tools, we then apply the method to test more than
1,300 monitors across the U.S., finding 14 metro areas with clusters of monitors showing similar
strategic behavior. We assess geometric imputation and remote-sensing technologies as potential
solutions to deter future strategic monitoring.
Yingfei Mu Eric Zou
Department of Economics Department of Economics
University of Oregon University of Oregon
1415 Kincaid Street 1415 Kincaid Street
Eugene, OR 97405 Eugene, OR 97403
yingfeim@uoregon.edu and NBER
ericzou@uoregon.edu
Edward A. Rubin
Department of Economics
University of Oregon
1415 Kincaid Street
Eugene, OR 97405
edwardr@uoregon.edu

1. Introduction
When regulators face substantial monitoring requirements, they commonly ask regulated entities
to monitor their own compliance. Police officers are charged with turning on/off body cameras that verify
their maintenance of ethical behavior; hospital staff transcribe operation events to catalog surgeons’
regulatory compliance; countries self-monitor greenhouse gas emissions to demonstrate adherence to
climate commitments. This system of self-monitoring is particularly common within environmental
regulation, where local entities – such as state governments and individual firms – assume the roles of both
the subject of regulation and the recorder of pollution data that demonstrate compliance. Can federal
regulators rely on the regulated to provide complete, representative self-monitoring data? We study this
question in the context of U.S. air quality regulation, where state and local governments monitor air
pollution to demonstrate compliance with federally set air quality standards. We show that state agencies’
leeway to decide when (not) to monitor, combined with the ability to anticipate pollution events in the near
future, results in strategic timing in monitoring activities at some locations. We begin with a motivating
anecdote, followed by an econometric analysis of the general prevalence of strategic monitoring.
On September 9th, 2013, two of three lanes to the George Washington Bridge closed for five days
at the toll plaza connecting Fort Lee, New Jersey and Manhattan, New York for what was initially said to
be a traffic study. The event was later found to be a deliberate act of political retribution.1 Coincidentally,
at the time of the Bridgegate-induced traffic jams, a nearby fine particulate matter (PM ) air pollution
2.5
monitor on the rooftop of the Jersey City Firehouse stopped collecting data. The monitor, placed by the
state government to continuously monitor compliance with federal Clean Air Act mandates, was later found
to have been inoperative for 13 days (September 6th–18th), the longest inactive period recorded in the decade
since its installation. While an investigation by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) blamed
“equipment malfunction,”2 the timing of the incident has raised concerns that the monitor was intentionally
disabled so that it would not record the spike in air pollution caused by the Bridgegate traffic jam.
This incident raises a general question of whether local officials are able to deliberately halt
pollution monitoring when they anticipate the monitor will record elevated pollution levels. First, state
governments have the incentive to “game.” While the federal EPA sets the national air quality standards
(NAAQS), states and local governments self-monitor compliance with these standards. When state
governments’ own monitoring indicates a lack of compliance, they bear the regulatory penalties including
1 See Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, s.v. “Fort Lee lane closure scandal,” (accessed November 13, 2020),
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fort_Lee_lane_closure_scandal
2 Enck, Judith. Regional Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Region 2. Letter to Jeff Ruch,
Executive Director of the Public Employees for Environmental Responsibility. February 28, 2014.
2

elevated requirements of expensive emission-reduction investments. Second, state governments have the
discretion to game. While the federal EPA encourages states to stick to their monitoring schedules as
strictly as possible, states have significant leeway, with every monitor typically allowed to miss up to 25%
of its scheduled data during each quarter. Third, state governments have the ability to game. In many states,
the same agencies that carry out monitoring also run advanced air quality forecasting – providing these
agencies with the best data and forecasts of air quality in the near future. Despite these concurrent factors,
the current system is not set up to detect strategic monitoring. Missing days are ignored by the federal
regulators, implicitly assuming that pollution levels on monitored days are equal to pollution levels on
unmonitored days. This tolerance for gaps in compliance monitoring data may induce strategic timing in
state and local agencies’ self-monitoring activity.
We propose an econometric framework that assesses whether air pollution monitors strategically
shut down to avoid sampling on high-pollution days – specifically focused on identifying individual
monitors whose pattern of shutdowns suggests gaming. Our framework has three components. The first
component infers the government’s expectation of high-pollution events through locally issued air quality
alerts. These public advisories calling for citizens to reduce outdoor activities and vehicle use are often
issued when forecasts predict that air pollution will exceed the Clean Air Act standards. We use an event
study to assess whether a monitor’s sampling rate falls when pollution alerts are in place. As a motivating
example, our analysis begins with the sampling patterns from the PM monitor at the Jersey City Firehouse
2.5
(JCF). Our analysis focuses on the JCF monitor’s data capture rate: the share of scheduled monitoring days
in which the monitor produces readings. Analyzing 21 alerts sent by Jersey City from 2007 to 2014, we
show that the data capture rate of the JCF monitor drops significantly during pollution alert weeks (declining
by 10 percentage points from a mean of 88%) and especially during the alert day itself (declining by 28
percentage points). Though we do not directly address the reasons for the failure of the JCF air pollution
monitor during the Bridgegate incident, our analysis indicates that the JCF monitor’s sampling pattern over
the seven-year period is consistent with strategic shutdowns during times of high pollution.
The second component of our framework incorporates simultaneous inference. We repeat the
Jersey City Firehouse monitoring exercise to analyze 1,359 monitors that are set up to continuously sample
air quality compliance for six different pollutants (PM , PM , O , NO , SO , and CO) throughout the
2.5 10 3 2 2
contiguous United States. These monitors are located in 167 counties with similar pollution alert programs.
Importantly, our task is not to estimate the response of the average monitor, but instead to pinpoint which
monitors are gaming the regulatory design by excluding days likely to have high pollution levels. This
inference problem poses two challenges, which we address with large-scale inference tools (Efron, 2012).
First, for each individual monitor, the event-study test for strategic shutdowns likely uses a small sample
due to the limited number of alerts and/or short time series for the monitor. Consequently, traditional
3