NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DIGITAL COLLATERAL
Paul Gertler
Brett Green
Catherine Wolfram
Working Paper 28724
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28724
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2021, Revised July 2023
This research was supported by USAID, CGAP and IFC (as part of the HIFI program), JPAL’s
Post-Primary Education program and UC Berkeley’s Lab for Inclusive FinTech (LIFT). We are
very grateful to Jenya Kahn-Lang, Renping Li, Cyrus Mevorach, Sanghamitra Mukherjee, Derek
Wolfson, Hilary Yu, and especially Robert Pickmans for excellent research assistance. Laura
Steiner provided exceptional project management, and we are also grateful to the IPA Uganda
team. We thank Efraim Benmelech (discussant), Dean Karlan, David Levine, Isabel Macdonald,
Gautam Rao, David Sraer, Antoinette Schoar, and Jonathan Zinman for useful comments and
suggestions as well as participants at the Harvard/Yale/Berkeley EEE seminar, NBER Corporate
Finance Meetings, Columbia University, Copenhagen Business School, Kellogg School of
Management, Oxford University, Stanford University, UC Merced, University of British
Columbia, University College of London, Warwick Business School, and The Wharton School.
The experiment described in this paper is registered at the AEA RCT Registry under the code
AEARCTR-0004191. The protocol was granted IRB approval by the University of California at
Berkeley under the code 2018-10-11516. The authors declare that they have no financial or
material interests in the results discussed in this paper. The views expressed in this article do not
necessarily represent the views of the United States, the U.S. Department of the Treasury, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Paul Gertler, Brett Green, and Catherine Wolfram. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Digital Collateral
Paul Gertler, Brett Green, and Catherine Wolfram
NBER Working Paper No. 28724
April 2021, Revised July 2023
JEL No. G20,I22,O16
ABSTRACT
A new form of secured lending using “digital collateral” has recently emerged, most prominently
in low- and middle-income countries. Digital collateral relies on lockout technology, which
allows the lender to temporarily disable the flow value of the collateral to the borrower without
physically repossessing it. We explore this new form of credit both in a model and in a field
experiment using school-fee loans digitally secured with a solar home system. Securing a loan
with digital collateral drastically reduces default rates (by 19 pp) and increases the lender’s rate of
return (by 38 pp). Employing a variant of the Karlan and Zinman (2009) methodology, we
decompose the total effect on repayment and find that roughly one-third is attributable to adverse
selection, and two-thirds is attributable to moral hazard. In addition, access to digitally secured
school-fee loans significantly increases school enrollment and school-related expenditures
without detrimental effects to households’ balance sheet.
Paul Gertler Catherine Wolfram
Haas School of Business Massachusetts Institute of Technology
University of California, Berkeley Sloan School of Management
Berkeley, CA 94720 100 Main St.
and NBER Cambridge, MA 02142
gertler@haas.berkeley.edu and NBER
cwolfram@mit.edu
Brett Green
Olin School of Business
Washington University
St. Louis, MO
b.green@wustl.edu

1 Introduction
Using collateral to secure debt helps overcome economic frictions, thereby expanding the supply
of credit and reducing the cost of providing credit. Indeed, more than 80% of total household
debt in the US is secured by a physical asset.1 Yet, secured debt is much less prevalent in low-
and middle-income countries (LMICs).2 Why? On the supply side, property rights are difficult
to establish and enforce in economies with weak legal institutions, which translates to a high cost
of repossessing collateral for creditors. This is especially true for lenders servicing households in
remote areas, where the costs associated with locating, repossessing, and redeploying collateral
can be prohibitive. On the demand side, the primary source of income for many households in
LMICs is self-employment, which is subject to more frequent shocks than formal sector wages.
These households, which lack savings, are more likely to default for nonstrategic reasons and may
choose to avoid the risk of having assets repossessed.
Recent technological innovations have facilitated new financial contracts that use “digital
collateral.” An emerging example is pay-as-you-go (PAYGO) financing. The typical PAYGO
contract requires a nominal down payment to take possession of an asset, followed by frequent,
small payments made via a mobile payment system. PAYGO lenders rely on an embedded lockout
technology, enabling them to remotely disable the flow of services from the asset. In other words,
the lender can digitally repossess the asset without the need to physically repossess it. Digital
collateral has two distinct technological features. First, disabling the flow of services is cheap and
easily reversible. Second, borrowers unable to make a payment do not lose the asset, rather they
are simply unable to consume the flow of services from the asset until they start paying again.
These features allow for a richer space of financial contracts involving flexible repayment schedules
(e.g., pay per usage) and temporary repossession for non-payment.3
In this paper, we argue that digital repossession can serve a useful role in credit markets,
1Source: “QuarterlyReportonHouseholdDebtandCredit,”FederalReserveoftheBankofNewYork(2020),
https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/interactives/householdcredit/data/pdf/HHDC 2020Q2.pdf.
2In our baseline survey, we find that only 30% of money borrowed by households is secured by a physical
asset (house, land, livestock, or vehicle). The Transparent Pricing Initiative, which covers standardized pricing
datafrom 23institutions operating inUganda, showsthat only16% ofloanproducts during 2011-2014explicitly
mention the usage of collateral (Transparent Pricing Initiative, 2014). In a survey, Elum and Kanu (2018) find
that47%ofthefarmersinNigeriaagreedthatcollateralrequirementwasaprobleminaccessingformalcredit.
3These features are in contrast to the typical secured loan that involves a fixed repayment schedule and
permanentrepossessionindefault.
1

especially in settings where physical repossession is impractical. We develop a theoretical model
to understand the implications of digital repossession in lending markets and how it contrasts
with physical repossession. The model also provides a framework for interpreting the results of
our experiment. In the experiment, we quantify the extent to which digitally secured loans have
better repayment than “unsecured” loans for which the lockout feature is disabled.4 We explore
the mechanism for the increase in repayment and ask whether digitally secured credit is a feasible
equilibrium contract. We then examine how access to this form of credit affects households.
Traditional collateral serves two roles: (i) the lender recovers something of value, thereby
insuring them against default, and (ii) the household loses something of value, thereby providing
them an incentive to repay the loan or decline the loan if they expect to default. Digital collateral
serves the latter role, but not the former. Still, much like with traditional collateral, securing loans
with digital collateral reduces the lender’s cost of providing financing via two channels relative to
unsecured credit. First, it provides households with an incentive to repay the loan when they can
afford to do so, thereby mitigating the moral hazard problem of strategic default (which is also
often referred to as limited enforcement). Second, when combined with a down payment, digital
collateral serves as a screening mechanism to mitigate adverse selection. That is, a household that
is more likely to default will have less incentive to accept a digitally secured loan. By reducing
moral hazard and adverse selection, digital collateral enables lenders to offer more financing to
credit-worthy borrowers at terms they find acceptable.
Despite reducing agency costs, a more effective lockout technology—which enables collateral to
bedigitized—doesnotnecessarilyincreasewelfare. Moreeffectivelockoutdestroysmoresurplus(i.e.,
householdutility)whenitisutilized,whichcanoffsetthewelfaregainsofthecreditexpansion,even
ifitisutilizedlessfrequently. Asaresult,anintermediatedegreeoflockoutfollowingnon-repayment
can be welfare maximizing. This finding is consistent with the temporary and relatively lenient
nature in which lockout is deployed in PAYGO contracts compared to traditional secured lending.
Our field experiment was designed to identify the impact of digital collateral on credit market
frictions and household outcomes. We partnered with Fenix International, the largest solar-home
system(SHS)providerinUganda. AnSHSprovidesahouseholdwithaccesstoamodestamountof
4While we refer to the latter type of loans as unsecured, technically all of the loans in our experiment are
secured in thesame way as mostother secured debt in LMICs, i.e., witha low probability of physicalrepossession
conditionalondefault.
2