NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
REGULATION AND SECURITY DESIGN IN CONCENTRATED MARKETS
Ana Babus
Kinda Cheryl Hachem
Working Paper 28764
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28764
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2021, Revised June 2021
We are grateful to Marzena Rostek and Ariel Zetlin-Jones for very helpful comments. We also
thank Narayana Kocherlakota, Chester Spatt, and participants at the Fall 2020 Carnegie-
Rochester-NYU Conference for their constructive suggestions. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2021 by Ana Babus and Kinda Cheryl Hachem. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Regulation and Security Design in Concentrated Markets
Ana Babus and Kinda Cheryl Hachem
NBER Working Paper No. 28764
May 2021, Revised June 2021
JEL No. D47,D86,G23
ABSTRACT
Regulatory debates about centralized trading assume security design is immune to market
structure. We consider a regulator who introduces an exchange to increase liquidity,
understanding that security design is endogenous. For a given security, investors would like to
trade in a larger market and, for a given market structure, they would like to trade a safer security.
We show that financial intermediaries design riskier securities after the exchange is introduced,
even when the exchange leads to the origination of safer underlying assets. The results reflect a
relative dilution of investor market power and motivate coordinated policies to improve investor
welfare.
Ana Babus
Washington University in St. Louis
One Brookings Dr.
St. Louis, MS 63130
anababus@gmail.com
Kinda Cheryl Hachem
University of Virginia
Darden School of Business
100 Darden Boulevard
Charlottesville, VA 22906
and NBER
hachemk@darden.virginia.edu

1 Introduction
The 2007-09 …nancial crisis spurred regulatory e¤orts to move the trading of many …nan-
cial instruments from decentralized over-the-counter markets to centralized platforms. The
argued bene…ts of trading in centralized markets include liquidity and transparency. These
arguments are almost always made on the premise that the set of securities designed by
…nancial intermediaries is immune to the market structure in which trading occurs. Do all
securities trading in decentralized markets migrate to the centralized platform rather than
ceasing to be issued? How can a regulator ensure that they do migrate? We present a
framework to study these questions here.
Weconsideraregulatorwhoredesignsthemarketstructureforcertain…nancialcontracts
to increase liquidity. In particular, the regulator introduces an exchange in which …nancial
securities that have traditionally traded in fragmented (local) markets can also trade. Fi-
nancial intermediaries design asset-backed securities taking into account investor demand in
the markets in which the securities will be traded. Babus and Hachem (2020) show that in-
termediaries will create increasingly riskier securities when facing deeper, more concentrated
markets. We now consider two dimensions of market power: the depth of the local market
and the market power of the intermediary relative to the investors in that market. Both
dimensions are important for security design, but the latter is the critical one studied here
relative to our earlier work. The regulator understands that simply shifting trade from a
decentralized market to a centralized one will result in …nancial intermediaries having more
market power relative to investors, and this will lead to the design of riskier securities.
In our baseline model, the market structure is given and consists of a set of local markets
in addition to an exchange in which securities can be traded. In each local market, investors
trade strategically whereas the exchange is perfectly competitive and thus highly liquid.
Each intermediary designs an asset-backed security for his local market. This security can
also be traded on the exchange. The payo¤of the security is backed by an underlying asset,
with the intermediary choosing how much of the underlying asset to acquire (or originate)
2

at a cost.
We characterize the e¤ect of introducing the exchange on security design and the welfare
of investors. For a given market structure, investors would like to trade a less risky security
and, for a given security, they would like to trade in a larger market. The introduction of the
exchange therefore makes investors better o¤ holding constant the payo¤s of the security.
However, we show that the security that intermediaries design after the introduction of the
exchange is of lower quality, in the sense of a lower expected payo¤ per unit of standard
deviation. This re‡ects the relative dilution of investor market power, which is a powerful
tool in disciplining the incentives of intermediaries in security design (Babus and Hachem
(2020)). The decline in the quality of the security issued to investors then makes them
worse o¤, all else constant. For a su¢ ciently small exchange, that is, an exchange where the
intermediary does not have very high market power, the decline in the quality of the security
is not large enough to o¤set the bene…ts to investors of trading in a larger, more liquid
market. The investor is then unambiguously better o¤. However, for a larger exchange, the
decline in the quality of the security is severe enough that the investor can be worse o¤as a
result of the introduction of the exchange.
The next part of the paper considers how the introduction of the exchange a¤ects an
intermediary’s incentive to originate higher quality assets. We …nd that introducing an
exchangeleadstheintermediarytooriginatebetterunderlyingassets,asindicatedbyahigher
expected payo¤ per unit of standard deviation, in order to relax the feasibility constraint
on the payo¤s in his security design problem. However, the quality of the asset-backed
securities sold by intermediaries to investors still declines as a result of the introduction of
the exchange, re‡ecting once again the relative loss of market power by investors in the
local market. The local market power of investors is thus a powerful disciplining device on
intermediary security design, so much so that even with better quality underlying assets, the
asset-backed security can still be worse.
These results motivate the need to coordinate regulations aimed at enhancing market
3