NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ARE BIGGER BANKS BETTER? FIRM-LEVEL EVIDENCE FROM GERMANY
Kilian Huber
Working Paper 28767
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28767
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2021
I am grateful to Douglas Diamond, Anil Kashyap, Alan Manning, Ricardo Reis, Harald Uhlig,
and Alwyn Young for helpful suggestions. I also thank Philippe Aghion, Saleem Bahaj, Bruno
Biais, Florian Blum, Francesco Caselli, Nicola Cetorelli, Thomas Drechsel, Erik Hurst, Victoria
Ivashina, Randall Kroszner, Ross Levine, Stephan Maurer, Brent Neiman, Daniel Paravisini,
Thomas Philippon, Steve Pischke, Raghuram Rajan, Oliver Rehbein, Albrecht Ritschl, Christina
Romer, David Romer, Isabel Schnabel, Robert Shimer, Jeremy Stein, Jón Steinsson, Philip
Strahan, Amir Sufi, Fabian Waldinger, and Thomas Wollmann for insightful comments. The
Economic Archive Hohenheim, the German National Library of Economics, the Historical
Archives of Commerzbank, Deutsche Bundesbank, and Deutsche Bank, the University Libraries
of Cologne, Tübingen, and Munich, and the Württembergische Landesbibliothek generously
supported the data collection. Kenan Jusufovic, Sungil Kim, and Stefan Wies provided excellent
research assistance. The research was funded by grants from the Centre for Economic
Performance, Centre for Macroeconomics, LSE Institute of Global Affairs, Paul Woolley Centre,
Sticerd, and Stiftung Familienunternehmen. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Kilian Huber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Are Bigger Banks Better? Firm-Level Evidence from Germany
Kilian Huber
NBER Working Paper No. 28767
May 2021
JEL No. E24,E44,G21,G28,L11,L25,N14,N24,N84
ABSTRACT
The effects of large banks on the real economy are theoretically ambiguous and politically
controversial. I identify quasi-exogenous increases in bank size in postwar Germany. I show that
firms did not grow faster after their relationship banks became bigger. In fact, opaque borrowers
grew more slowly. The enlarged banks did not increase profits or efficiency, but worked with
riskier borrowers. Bank managers benefited through higher salaries and media attention. The
paper presents newly digitized microdata on German firms and their banks. Overall, the findings
reveal that bigger banks do not always raise real growth and can actually harm some borrowers.
Kilian Huber
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
kilianhuber@uchicago.edu

I Introduction
Theimpactoflargefirmsontheeconomyhasrecentlyreceivedsignificantattention(Zingales2017;
Philippon2019). Thetopicisparticularlysalientinbanking. Thecontinuedgrowthofbanksinpast
decadesandfailuresoflargebanksinrecentcriseshavekepttheissueofbanksizeattheforefrontof
policy debates. Some policymakers argue that limits on bank size could reduce financial instability
andexcessiverisk-taking.1 Butiflargerbanksgenerateeconomiesofscale,thendiscouragingbanks
fromgrowingbiggercoulddecreasethequalityoffinancialservicesandharmrealeconomicgrowth.
Inthispaper,Iidentifyasettingwhereincreasesinbanksizewereexogenoustotheperformance
of banks and their borrowers. This rare occurrence allows me to estimate how changes in bank size
causally affected firms in the real economy. The setting is postwar Germany. Reforms in 1952 and
1957 determined when several institutions were allowed to consolidate from state-level banks into
national banks. I find that, on average, firms did not grow faster after their banks became larger.
The consolidations did not make the banks more cost efficient or profitable. These findings show
that increased bank size does not always generate improvements in bank efficiency or firm growth,
in contrast to leading theories. Furthermore, opaque (small, young, low-collateral) firms grew more
slowlyaftertheirbanksgotbigger,consistentwiththeviewthatbiggerbanksareworseatprocessing
softinformation.
The effect of bank size on borrower growth depends on the strength of several mechanisms that
havebeenanalyzedtheoretically. Ontheonehand,theorysuggeststhatbiggerbanksmightbemore
efficient and stable. For instance, bigger banks spread fixed costs over more borrowers (Humphrey
1990), are more diversified (Diamond 1984), issue large loans without syndication (Holmstrom and
Tirole 1997), and generate operational synergies (Kanatas and Qi 2003). Bigger banks might also
improve screening and the allocation of capital across borrowers (Stein 1997, 2003). These chan-
nels could raise the average growth of bank borrowers. On the other hand, diversification might
not be beneficial once banks exceed a certain size (Krasa and Villamil 1992b; Cerasi and Daltung
2000). Large organizations might entail complex agency and information problems (Rajan et al.
2000; Scharfstein and Stein 2000; Berger and Udell 2002; Stein 2002). These channels could harm
borrowergrowth.2
Giventheambiguoustheoreticalpredictions,theeffectofbanksizeonfirmgrowthisanempiri-
calquestion. Ifirstestimatetheoveralleffectofthebankingconsolidationsonborrowergrowth. The
results capture how the various theoretical mechanisms, on net, impacted firm growth. Thereafter, I
turn to assessing individual theories about bank operations. I provide evidence on which theoretical
1The market share of the ten biggest US banks increased from around 25 percent in 1990 to over 60 percent in
2014 (McCord and Prescott 2014). Recent regulatory proposals include outright caps on bank size as well as indirect
incentivesforbankstoremainsmall,forexamplehighercapitalrequirementsandstresstestsforbigbanks(Sternand
Feldman2004;Stein2013;Greenwoodetal.2017).
2The banking reforms in postwar Germany increased bank size without directly deregulating local competition or
entry,soIdonotanalyzetheeffectsofbanksizeonlocalcompetitioninthispaper.
1

mechanisms were important determinants of bank efficiency and firm performance after banks got
bigger.
The empirical challenge in estimating the effects of bigger banks is that banks do not become
big randomly. For example, a bank might strategically consolidate with another bank if it expects
the borrowers of the other bank to grow faster in future. In such cases, one would observe a pos-
itive correlation between bank size and the growth of borrowers even if bank size has no causal
effectonborrowers. TwofeaturesofthepostwarGermanbankingsystemallowmetoovercomethis
challenge. The first feature is the reliance of German firms on relationship banking. Due to asym-
metricinformation,bank-borrowerrelationshipsweresticky. Thismeansthatshockstoagivenbank
affectedthecostofbankingservicesforitsrelationshipborrowers.
ThesecondfeatureisthebankingpolicyoftheAlliedoccupiersinpostwarGermany. TheAllies
believed that three banks with nationwide branch networks (Commerzbank, Deutsche Bank, and
Dresdner Bank) had contributed to the Nazi war effort. These banks constitute the treatment group
forthepurposesofthispaper. In1947/48,theAlliesbrokeupthetreatedbanksinto30independent
state-level organizations and prohibited the new banks from branching outside state borders. A first
reform in 1952 permitted some of the state-level banks to consolidate with other state-level banks
within three banking zones. This meant that the 30 state-level banks merged to become nine treated
institutions, one for each former national bank in each banking zone. A second reform in 1957
permitted the reconsolidation of the three original, national banks. Hence, borrowers with a treated
relationship bank experienced sharp increases in the size of their relationship banks in 1952 and
1957.3
The history of banking is replete with cases of banks that have sought to consolidate. The
prevailing sentiment among the managers of treated banks in postwar Germany was no different.
They had wanted to reconsolidate from the moment of their initial breakup. The key advantage
of this setting is that when the banks were allowed to consolidate was determined by the reforms.
Improvements in the attitude of the Allies toward Germany, mainly due to the emergence of the
Cold War, made the reforms possible. Negotiations among German politicians, central bankers,
bankrepresentatives,andtheAlliesthendeterminedspecificallywhentheconsolidationshappened.
Historical records suggest that the consolidations affected how the banks operated. They in-
creased diversification, organizational complexity, and hierarchical decision-making; enabled the
banks to use internal capital markets and to spread out fixed costs; and reduced the need for loan
syndicates. Importantly,thereformsdidnotdirectlyaffectdeterminantsofbankefficiencyunrelated
to size, such as the kinds of services offered by the banks or the number of branches operating in
each local market. This allows me to examine how increases in bank size affected banks and bor-
rowerswhilekeepingconstantspuriousconfoundersthatareusuallycorrelatedwithchangesinbank
size.
3Ifocusonthe1952and1957reforms. Idonotanalyzetheimpactofthe1947/48breakupbecausenodataexistfor
theimmediatepostwarperiod.
2