NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MERCHANTS OF DEATH:
THE EFFECT OF CREDIT SUPPLY SHOCKS ON HOSPITAL OUTCOMES
Cyrus Aghamolla
Pinar Karaca-Mandic
Xuelin Li
Richard T. Thakor
Working Paper 28709
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28709
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2021, revised October 2023
We thank the anonymous reviewers, John Friedman (the editor), Viral Acharya, Sandra
Chamberlain, Gustavo Cortes, Jon Garfinkel, Sabrina Howell, Katharina Lewellen, Erzo Luttmer,
Tom Philipson, Michael Usher, Daniel Weagley, Chris Whaley, Xiaoyun Yu, several hospital
executives, conference participants at the 2021 FIRS Meetings, the 2021 NBER Health Care
Summer Institute, the 2021 Federal Reserve Stress Testing Research Conference, the 2022
Financial Markets and Corporate Governance Conference, and the 2022 China International
Conference in Finance, and seminar participants at Columbia University, CSU Fullerton, Emory
University, Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad, Northeastern University, Pennsylvania
State University, University of Bath, University of British Columbia, University of Colorado–
Boulder, Peking University, University of Minnesota, University of Missouri, University of
Pittsburgh, University Wisconsin–Milwaukee, and the Virtual Corporate Finance Seminars for
helpful comments.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Cyrus Aghamolla, Pinar Karaca-Mandic, Xuelin Li, and Richard T. Thakor. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Merchants of Death: The Effect of Credit Supply Shocks on Hospital Outcomes
Cyrus Aghamolla, Pinar Karaca-Mandic, Xuelin Li, and Richard T. Thakor
NBER Working Paper No. 28709
April 2021, revised October 2023
JEL No. G21,G32,I11,I15
ABSTRACT
This study examines the link between credit supply and hospital health outcomes. We use bank
stress tests as exogenous shocks to credit access for hospitals that have lending relationships with
tested banks. We find that affected hospitals shift their operations to increase resource utilization
following a negative credit shock but reduce the quality of their care to patients across a variety
of measures, including a significant increase in risk-adjusted readmission and mortality rates. The
results indicate that access to credit can affect the quality of healthcare hospitals deliver, pointing
to important spillover effects of credit market frictions on health outcomes.
Cyrus Aghamolla Xuelin Li
University of Minnesota University of South Carolina
321 19th Ave S 1014 Greene St
Minneapolis, MN 55455 Columbia, SC 29208
caghamol@umn.edu xuelin.li@columbia.edu
Pinar Karaca-Mandic Richard T. Thakor
Carlson School of Management University of Minnesota,
University of Minnesota 321 19th Avenue South, 3-255
321 19th Avenue South Minneapolis, MN 55455
Room 3-287 rthakor@umn.edu
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
pkmandic@umn.edu

1 Introduction
Hospitals play an essential role in maintaining public health. Hospitals are also crucial to
the economy, with healthcare spending in the U.S. accounting for 18–20% of GDP and the
hospital sector accounting for one-third of this spending.1 However, like other enterprises,
hospitals must obtain financing for their operations and utilize credit markets for this financ-
ing. Indeed, the vast majority of U.S. hospitals carry leverage and often rely on debt for
their financing needs. Moreover, due to low profit margins, hospitals carry considerable de-
fault risk, with healthcare defaults on municipal bonds comprising 20% of all bond defaults,
second only to housing. Consequently, frictions in the credit market can exacerbate imped-
iments to credit access for hospitals, straining hospital finances and potentially influencing
real decisions and outcomes.
Given the prevalence of borrowing in the hospital sector (among all types of hospitals,
including non-profit and rural hospitals), it is important to understand the role of credit
access in shaping hospital operating decisions, as well as the potential spillover effects of such
decisionsonthehospital’squalityofcare. Thequestionsweseektoaddressarethus: (i)How
do shocks to credit markets transmit to hospital finances?; (ii) How do hospitals respond to
negative shocks to credit access in terms of financing and operating decisions?; and finally,
(iii) Do we observe indirect, negative effects on patient health outcomes following tightened
credit constraints? Given their importance to public health, we would expect (or hope)
that hospitals can maintain the same quality of care despite frictions in financial markets.
This question highlights an important yet overlooked negative societal externality—health
consequences—that can arise from credit shocks. Research on this topic may therefore have
important social consequences and policy implications.
To help shed light on the above questions, we utilize the staggered pattern of stress
tests on U.S. banks implemented by the 2010 Dodd-Frank Act to cleanly test the effects
of shocks to the supply of credit. Stress tests are regulatory assessments by the Federal
Reserve designed to gauge a bank’s ability to withstand an impending economic crisis, the
first of which were implemented in 2012. Following a stress test, banks often engage in risk
management actions in order to improve their solvency and capital adequacy ratios. We
1U.S. healthcare spending was $4.1 trillion in 2020, constituting 19.7% of U.S. GDP. Furthermore,
hospital employment in the U.S. exceeds 5.7 million, and hospitals are among the top employers across
U.S. cities (Samuelson (2017)). See also Gaynor et al. (2015). Moreover, the economic decline following the
2020 pandemic is reported to be partly attributed to the large reduction in healthcare spending, leading
to significant layoffs of hospital medical staff. See, e.g., “Plunge in health-care spending a big reason US
economy sank in first quarter,” CNBC, April 29, 2020. Healthcare spending in other OECD countries is
similar, with an average of 8–9% of GDP.
1

use the fact that a given hospital’s bank experiences a stress test as an exogenous negative
shock to credit for the hospital. As noted by Gao et al. (2019), hospitals are particularly
risky borrowers, with higher than average yields and default rates for municipal bonds.
Consequently, to better manage their risk or improve their capital adequacy, stress-tested
banks can lower the amount of credit provided or demand higher rates from these risky
borrowers (Acharya et al. (2018), Cort´es et al. (2020)).2
Using a staggered difference-in-differences specification over the period 2010–2016, we
examine the change in operating decisions and performance, as measured by patient health
outcomes, between hospitals subject to a credit supply shock—hospitals that had lending
relationships with banks which were later stress-tested—relative to hospitals which did not
experience a shock. This empirical strategy has the advantage that (i) the stress tests
themselvesareunrelatedtotheunderlyinghealthofalocalpopulation; (ii)thetestsoccurred
in a staggered manner; (iii) the tests were applied to banks based on size thresholds rather
than on bank performance; and (iv) it is unlikely that hospitals could anticipate the negative
bank responses following a stress test.
We first establish that bank stress tests constitute a negative credit shock to their con-
nected hospital borrowers. In particular, we find that loan spreads increase while loan
amounts and maturity periods decrease for affected hospitals, and these hospitals are more
likely to switch lenders to one for which they did not have a previous relationship with.3
These results are consistent with bank stress tests increasing the cost of credit for an af-
fected bank’s hospitals and reinforce the findings of Acharya et al. (2018) and Cort´es et al.
(2020). The increases in debt servicing costs are economically significant for hospitals in our
sample, due to low profit margins within the hospital industry. For example, the impact
of the higher spread (interest rate over LIBOR) alone results in an additional $1.07 million
in interest expense per year for an affected hospital in our sample, which amounts to an
economically sizable 13.4% of net income. A decrease in net income heightens the likelihood
of hospital insolvency and closure—an ever-present risk in the hospital industry (Bai et al.
(2020))—and also leaves the hospital with fewer internally generated funds with which to
finance future operations.
We then explore how hospital financial and operating outcomes change as a result. We
2Asshown by Acharyaet al.(2018)andCort´esetal. (2020), bankstrimtheirloanportfoliosandcharge
higher rates for riskier loans following a stress test, thus constituting a negative credit supply shock to firms
that borrow from these tested banks.
3Changing lenders or acquiring loans from new banks also proves problematic for hospitals, as new
lenders require a higher rate to compensate for the more severe information asymmetry due to the absence
of a previous relationship.
2