NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FROM MAN VS. MACHINE TO MAN + MACHINE:
THE ART AND AI OF STOCK ANALYSES
Sean Cao
Wei Jiang
Junbo L. Wang
Baozhong Yang
Working Paper 28800
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28800
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2021
The authors have benefited from discussions with Svetlana Bryzgalova, Will Cong, Jillian
Grennan, Gerry Hoberg, Markus Pelger, Siew Hong Teoh, and Christina Zhu, and comments and
suggestions from seminar/conference participants at CKGSB and Stanford Engineering the AI
Big Data in Finance Research Forum (ABFR) webinar. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Sean Cao, Wei Jiang, Junbo L. Wang, and Baozhong Yang. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

From Man vs. Machine to Man + Machine: The Art and AI of Stock Analyses
Sean Cao, Wei Jiang, Junbo L. Wang, and Baozhong Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 28800
May 2021
JEL No. G11,G12,G14,G31,M41
ABSTRACT
An AI analyst we build to digest corporate financial information, qualitative disclosure and
macroeconomic indicators is able to beat the majority of human analysts in stock price forecasts
and generate excess returns compared to following human analyst. In the contest of “man vs
machine,” the relative advantage of the AI Analyst is stronger when the firm is complex, and
when information is high-dimensional, transparent and voluminous. Human analysts remain
competitive when critical information requires institutional knowledge (such as the nature of
intangible assets). The edge of the AI over human analysts declines over time when analysts gain
access to alternative data and to in-house AI resources. Combining AI’s computational power and
the human art of understanding soft information produces the highest potential in
generating accurate forecasts. Our paper portraits a future of “machine plus human” (instead
of human displacement) in high-skill professions.
Sean Cao Junbo L. Wang
J.Mack Robinson College of Business School of Business
Georgia State University Louisiana State University
35 Broad Street, Suite 1243 Baton Rouge, LA 70803
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992 junbowang@lsu.edu
scao@gsu.edu
Baozhong Yang
Wei Jiang Georgia State University
Graduate School of Business J.Mack Robinson College of Business
Columbia University 35 Broad Street, Suite 1243
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 803 Atlanta, GA 30303
New York, NY 10027 bzyang@gsu.edu
and NBER
wj2006@columbia.edu

1. Introduction
Since its inception and as it rises, artificial intelligence (AI) constantly makes human
beings to rethink their own roles. While AI is meant to be intelligence augmentation for
humans, concerns abound that AI could replace human tasks and increasingly skilled ones,
and thus displace jobs by those currently performed by the better-paid and better-educated
workers (Muro, Maxim, and Whiton, 2019). Such a concern and the associated debates have
motivated a quickly growing literature. Recent work by Webb (2020), Acemoglu, Autor,
Hazell, and Restrepo (2020), Babina, Fedyk, He, and Hodson (2020), and Jiang, Tang, Xiao,
and Yao (2021) have all conducted large-sample analyses on the extent of job exposure
and vulnerability to AI-related technology as well as the consequences on employment and
productivity.
The existing literature has been mostly focusing on characterizing the type of jobs that
are vulnerable to disruption by, as well as those that could be created due to, AI evolution.
In other words, the sentiment of the existent studies mostly involves a theme of “man-
versus-machine,” i.e., to characterize the contest between human and AI, to explore ways
human adapts, and to predict the resulting job redeployment. In such settings, human
beings are often rendered passive or reactive – dealing with disruptions and looking for new
opportunities defined by the AI landscape. There has been relatively little research devoted
toprescribinghowskilledhumanworkerscouldtapintoahigherpotentialwithenhancement
from AI technology, presumably the primary goal for human beings to design and develop
AI in the first place. This study aims to connect the contest of “man-versus-machine” (“man
v. machine” hereafter) to a potential equilibrium of “man-plus-machine” (“man + machine”
hereafter).
Our study could be motivated by the experience of chess grand master Garry Kasparov.
The story that IBM’s Deep Blue beat the then reigning grand master Kasparov in 1997 was
well-known. Multiple contests repeated in a similar setting afterwards killed any remaining
suspense for the outcome of man v. machine in chess playing. What is far less known is that
1

humans, despite having lost interest in man-versus-machine chess contests, have not lost
interest in either the game or the machine. In fact, the encounter with the Deep Blue was a
catalyst for people like Kasparov to pioneer the concept of man + machine matches, in which
a chess player equipped with AI assistance (a “centaur” player) competes against AI. Up
to today the centaur keeps an upper hand against machines; and even more encouragingly,
there have been more and better human chess players with the advent of affordable AI-
engineered chess programs.1 If AI can help more humans become better chess players, it
stands to reason that it can help more of us become better at many skilled jobs, from pilots,
medical doctors, to investment advisors. In this study, we zoom into the profession of stock
analysis, whose data availability allows us to calibrate both man vs. machine and man +
machine. Stock analysts are among the most important information intermediaries in the
market place (e.g., Brav and Lehavy, 2003; Jegadeesh, Kim, Krische, and Lee, 2005; Crane
and Crotty, 2020). Their job, which require both institutional knowledge and data analytics,
has not been spared by AI as more and more investors start to heed to recommendations
about stock picking and portfolio formation made by AI-powered tools.2
To trace out the path from “man v. machine” to “man + machine,” we decided to
build our own AI model for year-end stock predictions so that we have a consistent and
time-adapted benchmark for AI performance which we understand and are able to explain.3
Target prices and earnings are the two primary subjects of analyst forecasts, we choose the
former as the latter are subject to managerial discretion, which a large body of accounting
literature on earnings management manifests. Our “AI analyst” is built on training a com-
1Source of information: The Inevitable, by Keven Kelly, Penguin Publishing Group, 2016. See also
“Defeated Chess Champ Garry Kasparov Has Made Peace With AI,” Wired, February 2020.
2Sources: “What Machine Learning Will Mean for Asset Managers,” Robert C. Pozen and Jonathan
Ruane, Havard Business Review, December 3, 2019. “How Startup Investors Can Utilize AI To Make
Smarter Investments,” Jia Wertz, Forbes, January 18, 2019.
3We focus on year-end prices because these are a typical focal point for investors and corporations for
tax and reporting reasons. For example, “Credit Suisse Raised Its SP 500 Target – Earnings Are Too Good
to Ignore,” Jacob Sonenshine, Barron’s, April 30, 2021.
2