NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
REALLOCATING LIQUIDITY TO RESOLVE A CRISIS:
EVIDENCE FROM THE PANIC OF 1873
Haelim Anderson
Kinda Cheryl Hachem
Simpson Zhang
Working Paper 28870
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28870
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2021, Revised March 2022
We thank Ellis Tallman for many helpful conversations in the early stages of this work. We also
thank Jason Allen, Allen Berger, Mark Carlson (discussant), David Martinez-Miera, Roberto
Robatto, and participants at various seminars and conferences for comments. The views
expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the U.S. Department of the Treasury, the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Bureau of Economic Research, or any federal
agency and do not establish supervisory policy, requirements, or expectations. The authors are
responsible for any errors.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Haelim Anderson, Kinda Cheryl Hachem, and Simpson Zhang. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Reallocating Liquidity to Resolve a Crisis: Evidence from the Panic of 1873
Haelim Anderson, Kinda Cheryl Hachem, and Simpson Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 28870
May 2021, Revised March 2022
JEL No. D53,D62,E42,E50,G01,N21
ABSTRACT
We study financial stability with constraints on central bank intervention in a model with belief-
driven bank runs. A pecuniary externality arises in the decentralized market for interbank loans
and leads to excessively many bank failures. A forced reallocation of liquidity across banks
improves social welfare and can be implemented through the issuance of clearinghouse loan
certificates, such as those issued in New York City during the Panic of 1873. A new dataset
constructed from archival records reveals that the New York Clearinghouse issued loan
certificates to member banks in the way our model suggests would have helped resolve the panic.
Haelim Anderson Simpson Zhang
Center for Financial Research Office of the Comptroller of the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Currency (OCC) - Treasury
550 17th St NW 400 7th St SW
Washington, DC 20429 Washington, DC 20219
handerson@fdic.gov Simpson.Zhang@occ.treas.gov
Kinda Cheryl Hachem
University of Virginia
Darden School of Business
100 Darden Boulevard
Charlottesville, VA 22906
and NBER
hachemk@darden.virginia.edu

1 Introduction
While the advent of deposit insurance has dramatically reduced runs on banks in the traditional
sector, shadow banks engaging in maturity transformation remain highly vulnerable. The preser-
vation of the banking system during an aggregate liquidity crunch then requires either suspensions
of convertibility or monetary injections by the central bank. Neither option is without problems.
Suspensions can undermine investor confidence and cause market disruptions, making them a nu-
clear option. The 2007-09 financial crisis, widely characterized as a run on the shadow banking
system, was instead resolved with a massive expansion of the monetary base. However, weary
of the implications for bailout expectations and bank risk-taking, lawmakers have since imposed
restrictions on how central banks can respond to future financial crises.1
This paper investigates the scope for mitigating bank failures without resorting to suspension
or monetary injections. If such policies exist, they would make the restrictions on central banks
credible and provide a powerful tool against bailout expectations. The setting for our analysis is
the Panic of 1873. This was the first major financial crisis of the U.S. National Banking Era and
its magnitude necessitated a strong response in order to contain the damage. Since the Federal
Reserve did not yet exist, the banking system had to resolve financial crises without a central bank
balance sheet that could expand as needed. The New York Clearinghouse (NYCH) took the lead
in New York City, the center of the financial system.
ThePanicof1873ledtothefirstlarge-scaleuseofanovelinstrumentdevisedbytheNYCH:the
issuance of clearinghouse loan certificates to member banks.2 These certificates were collateralized
notes that members of the clearinghouse could use instead of cash to settle payment obligations
with each other, then driven principally by check clearing. Members paid in loan certificates were
entitled to cash at a later date. The certificates did not increase the total amount of cash in the
systemnordidtheycirculateasmoneyinthegeneralpublic. Instead,clearinghouseloancertificates
1Regulations were passed after the financial crisis to restrict the scope of central bank lending. In the U.S., for
example, the Dodd-Frank Act imposes restrictions on the Fed’s powers to lend to non-bank financial institutions.
The Treasury Secretary must approve Fed loans to non-banks, and banks are limited from using discount window
loanstochannelfundstonon-bankaffiliates. In2017, lawmakersattemptedtofurtherrestrictlendingto non-banks
in the Financial CHOICE Act, though the act did not ultimately pass. The latest battle over the Fed’s emergency
lending authority occurred in December 2020 during negotiations for the Consolidated Appropriations Act.
2This was the first instance of loan certificates during the U.S. National Banking Era. Prior to the National
Banking Acts of 1863 and 1864, loan certificates were used during the Panic of 1857 where they were introduced in
the middle of the crisis, in contrast to the Panic of 1873 where they were introduced at its onset.
2

providedamechanismforreallocatingcashacrossbanksandtheiractivities. Ourpaperstudiesthis
reallocation, its value-added relative to a decentralized market for interbank loans, and its role in
resolving the Panic of 1873. The lessons transcend the historical episode as regulations mandating
the central clearing of credit derivatives after the 2007-09 financial crisis have led to a revival of
clearinghouses in modern financial systems.
We start by constructing a new dataset from archival records of the NYCH to shed light on
the usage of clearinghouse loan certificates during the Panic of 1873. These records include the
daily clearing and settlement payments of all member banks through the NYCH, the amount of
loan certificates applied for and received by banks, and the interest payments among banks. With
this information, we characterize the magnitude of liquidity shortages and the amount of liquidity
transfers across banks.
We document that banks experiencing the most pressure on cash reserves (specie and legal
tender) due to check settlement obligations received the most loan certificates from the NYCH.
These banks were also experiencing much larger deposit outflows than non-recipient banks during
the crisis, so, in the absence of loan certificates, they would not have had enough cash to honor
both clearing obligations and deposit withdrawals without liquidating large amounts of assets,
most likely call loans. The call loan market was a critical source of funding for stock-brokers, thus
liquidations of call loans by banks in need of cash would have had potentially deleterious effects
on stock prices. We also document that both recipient and non-recipient banks emerged from the
Panic of 1873 with cash-to-deposit ratios that were similar to the ratios they had before the crisis
began, despite experiencing differential deposit outflows during the panic. Liquidity thus appears
to have been successfully redistributed across the members of the NYCH.
The empirical findings raise an important theoretical question: were clearinghouse loan certifi-
cates simply substituting for a decentralized interbank market, which by all accounts did not exist
in New York in 1873, or do loan certificates improve outcomes over and above what such markets
can achieve? We develop a model to answer this question and provide a basis for quantitative
analysis and the exploration of policy counterfactuals.
Banks in the model borrow short and lend long, subjecting themselves to runs by patient
depositors (i.e., those who do not need to withdraw early but may choose to do so). As is common
in bank-run models, the actions of patient depositors depend on their beliefs. The depositors in
3