NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SORTING OUT THE REAL EFFECTS OF CREDIT SUPPLY
Briana Chang
Matthieu Gomez
Harrison Hong
Working Paper 28842
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28842
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2021
We thank Samuel Hanson, David Scharfstein, Raj Iyer, Jose-Luis Peydro, Rafael Repullo, Daniel
Paravisini, Amir Sufi, Michael Schwert, Oliver Giesecke, Shangjin Wei, and seminar participants
at American Finance Association Meetings, NBER Corporate Finance Meetings, Imperial College
Business School, Columbia University, Seoul National University, and Fudan University for helpful
comments. Address correspondence to Briana Chang, Department of Finance, Wisconsin School of
Business, UW-Madison, 5274 E Grainger Hall, 975 University Avenue, Madison, WI 53703, Tel:
608-265-9171. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2021 by Briana Chang, Matthieu Gomez, and Harrison Hong. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Sorting Out the Real Effects of Credit Supply
Briana Chang, Matthieu Gomez, and Harrison Hong
NBER Working Paper No. 28842
May 2021
JEL No. G0,G01,G2,G23
ABSTRACT
We document that banks which cut lending more during the Great Recession were lending to
riskier firms. To explain this evidence, we build a competitive matching model of bank-firm
relationships in which risky firms borrow from banks with low holding costs. Based on default
probabilities and equilibrium loan rates, we use our sorting model to recover the latent bank
holding cost distribution. The measure of banks with low holding costs dropped during the Great
Recession. This credit supply shift conservatively accounted for around 50% of the decline in
corporate loans over this period. Our attribution cannot be captured by panel regression estimates
from the bank lending channel literature.
Briana Chang Harrison Hong
Department of Finance, Investment Department of Economics
and Banking Columbia University
University of Wisconsin - Madison 1022 International Affairs Building
bchang@bus.wisc.edu Mail Code 3308
420 West 118th Street
Matthieu Gomez New York, NY 10027
Columbia University and NBER
435 Riverside Drive, Apt 41 hh2679@columbia.edu
10025 New York
gomez.matthieu@gmail.com

1. Introduction
A large macro-finance literature seeks to quantify the effects of bank lending for business
cycle outcomes (Bernanke and Blinder (1988), Bernanke and Gertler (1989), Kashyap,
Stein, and Wilcox (1993)). One particularly striking episode is the Great Recession,
during which aggregate loan volume dropped by half (Ivashina and Scharfstein (2010)).
How much of this drop was due to changes in financial markets (shift in credit supply)
as opposed to changes in firm riskiness (shift in credit risk) is still an open question. We
provide an answer using a matching model of bank lending.
First, we provide strong evidence of sorting between banks and firms. Banks which
cut lending the most during the Great Recession were lending to the riskiest firms. This
correlation is robust across all these measures of firm downside risk used in the banking
literature: (1) borrower loan spread or interest rates, (2) the yields of the public debt
for firms that issue in both public and syndicated private corporate loan markets, and
(3) borrower leverage. The economic magnitudes are large. For instance, a 1 p.p. higher
borrower loan or bond spread is associated with a decrease of bank lending growth of 0.70
standard deviation, with a t-statistic of around 4.
We then examine the ex-ante characteristics of the banks that were lending to the
riskiest firms. These banks typically had a low deposit-to-asset ratio and a close proximity
to Lehman in terms of co-syndication of corporate loans. In short, they were investment
banks rather than commercial banks. This suggests that this sorting pattern is driven by
banks’ ability to take on risk, presumably due to their talent to sell securitized loans. For
instance, marketing documents for Lehman during this period pointed to their ability to
package the riskiest loans and to sell them to institutional investors compared to other
banks.1 While firms in theory could have borrowed from banks with differential exposure
1See https://bit.ly/3j0rz9H. Banks that securitized had a competitive advantage over traditional
banks during the years before the Great Recession of 2008 (Nadauld and Weisbach (2012)).
1

to securitization so as to diversify their funding risks during the crisis period, they did
not in practice.
Second, we develop a competitive one-to-one matching model of a credit market where
banks differ in their holding costs (per unit of risk). For the Great Recession episode,
we associate lower holding costs with bank talent to sell securitized loans. But bank
holding costs can in principle be related to different bank characteristics emphasized in
the literature:2 our approach does not require us to take a stand on relevant underlying
bank characteristics.
ThejointsurplusofagivenmatchissimplytheNPVoftheprojectminusthetotalcost
of the loan. When there is complementarity between firm riskiness and bank talent, firms
with greater downside risk borrow from banks with lower holding costs in equilibrium,
consistent with the sorting in the data. The interest rate of the loan determines the split
of the surplus. The riskiest firms benefit the most from the best banks (i.e. those with
lowest per unit holding costs) and thus are willing to pay higher interests to these banks.
In contrast, the safest firms with the best credit ratings benefit the least from the best
banks and so they match with the worst banks and get all the surplus in the relationship.
The loan rates are dependent on the distribution of bank holding costs (or equivalently
talent to sell securitized loans) and the distribution of firm credit risk across the entire
credit market.
A market clearing condition characterizes the type of the marginal lender, and there-
fore the mass of firms that obtain loans. The marginal type of firm that gets a loan can
be understood from a social planner’s perspective: the benefit of lending to the marginal
firm must equal its marginal cost. The marginal benefit is the NPV of the project net
of the holding costs of the best bank. The marginal cost is moving other firms to worse
2These include size (Chen and Song (2013), Berger, Miller, Petersen, Rajan, and Stein (2005)), bank
capitalization (Schwert (2018)), proximity (Petersen and Rajan (2002)), specialized knowledge (Par-
avisini, Rappoport, Schnabl, and Wolfenzon (2014)) or networks (Engelberg, Gao, and Parsons (2012)).
2