NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A LONG AND A SHORT LEG MAKE FOR A WOBBLY EQUILIBRIUM
Nicolae B. Gârleanu
Stavros Panageas
Geoffery X. Zheng
Working Paper 28824
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28824
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2021, Revised October 2021
We would like to thank Itamar Dreschler and seminar participants at the NBER Summer Institute
Asset Pricing Program, the UW Foster School of Business, the Shanghai Advanced Institute of
Finance, and UNC Kenan-Flagler Business School for their useful comments on the paper. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Nicolae B. Gârleanu, Stavros Panageas, and Geoffery X. Zheng. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Long and a Short Leg Make For a Wobbly Equilibrium
Nicolae B. Gârleanu, Stavros Panageas, and Geoffery X. Zheng
NBER Working Paper No. 28824
May 2021, Revised October 2021
JEL No. G11,G12
ABSTRACT
We document the historically bad performance of shorting strategies in late 2020 and early 2021.
Short sellers started retreating several weeks before the dramatic growth in the online discussion
of January 2021 and across numerous stocks, the majority of which were not heavily discussed
online and did not experience an unusual increase in retail buying volume. We provide a model to
explain how fears among short sellers can become self-fulfilling and lead to “run-type” behavior.
The model also provides a novel explanation why rational short sellers may choose to leave the
market even as mispricing widens.
Nicolae B. Gârleanu Geoffery X. Zheng
Haas School of Business New York University
F628 geoff.zheng@nyu.edu
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
garleanu@haas.berkeley.edu
Stavros Panageas
Anderson School of Management
University of California, Los Angeles
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
stavros.panageas@anderson.ucla.edu
An appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28824

We show that late 2020 to early 2021 was a historically bad period for shorting strategies.
Numerous press articles were dedicated to one stock, GameStop, whose price sky-rocketed in
January 2021 due to the strong demand by non-professional traders participating in online
forums. However, a broad-based decline in short selling had begun almost two months before
the dramatic events of January 2021. As early as November 2020, short interest went down
in a significant number of stocks that were much larger than GameStop, did not attract the
attention of the online crowd, and did not experience any notable change in retail purchase
volume.
The timing of the retreat suggests that it was not a direct reaction to GameStop losses.1
At the same time, the unremarkable behavior of retail purchase volume for the numerous
stockswhoseshortinterestdeclinedsuggeststhatthisretreatwasnottheresultofwidespread
“short squeezes,” like the one experienced by GameStop. Rather, we contend that the
behavior of short sellers during this period may be better described as a fearful reaction to
early warning signs of a shifting market environment.
Motivated by these events, in this paper we attempt to explain why short selling may be
a particularly fickle strategy, susceptible to “run-type” behavior. In particular, we provide a
novel reason — unrelated to the well-known Shleifer and Vishny (1997) “limits to arbitrage”
argument — why rational short sellers may choose to abandon a market even as prices
increasingly deviate from fundamentals.
We next provide more detail on our empirical findings, outline the ingredients of the
model, and summarize the basic intuitions for our findings.
As has been extensively reported, in January 2021 the WSB subreddit, an online forum
where contributors exchange views on trading, saw explosive growth, largely centered around
GameStop. Consistent with articles in the popular press linking this online discussion with
retail purchases, we show that high-frequency fluctuations of GameStop mentions on the
WSB subreddit exhibited a very high correlation (above 90 percent at hourly intervals) with
retail purchases of GameStop. This strong high-frequency correlation suggests that the WSB
subreddit was an effective vehicle in coordinating retail purchases for this particular stock.
1In this context, it is worth noting that the dollar value of GameStop shares shorted as of December 31,
2020 was $1.3 billion, 0.1% percent of the total value of all shares shorted in the US stock market at that
time.
1

Remarkably, many other high-short-interest stocks experienced significant declines in
short interest starting in November 2020 (thus, six to eight weeks before the GameStop
events), even though these stocks were not heavily discussed on the WSB subreddit, did not
experience any unusual increase in retail purchases, and were much larger than GameStop.
Concurrently, the strategy of shorting these stocks performs strikingly poorly.2 For such
stocks there appears to be no evidence of a coordinated short squeeze by the WSB subreddit
participants, yet short interest nonetheless declined. Interestingly, this decline appears to be
permanent, suggesting a shift in equilibrium.
Using these events as backdrop, we develop a model that explains why short selling can
be unstable. We are not interested in explaining the behavior of GameStop, but rather
situations in which a short-seller exit is not the result of a short squeeze. In particular,
the model emphasizes the feedback loop between the Sharpe ratio and short interest and
shows that the same fundamentals can lead to equilibria in which short interest is high,
intermediate, or zero. This equilibrium multiplicity is a time-honored device to illustrate
the possibility of a run: a shared perception of a shift in equilibrium is enough to cause an
abrupt short-seller exit. In addition, the model provides a novel explanation for why rational
short sellers may choose to abandon a market even as mispricing widens.
The model features investors with heterogeneous beliefs about the expected return of a
positive-supply, risky stock: one group is optimistic, while the other holds rational beliefs.3
This difference of opinion between investors prompts them to trade with each other, with the
rational investors having an incentive to short the stock whenever the expected excess return
becomes negative. Shorting stock requires borrowing it, for a fee determined endogenously
in the lending market as a result of bargaining.
As is recognized, the presence of lending fees modifies the returns experienced by both
longandshortinvestors. Theequilibriumriskcompensation(the“Sharperatio”)isimpacted
both by the magnitude of the lending fee and the fraction of a representative lender’s shares
2An illustration of the gloomy mood among short sellers at that time was the emblematic de-
cision of Citron Research to stop publishing short selling research after over 20 years: “Citron to
stop publishing short-selling research, Andrew Left says” (https://financialpost.com/investing/
citron-research-andrew-left-stop-short-selling-research-publishing).
3Motivatedbytheempiricalfactthatstockswithhighshortinteresttendtohavelowsubsequentreturns,
weassumethatthecomparativelymorepessimisticinvestorsareactuallyrational,butthisisnotanessential
assumption for our results.
2