NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW RESILIENT IS MORTGAGE CREDIT SUPPLY?
EVIDENCE FROM THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC
Andreas Fuster
Aurel Hizmo
Lauren Lambie-Hanson
James Vickery
Paul S. Willen
Working Paper 28843
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28843
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2021, Revised December 2024
We thank Omar Ahmad, Eric Hardy, Natalie Newton, Dick Oosthuizen, and Peter Psathas for
outstanding research assistance, Greg Buchak, Will Diamond, Scott Frame, Tim McQuade, Paolina
Medina, Jung Sakong, Philipp Schnabl, Felipe Severino, and numerous other colleagues for
comments, as well as seminar and workshop participants at the Journal of Finance and Fama-Miller
Center Conference on the Financial Consequences of COVID-19, University of Zurich, Louisiana
State University, Philadelphia Fed, Penn State University, Mortgage Bankers Association, NBER
Summer Institute, FRBSF/UCLA Housing Conference, GAO, Baruch, FDIC Consumer Research
Symposium, Dartmouth (Tuck), the Dallas Fed, CFPB Research Conference, AFA meetings,
University of Colorado, Temple Fischer-Shain conference, UEA meetings, Wisconsin Real Estate
Research conference, Bank of Lithuania, Wharton, Temple University, FIRS, and the INFORMS
meetings. Hizmo was an economist at the Federal Reserve Board while this research was
conducted. Opinions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not represent the
opinions of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston or Philadelphia, the Federal Reserve System, or
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Andreas Fuster, Aurel Hizmo, Lauren Lambie-Hanson, James Vickery, and Paul S.
Willen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How Resilient Is Mortgage Credit Supply? Evidence from the COVID-19 Pandemic
Andreas Fuster, Aurel Hizmo, Lauren Lambie-Hanson, James Vickery, and Paul S. Willen
NBER Working Paper No. 28843
May 2021, Revised December 2024
JEL No. G21, G23, G28
ABSTRACT
We study the resilience of US mortgage credit supply during the COVID-19 pandemic—the most
significant shock since the financial crisis—and draw out broader lessons about the functioning of
this important market. While mortgage lending boomed in 2020-21, we find that a sharp increase in
intermediation markups limited the passthrough of low rates to households. We link this increase in
markups to capacity constraints amplified by pandemic-related operational and labor market
frictions. We also present new evidence that capacity constraints in the mortgage market are
national in scope and have not yet been significantly mitigated by recent technological change.
Nonbank lenders, often thought to be fragile, gained market share from banks but remain reliant on
securitization. We also find evidence that government credit guarantees support the flow of credit
to risky borrowers but are not always sufficient, and that quantitative easing boosts supply
particularly for the types of loans being purchased.
Andreas Fuster James Vickery
Swiss Finance Institute @ EPFL Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
Quartier UNIL-Dorigny james.vickery@phil.frb.org
Extranef 216
Lausanne CH-1015 Paul S. Willen
Switzerland Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
and CEPR Research Department
andreas.fuster@gmail.com 600 Atlantic Avenue
Boston, MA 02210-2204
Aurel Hizmo and NBER
Federal Reserve Board paul.willen@bos.frb.org
20th and C St NW
Washington, DC 20551
aurel.hizmo@frb.gov
Lauren Lambie-Hanson
10 Independence Mall
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, CFI
Philadelphia, PA 19106
Lauren.Lambie-Hanson@phil.frb.org

I Introduction
The pandemic years 2020 and 2021 were an extraordinary period for the US mortgage
market. In both years, lenders underwrote over $4 trillion in new mortgages, far higher
than in any other year except 2003.1 Rates on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages (FRMs) fell to
historiclowsbelow3%foranextendedperiod. Atthesametime,however,thepandemic
was of course also a large negative economic shock with effects on borrower default risk
and financial markets more broadly, and virus-related restrictions complicated many ac-
tivitiesincludinghousingtransactionsandtheoriginationofmortgages.
We use this period to study the resilience of US mortgage credit supply, focusing on
broader lessons for understanding the functioning of this critical market. One key goal
is to shed light on the effects of well-documented structural changes in the mortgage
marketsincethe2007-09globalfinancialcrisis(GFC),includingasecularshiftinlending
to less-regulated nonbanks (Buchak et al., 2018; Kim et al., 2022), the diffusion of online
lending (Buchak et al., 2018; Fuster et al., 2019) and changes in regulation and the role
of government. These developments raise many questions: How resilient are the new
nonbank lenders in periods of stress? Has new technology alleviated lender capacity
constraints, making credit supply more elastic? How sensitive are mortgage risk premia
to economic and financial shocks, and what role do government guarantees and other
interventions(e.g.,quantitativeeasing,orQE)playinmitigatingtheseeffects?
We start by documenting that, even though mortgage rates reached record lows in
2020-21,thegapbetweenmortgageratesand10-yearTreasuryyieldsinfactreachedpeak
levels not seen since the GFC—see Figure 1.2 However, the cause of this increase in the
mortgage-Treasury spread was different from the GFC (and from the recent 2022-24 pe-
1From 2008 through 2019, annual mortgage originations never exceeded $2.4 trillion, and they exceeded
$2 trillion only three times. Lending volume was $3.7 trillion in 2003. Statistics are from Inside Mortgage
Financeandcanbeseenonp. 8ofUrbanInstitute(2024).
2The effective duration of a 30-year mortgage is much shorter than 30 years due to prepayment. Ten-year
Treasuryyieldsarethereforewidelyusedasabenchmarkformortgagerates,eventhoughthisbenchmark
isimperfect,forreasonsweexplainbelow.
1

riod when this spread also widened significantly): it is fully explained by a large rise
in the “primary-secondary spread,” a measure of mortgage lenders’ markups.3 Another,
conceptually sounder measure of markups, “gain-on-sale,” also increased sharply early
inthepandemicandstayedelevatedthroughtolate2021.
Intermediation markups typically rise during refinancing booms due to lender capac-
ity constraints (Fuster et al., 2024). But this historical relationship accounts for less than
half of the increase in 2020-21. In other words, the elasticity of mortgage supply was ab-
normally low, despite the recent widespread adoption of online and digital technologies
to streamline lending. We find evidence that operational and labor market frictions re-
lated to the pandemic can account for heightened capacity constraints in 2020-21—e.g.,
licensing of new loan officers was disrupted, contributing to high labor utilization and
wages for existing workers. Perhaps surprisingly, we also find little evidence that fintech
lenders expanded supply more elastically than other nonbanks, further indicating that
technologyhasnotyet“solved”theproblemofcapacityconstraints.
We also present novel evidence on the nature of capacity constraints in the mortgage
market, concluding that these constraints today are effectively national in scope because
the US mortgage market is highly integrated geographically. Specifically we show that
mostmortgagesareoriginatedbylendersthatoperateinmanyregions,andthatlenders,
and even individual loan officers, expanded to new markets in 2020-21 to offset local
differencesindemand. Asaresult,thereislittleornocross-sectionalrelationshipbetween
local demand shocks (or other local factors) and mortgage rates or origination timelines,
eventhoughthesevariablesaretightlyconnectedinthetimeseries.
We then consider other potential drivers of high intermediation markups in 2020-21.
First,westudyindetailtheroleoffinancialconstraintsfacingnonbankslenders,agroup
often considered to be financially fragile. Studying the first major shock since the rise
of nonbanks in the 2010s, we in fact find that nonbanks expanded lending more elasti-
3Weusetheterm“markup”throughoutasshorthandfor“grossmarkup”or“grossmargin”,meaninginour
casethedifferencebetweenthemarginalrevenueofanintermediaryandthemarginaldirectcostoffunds
lenttotheborrower(butwithoutaccountingforwages,overhead,etc.),asin,e.g.,Andersonetal.(2018).
2