NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CENTRAL BANK POLICY AND THE CONCENTRATION OF RISK:
EMPIRICAL ESTIMATES
Nuno Coimbra
Daisoon Kim
Hélène Rey
Working Paper 28907
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28907
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2021, Revised September 2021
We are very grateful for the comments of the Editor, an anonymous referee, our discussant Nina
Boyarchenko and of the participants in the 2021 Carnegie-Rochester-NYU Public Policy
Conference. Rey thanks the ERC for financial support (ERC Advanced Grant 695722). The views
expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the
Banque de France, the ESCB, or the French Macroprudential Authority. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Nuno Coimbra, Daisoon Kim, and Hélène Rey. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Central Bank Policy and the Concentration of Risk: Empirical Estimates
Nuno Coimbra, Daisoon Kim, and Hélène Rey
NBER Working Paper No. 28907
June 2021, Revised September 2021
JEL No. E0,E5,F3,G01
ABSTRACT
Before the 2008 crisis, the cross-sectional skewness of banks’ leverage went up and macro risk
concentrated in the balance sheets of large banks. Using a model of profit-maximizing banks with
heterogeneous Value-at-Risk constraints, we extract the distribution of banks’ risk-taking
parameters from balance sheet data. The time series of these estimates allow us to understand
systemic risk and its concentration in the banking sector over time. Counterfactual exercises show
that (1) monetary policymakers confront the trade-off between stimulating the economy and
financial stability, and (2) macroprudential policies can be effective tools to increase financial
stability.
Nuno Coimbra Hélène Rey
Banque de France London Business School
39, Rue Croix des Petits Champs Regents Park
75001 Paris London NW1 4SA
France United Kingdom
nuno.coimbra@banque-france.fr and CEPR
and also NBER
Daisoon Kim hrey@london.edu
Nelson Hall 4114, Box 8110
Poole College of Management
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC 27695
dkim29@ncsu.edu

1. Introduction
Financial crises are a recurring phenomenon in economic history. Their consequences
on growth and investment can be severe and protracted, as the Great Financial Crisis of
2008 so clearly illustrated. Eichengreen and Portes (1987) write that “much as the study
of disease is one of the most effective ways to learn about human biology, the study of
financial crises provides one of the most revealing perspectives on the functioning of monetary
economies.” There is now substantial evidence showing that credit expansions can end in
crashes materializing in banking crises and recessions, (e.g., Borio and Lowe, 2002; Mian
and Sufi, 2009; Schularick and Taylor, 2012; Fouliard, Howell and Rey, 2020). However, the
mechanism and characteristics of credit expansions as well as their root causes remain largely
elusive. Making progress on those fronts is key for policymakers in charge of macroprudential
policies.
This paper starts with three important facts. First, there is substantial heterogeneity in
risk-taking across financial intermediaries, particularly during credit booms, and some large
actors are particularly reckless. Leverage increases on average in the financial system during
booms, but some banks gain market share rapidly. Wilmarth (2014) for the US before 2008,
Englund (2016) for Sweden before 1992, Santos (2017) and Hellwig (2018) for Spain and
Germany respectively before 2008 all show in their case studies on crises that a subset of
large actors took excessive amounts of macro risk before the crash. For example, Deutsche
Bank leveraged up to quadruple the size of its balance sheet from about e0.5 trillion in early
1990s to about e2 trillion in 2008 as a return of equity (RoE) of 25% was regularly targeted
by the bank CEO. Second, as explained in Adrian and Shin (2010); Adrian and Boyarchenko
(2012); Stulz (2016), banks and other financial institutions make extensive use of value-at-risk
(VaR) measures to manage their risk. Firms estimate the probability of making losses that
could put them in financial distress or default. A certain amount of losses that is exceeded
with a probability p over one month gives the VaR over one month at the probability level p.
1

The use of VaR is ubiquitous in the financial sector. Third, there is great variation across
financial intermediaries regarding how VaR is calculated and how internal risk models of
banks are evaluated. A prima facie example of that variation is the exercise performed by
the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, who undertook a review of the consistency of
risk weights used by a sample of banks (Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, 2013).
Those risk weights, for a given portfolio, depend on the internal risk models of the different
institutions. When given a diversified test portfolio, the surveyed banks, who knew they were
answering their regulators, produced a wide range of results in terms of modeled VaR and
gave answers ranging from 13 million to 33 million euros in terms of capital requirement with
a median of about 18 million. These differences in VaR modeling may be reflecting corporate
culture (risk appetite of the boards as discussed by Stulz, 2016) or different interactions
between banks and their national supervisors, some being much more prescriptive than others.
The tightness of VaR constraints varies substantially across institutions.
In this paper, we zoom on this heterogeneity in risk-taking by analyzing the evolution of
the cross-sectional composition of the balance sheets of financial intermediaries. We estimate
the distribution of their VaR constraint parameters and show how they change over time as
macroeconomic conditions and regulations fluctuate. We show that the time variation and
the shape of the estimated distributions of the VaR parameters are excellent predictors of
bank performance and carry important information on systemic risk. Importantly, it is crucial
to consider the heterogeneity across different financial intermediaries as the larger share of
time variation in our measure comes from the cross-section. Simply looking at changes in
aggregate leverage in the system would therefore miss an essential part of the story. As an
aside, our measure outperforms those based on asset prices when predicting aggregate risk. In
line with this, our systemic risk indicator is related to Baron and Xiong (2017) who link bank
credit expansion to negative predicted excess returns of the bank equity index in the next
three years, but we estimate structural parameters at the bank level rather than outcome
variables at the country level.
2