NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EVOLUTION FROM LIFE INSURANCE TO FINANCIAL ENGINEERING
Ralph S. J. Koijen
Motohiro Yogo
Working Paper 29030
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29030
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2021, Revised September 2021
This invited paper was prepared for the Geneva Risk Economics Lecture at the 47th Seminar of
European Group of Risk and Insurance Economists. We thank Alexander Mürmann, Gregory
Niehaus, and Casey Rothschild for comments. A.M. Best Company, Morningstar, and the NAIC
own the copyright to their respective data, which we use with permission under their license
agreements with Princeton University. This paper is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation under grant 1727049. Koijen acknowledges financial support from the Center
for Research in Security Prices at the University of Chicago and the Fama Research Fund at the
University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Ralph S. J. Koijen and Motohiro Yogo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Evolution from Life Insurance to Financial Engineering
Ralph S. J. Koijen and Motohiro Yogo
NBER Working Paper No. 29030
July 2021, Revised September 2021
JEL No. G22,G32
ABSTRACT
Since the mid-1980s, the share of household net worth intermediated by US financial institutions
has shifted from defined benefit plans to life insurers and defined contribution plans. Life insurers
have primarily grown through variable annuities, which are mutual funds with longevity
insurance, a potential tax advantage, and minimum return guarantees. The minimum return
guarantees change the primary function of life insurers from traditional insurance to financial
engineering. Variable annuity insurers are exposed to interest and equity risk mismatch and their
stock returns were especially low during the COVID-19 crisis. We consider regulatory changes,
such as more detailed financial disclosure and standardized stress tests, to monitor potential risk
mismatch and to ensure stability of the insurance sector.
Ralph S. J. Koijen
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
Ralph.koijen@chicagobooth.edu
Motohiro Yogo
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
myogo@princeton.edu

1. Introduction
The business of life insurers and the associated risks have substantially changed over the last
20 years. The traditional sources of risk for life insurers are uncertainty in interest rates,
aggregate longevity or mortality, and policyholder behavior. A nearly constant leverage
ratio from 1945 through the 1990s suggests that life insurers managed these risks well for
decades when fixed annuities and life insurance were their primary liabilities. Life insurers
manage interest risk by investing a significant share of their assets in long-term bonds. They
manage longevity or mortality risk by offsetting annuities with life insurance. Uncertainty
in policyholder behavior may be more difficult to hedge, but life insurers have decades of
experience to assess the policyholder risk of fixed annuities and life insurance. Finally, life
insurers diversify these sources of risk through unaffiliated reinsurance.
As the share of household net worth intermediated by private defined benefit plans has
declined since the 1980s, the share intermediated by life insurers and private defined con-
tribution plans has grown. At the same time, the composition of life insurer liabilities has
shifted from life insurance to variable annuities, which are mutual funds with longevity in-
surance and a potential tax advantage. Thus, variable annuities replace the key functions of
defined benefit plans in individual accounts and employer-sponsored plans. Since the 2000s,
life insurers have competed on variable annuities with minimum return guarantees, which
are essentially long-maturity put options on the mutual fund.
Thelargesize ofthevariableannuity market reflects itsimportanceforhouseholdwelfare.
In theory, minimum return guarantees could facilitate efficient risk sharing across heteroge-
neous agents (Dumas, 1989; Chan and Kogan, 2002) or overlapping generations (Allen and
Gale, 1997; Ball and Mankiw, 2007). Investors cannot easily replicate minimum return guar-
anteesbecause tradedoptionshaveshorter maturityandmodeluncertainty exposes investors
to basis risk in a dynamic hedging program. Therefore, insurers complete a missing market
for long-maturity options by offering minimum return guarantees over long horizons.
The minimum return guarantees change the primary function of life insurers from tradi-
tional insurance to financial engineering. Life insurers are exposed to interest risk because
they have not sufficiently increased the maturity oftheir bondportfolioor used derivatives to
offset the negative duration and the negative convexity from variable annuities. Life insurers
are also exposed to long-run volatility risk, which is difficult to hedge with traded options
that are short term. The presence of high leverage and risk mismatch makes life insurers
similar to pension funds. However, the minimum return guarantees make life insurers dif-
ferent from pension funds because they are engineering complex payoffs over long horizons
that are difficult to hedge with traded options.
2

Duringtheglobalfinancialcrisis, manyinsurersincludingAegon,Allianz, AXA,Delaware
Life, John Hancock, and Voya (formerly a US subsidiary of ING) suffered large increases in
variable annuity reserves ranging from 27% to 125% of total equity. Hartford was bailed
out by the Troubled Asset Relief Program in June 2009 because of significant losses on their
variable annuity business. The risks associated with minimum return guarantees are not
limited to the US. For example, Equitable Life in the UK failed partly because of guarantees
that were too generous (Roberts, 2012). Perhaps more relevant to the low interest environ-
ment, many Japanese life insurers experienced significant losses because of overly generous
guarantees in the early 2000s (Kashyap, 2002). Minimum return guarantees are important
globally and represent a major share of life insurer liabilities in Austria, Denmark, France,
Germany, the Netherlands, andSweden (European Systemic Risk Board, 2015;Hombert and
Lyonnet, 2017). In these countries, the average duration of liabilities exceed that of assets
by 5 to 10 years (European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority, 2014), which
implies significant losses if interest rates remain unexpectedly low as they have been since
the European sovereign debt crisis through 2020.
This survey paper primarily draws upon research in Koijen and Yogo (2021) and Koijen
and Yogo (2022). Section 2 provides a historical perspective of life insurers’ liabilities and
leverage. Life insurers’ leverage has become more volatile since the 1990s, suggesting greater
risk mismatch due to the minimum return guarantees. Section 3 describes variable annuities
and details about their regulation that are relevant for this paper. Section 4 shows that the
top insurers suffered large increases in variable annuity reserves during the global financial
crisis. Variable annuity insurers’ stock returns have negative exposure to long-term bond
returns after the global financial crisis, and their stock returns were especially low during the
COVID-19 crisis. Section 5 shows that variable annuity sales decreased, fees increased, and
many insurers stopped offering minimum return guarantees during the global financial crisis.
As variable annuities shocked risk-based capital, they affected other important functions of
life insurers including the pricing of fixed annuities and reinsurance. Section 6 considers
regulatory changes, such as more detailed financial disclosure and standardized stress tests,
to monitor potential risk mismatch and to ensure stability of the insurance sector.
2. A historical perspective of life insurers
We provide a historical perspective of life insurers’ liabilities and leverage in comparison
with property and casualty insurers, private pension funds, and banks. Since the 1980s, life
insurers have grown significantly, and the composition of their liabilities has shifted from life
insurance to variable annuities. Coinciding with the changing nature of their business, life
3