NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO COLLATERAL SANCTIONS WORK? EVIDENCE FROM THE IRS’ PASSPORT
CERTIFICATION AND REVOCATION PROCESS
Paul R. Organ
Alex Ruda
Joel Slemrod
Alex Turk
Working Paper 29029
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29029
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2021
We thank Nick Gebbia, Tatiana Homonoff, Jeff Hoopes, Jan Millard, Stacy Orlett, and participants at
the 2020 National Tax Association annual conference, the 2021 IRS/TPC Joint Research Conference
on Tax Administration, and University of Michigan seminars for helpful comments. All data work for
this project involving confidential taxpayer information was done on IRS computers by IRS
employees, and at no time was confidential taxpayer data ever outside of the IRS computing
environment. Organ is a student volunteer with the IRS through the Joint Statistical Research Program.
Slemrod is an IRS employee under an agreement made possible by the Intragovernmental Personnel
Act of 1970 (5 U.S.C. 3371-3376). The views and opinions presented in this paper reflect those of the
authors. They do not necessarily reflect the views or the official position of the Internal Revenue
Service or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All results have been reviewed to ensure that
no confidential information is disclosed.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2021 by Paul R. Organ, Alex Ruda, Joel Slemrod, and Alex Turk. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Collateral Sanctions Work? Evidence from the IRS’ Passport Certification and Revocation
Process
Paul R. Organ, Alex Ruda, Joel Slemrod, and Alex Turk
NBER Working Paper No. 29029
July 2021
JEL No. H2,H24,H26
ABSTRACT
Penalties for tax evasion are typically financial, but many jurisdictions also utilize collateral
sanctions that deny access to some government-provided service. To learn about the effectiveness
of such penalties, we examine a U.S. policy restricting passport access for taxpayers with
substantial tax debt, known as “certification.” We find an immediate and strong positive effect on
compliance actions when a passport request is denied. We then take advantage of randomization
during the policy rollout to identify the direct compliance effect of certification, and find smaller
but non-trivial effects whose heterogeneity is consistent with measures of taxpayers’ value of
having a passport.
Paul R. Organ Joel Slemrod
University of Michigan University of Michigan
prorgan@umich.edu 701 Tappan Street
Room R5396
Alex Ruda Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
Internal Revenue Service and NBER
Research, Applied Analytics, and Statistics jslemrod@umich.edu
77 K Street NE
Washington, DC 20222 Alex Turk
Alexander.C.Ruda@irs.gov Internal Revenue Service
30 East 7th Street
Wells Fargo Place
St. Paul, MN 55101
Alex.H.Turk@irs.gov

1. Introduction and motivation
According to the canonical model of Allingham and Sandmo (1972), tax evasion is constrained
by the threat of detection and punishment. Traditionally, the punishment for actions deemed to be
evasion has been largely financial and, very occasionally, imprisonment. But there is a third tool,
known as a collateral sanction. Blank (2013) defines these as measures that are applied in
addition to formal tax penalties, rescind government-provided benefits or privileges, and are
usually enforced by an agency other than the tax agency. Although empirical analyses of the
effectiveness of traditional enforcement policies have recently proliferated, as surveyed in
Slemrod (2019), little attention has been paid to the effectiveness of collateral sanctions.
This paper addresses that gap by examining a recent U.S. initiative that can restrict passport
access—denying an application or renewal, and even revocation of an existing passport—to
taxpayers with substantial tax debt. We estimate the direct and indirect effects on taxpayer
behavior of this new authority, including specifically, but not limited to, the effects on payment
speed and amount, the likelihood of entering into an installment agreement, and the likelihood of
bankruptcy filing. Of the direct effects, we examine the impact of having a passport application
denied as well as receiving notification that certification of such an action has been initiated. We
take advantage of a randomized controlled trial (RCT) embedded in the certification to identify
the latter effect. To study the indirect effects of the program, we analyze trends in taxpayer
counts and balances over time, look for bunching under the statutory threshold, and plan to study
the total effect of the program by studying how behavior changes over time for cohorts impacted
differently by the program.
Understanding both the direct and indirect effects of this program is critical for analyzing the
costs and benefits of the program, as well as for optimizing the design of this and other similar
programs. It also fleshes out a central component of the Allingham-Sandmo model of tax
evasion, the expected penalty for non-compliance, which depends not only on the ability of the
tax agency to detect non-compliance but also on its ability to collect any assessed liability.
The collateral sanction we examine—restricting passport access for certain tax debtors—was
enacted as part of the Fixing America’s Surface Transportation (FAST) Act of 2015, which was
2

passed by Congress on December 3 and signed by President Obama a day later.1 This Act
required the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to notify the State Department of taxpayers owing a
seriously delinquent tax debt (initially $50,000 or more, $54,000 or more as of 2021). The State
Department may then deny passport applications or renewals for these taxpayers, and may also
revoke existing passports. In February 2018, the IRS began notifying taxpayers of their
certification with Notice CP508C and sending certifications of unpaid tax debt to the State
Department. TIGTA (2019) discusses some issues with its implementation.
To put into perspective the enforcement potential of the passport sanction program, according to
GAO (2011), in fiscal year 2008, of the 16 million passports issued, 224,000 were issued to
individuals who owed a total of $5.8 billion in unpaid federal taxes. The TIGTA (2019) report
provides a snapshot of the passport certification program as of May 17, 2019. By that date, the
IRS had certified 388,701 taxpayers as having “seriously delinquent tax debt” under the FAST
Act.2 A total of $961 million in payments had been made to these taxpayer accounts, including
$551 million in fully paid balances. As a result of these collections efforts, over 40,000 taxpayers
had received decertifications for having paid in full or otherwise moving towards being tax
compliant. This accounted for 40% of all decertifications through May 17, 2019, with the
remaining 60% of decertifications resulting from taxpayers falling into one of several categories,
the most prevalent being taxpayers living in disaster zones (27%), whose tax debts have become
uncollectible due to statute expiration (12%), or qualifying for hardship exemptions (9%).
What these numbers do not reveal is the counterfactual—how much of this debt would have been
paid off in the absence of the passport sanctions program—and therefore they do not provide an
estimate of the causal impact of the passport revocation program. In this paper we take advantage
of micro-level tax administration data and a randomized control trial embedded in the
implementation of the program to provide credible causal estimates of its impact.
1 The idea was first introduced in fall 2011 as part of Sen. Barbara Boxer (D-CA)’s bill called MAP-21, a precursor
to the FAST Act (Urist (2012)). There is some precedent for restricting access to passports for certain individuals;
the Conference Report on the FAST Act notes that under then-present law, the Secretary of State could “refuse to
issue or renew a passport if the applicant owes child support in excess of $2,500 or owes certain types of Federal
debts.” (U.S. House (2015)
2 The report notes that this includes some repeat certifications, where a taxpayer was certified, de-certified, and later
certified again. In this paper, we focus on first-time certifications.
3