NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RESERVES WERE NOT SO AMPLE AFTER ALL
Adam Copeland
Darrell Duffie
Yilin Yang
Working Paper 29090
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29090
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2021, Revised August 2022
We are grateful for conversations with Viral Acharya, Gara Afonso, Sriya Anbil, Yakov Amihud,
David Andolfatto, Adrien d'Avernas, Cecilia Caglio, Seth Carpenter, John Cochrane, Ricardo
Correa, Lou Crandall, Wenxin Du, Bill English, Egemen Eren, Andy Filardo, Peter Fisher, Andy
Filardo, Michael Fleming, Scott Freidenrich, Ken Garbade, Beth Hammack, Tom Harrop, Ben
Hébert, Sebastian Infante, Peter Ireland, Frank Keane, Narayana Kocherlakota, Don˛Kohn,
Arvind Krishnamurthy, Gabriele La Spada, Jenn LeClair, Mickey Levy, Gordon Liao, Lorie
Logan, Brian Madigan, Andrei Magasiner, Antoine Martin, Jamie McAndrews, Al Moffitt, Jamie
McAndrews, Bill Nelson, Peter Nowicki, Patrick Parkinson, Monika Piazzesi, Simon Potter,
Michael Roberts, Brian Sack, George Selgin, John Taylor, Quentin Vandeweyer, Mike
Verdeschi, Josh Younger, John Williams, Stephen Williamson, and AmyWang. The views
expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research. Research assistance by Renhao Jiang is gratefully acknowledged.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2021 by Adam Copeland, Darrell Duffie, and Yilin Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Reserves Were Not So Ample After All
Adam Copeland, Darrell Duffie, and Yilin Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 29090
July 2021, Revised August 2022
JEL No. G12,G2
ABSTRACT
The Federal Reserve's "balance-sheet normalization," which reduced aggregate reserves between
2017 and September 2019, increased repo rate distortions, the severity of rate spikes, and intraday
payment timing stresses, culminating with a significant disruption in Treasury repo markets in
mid-September 2019. We show that repo rates rose above efficient-market levels when the total
reserve balances held at the Federal Reserve by the largest repo-active bank holding companies
declined and that repo rate spikes are strongly associated with delayed intraday payments of
reserves to these large bank holding companies. Intraday payment timing stresses are magnified
by early-morning settlement of Treasury security issuances. Substantially higher aggregate levels
of reserves than existed in the period leading up to September 2019 would likely have eliminated
most or all of these payment timing stresses and repo rate spikes.
Adam Copeland Yilin Yang
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Stanford University
33 Liberty Street davyang@stanford.edu
New York, NY 10045
USA
adam.copeland@gmail.com
Darrell Duffie
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-7298
and NBER
duffie@stanford.edu

1 Introduction
We show how post-crisis liquidity regulations and the Federal Reserve’s “balance-sheet nor-
malization”stressedtheintradaymanagementofreservebalancesheldattheFederalReserve
(Fed) by large bank holding companies (BHCs) that are active in repo markets. This led to
spikes in Treasury repo rates during 2018-2019. After an especially large and prominently
reported1 disruption in repo markets during September 16-18, 2019, the Fed reversed its
balance-sheet normalization. Despite this change in policy, our analysis implies that the
reserve balances held at the Fed by the large BHCs that are active intermediaries in the
Treasury repo market were still not sufficiently large to avoid repo liquidity crunches until
the Fed created a large quantity of additional reserves in response to the Covid shock of
March 2020. Whether the Fed should aim, over the long run, for a small or large balance
sheet remains controversial.
Before the failure of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, a small aggregate supply of
federal reserve balances, typically under $50 billion, was sufficient for large U.S. banks to
manage trillions of dollars of daily payments and for wholesale overnight funding markets
to function efficiently. Banks liberally exploited daylight overdrafts of their federal reserve
accounts to manage their intraday payments. The Fed’s crisis and post-crisis quantitative-
easing programs increased reserve balances to about $2.8 trillion in 2014. In late 2017,
the Fed activated its policy of balance sheet normalization, by which aggregate reserves
steadily declined, reaching about $1.4 trillion by September 2019, still far above pre-crisis
levels. As part of its post-crisis regulatory reform, however, the Fed also introduced a
battery of new liquidity requirements that provided incentives for large BHCs to maintain
substantial balances at the Fed and which strongly discouraged them from incurring daylight
1For examples of reporting, see “Fed Preps Second $75 Billion Blast With Repo Market Still On Edge,”
Bloomberg, September 17, 2019; “Why the U.S. Repo Market Blew Up and How to Fix It,” Bloomberg,
January 6, 2020; “Fed Plans Second Intervention to Ease Funding Squeeze,” Financial Times, September
17, 2019; “New York Fed Examines Banks’ Role in Money Market Turmoil,” Financial Times, September
20, 2019; “Wall Street Is Buzzing About Repo Rates. Here’s Why,” New York Times, September 18, 2019;
“Fed Intervenes to Curb Soaring Short-Term Borrowing Costs,”Wall Street Journal, September 17, 2019.
1

overdrafts on their reserve accounts at the Fed. We find that as balance sheet normalization
reducedaggregatereserves, intradaypaymentstothelargeBHCsactiveinrepomarketswere
significantly delayed and these BHCs quoted inefficiently high rates for wholesale overnight
funding. TheselargeBHCsavoideddaylightoverdraftsandthediscountwindow, prioritizing
regulatory liquidity requirements by maintaining a significant cushion of reserve balances at
the Fed to manage intraday payments.
Inanefficientwholesalefundingmarket, Treasuryreporateswouldbeessentiallyequated
by arbitrage with the overnight interest rate offered by the Fed on balances held at the Fed
(IOR). This is so because Treasury repos and balances held at the Fed are nearly equivalent
risk-free overnight investments available to banks. From 2015 to 2020, however, we find that
the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR), a broad measure of overnight Treasury repo
rates, was typically well above IOR whenever the total balances held at the Fed of the ten
largest repo-active BHCs was below roughly $580 billion.
Low balances held at the Fed can lead to intraday cash hoarding by banks, raising
concerns over market liquidity and sometimes even threatening financial stability.2 Intraday
payment delays can be exacerbated by self-fulfilling expectations. That is, whenever a bank
believesthatotherbankswilldelaytheirpaymentsbecausetheyhavelowbalances,thatbank
also has an increased incentive to delay payments in order to conserve intraday balances.
This feedback effect naturally leads to even higher jumps in repo rates (Yang, 2020).
Intraday payment timing stresses are also exacerbated by issuances of Treasuries because
payments to the U.S. Treasury for these issuances must occur early in the day.3 That is,
Treasury issuances increase repo rates not only through the supply-of-reserves channel, but
also through the intraday payment timing channel. Issuances also place upward demand-side
pressure on repo rates because newly issued Treasury notes are particularly heavily financed
2See Hamilton (1996), McAndrews and Potter (2002), Bech and Garratt (2003), Ashcraft and Duffie
(2007),Bech(2008),Ashcraft,McAndrewsandSkeie(2011),Afonso,KovnerandSchoar(2011),Afonsoand
Shin (2011), d’Avernas and Vandeweyer (2020) and Yang (2020).
3See Pozsar (2019b). We checked this fact in conversations with multiple knowledgeable market partici-
pants and official-sector sources.
2