NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CREATING CONTROVERSY IN PROXY VOTING ADVICE
Andrey Malenko
Nadya Malenko
Chester S. Spatt
Working Paper 29036
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29036
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2021, Revised May 2022
We are grateful to Sugato Bhattacharyya, Philip Bond, Briana Chang, Amiyatosh Purnanandam,
Uday Rajan, Alexander Wagner, Lucy White, Yan Xiong, Yishu Zeng, conference participants at
the 2021 Conference on Markets and Economies with Information Frictions, Midwest Economic
Theory Conference, 13th Florida State University SunTrust Beach Conference, Finance Theory
Group meeting, and seminar participants at Aarhus University, Carnegie Mellon University,
Georgetown University, Georgia State University, London Business School, Queen Mary
University of London, Rice University, Rutgers Business School, University of Illinois Urbana-
Champaign, University of Michigan, University of Mississippi, University of Rochester,
University of Utah, University of Warwick, Vienna Graduate School of Finance, and Finance
Theory Webinar for helpful comments, and to Filipp Prokopev for research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Andrey Malenko, Nadya Malenko, and Chester S. Spatt. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Creating Controversy in Proxy Voting Advice
Andrey Malenko, Nadya Malenko, and Chester S. Spatt
NBER Working Paper No. 29036
July 2021, Revised May 2022
JEL No. D72,D82,D83,G34,K22
ABSTRACT
We analyze the design of recommendations (available to all shareholders) and research reports
(available only to subscribers) by a proxy advisor, who maximizes profits from selling
information to shareholders. We show that the advisor benefits from biasing its recommendations
against the a priori more likely alternative, thereby “creating controversy” for the vote. In
contrast, it serves the advisor’s interest to produce precise and unbiased research reports. Our
results help reinterpret empirical patterns of shareholders’ voting behavior, suggesting that proxy
advisors’ recommendations may not be a suitable benchmark for evaluating shareholders’ votes.
Our model also rationalizes the one-size-fits-all approach in recommendations.
Andrey Malenko Chester S. Spatt
University of Michigan Tepper School of Business
Stephen M. Ross School of Business Carnegie Mellon University
701 Tappan Street, R5412 4765 Forbes Avenue
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234 Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890
amalenko@umich.edu and NBER
cspatt@andrew.cmu.edu
Nadya Malenko
University of Michigan
Stephen M. Ross School of Business
701 Tappan Street, R5322
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
nmalenko@umich.edu
An online appendix is available at
https://www.nadyamalenko.com/Malenko,Malenko,Spatt_OnlineAppendix.pdf

1 Introduction
Proxy advisory …rms have emerged as major players in corporate governance. They make
recommendationsonhowtocastvotesandprovideresearchreportsforsubscribingshareholders
that contain the rationales for recommendations, including information on various aspects of
…rms’governance practices. The clients of the largest proxy advisor, Institutional Shareholder
Services (ISS), include about 1,500 institutional investors, which cast more than 12 million
ballots in 45,000 shareholder meetings around the world.1 While proxy advisors’research
reports are only available to their subscribers, their recommendations are frequently made
public, either by the media or by the party supported by the proxy advisor –the company
or the activist investor.2 Through both these public recommendations and private research
reports, proxy advisors have a substantial impact on voting outcomes (e.g., Alexander et al.,
2010; Iliev and Lowry, 2015; Malenko and Shen, 2016).
Given the strong in‡uence of proxy advisors, the quality and information content of their
reports and recommendations have become an important topic of discussion among market
participants and policymakers. For example, over 2018–2020, the SEC adopted a number of
regulatorychangestoensure“thatinvestorswhouseproxyvotingadvicereceivemoretranspar-
ent, accurate, and complete information on which to make their voting decisions.”3 Do proxy
advisors have incentives to produce unbiased and informative research and recommendations?
In particular, as the SEC’s concept release on the U.S. proxy system questioned, “Does the
lack of a direct pecuniary interest in the e¤ects of their recommendations on shareholder value
a¤ect how they formulate recommendations,”“what criteria and processes do proxy advisory
…rms use,”and are their “proxy research reports ... materially accurate and complete”?4
1Source: ISS website. The second largest proxy advisor, Glass Lewis, has more than 1,300 clients, who
collectively manage more than $40 trillion in assets (source: Glass Lewis website).
2Forexample, itiscommonforanactivistrunningaproxy…ghttoannounceproxyadvisors’supportforits
directorsthroughthecampaignwebsiteorpressreleasedistributionservices,andformanagementtoannounce
proxyadvisors’supportforitsproposals. Forexamplesofthemediapublicizingtherecommendations,see“ISS
recommends investors support Goldman Sachs on executive pay”(Reuters, April 14, 2022), “ISS says Wells
Fargo pay reforms insu¢ cient to justify support”(Reuters, April 13, 2022), and “Proxy adviser ISS backs all
Exxon Mobil director candidates”(Reuters, May 10, 2022), which says “In a report sent by a representative
late Monday ISS also recommended votes “for”the company’s executive pay, but backed several shareholder
resolutions focused on climate concerns.”For an example of announcements by management, see the press
release of Osisko “Leading Independent Proxy Advisory Firms Recommend Osisko Shareholders Vote for all
Proposed Items at the Upcoming Annual Meeting”(April 28, 2022).
3See,e.g.,https://www.sec.gov/rules/interp/2019/34-86721.pdfandhttps://www.sec.gov/rules/…nal/2020/34-
89372.pdf. In June 2021, the SEC suspended the enforcement of these new regulations, given concern that
they might potentially impair the independence and quality of the proxy voting advice.
4See p. 125 in https://www.sec.gov/rules/concept/2010/34-62495.pdf.
1

Motivated by these questions, this paper solves the information design problem of a proxy
advisor who aims to maximize its pro…ts from information sale to voters. Our main result is
that even if all shareholders are unbiased and aligned at maximizing the value of their shares,
the pro…t-maximizing proxy advisor often has incentives to produce public recommendations
that are biased against the a priori more likely alternative. At the same time, the advisor has
incentives to produce informative and unbiased research reports for its subscribers.
In our model, shareholders vote on a proposal whose value depends on the unknown state.
The proxy advisor, who observes the state, faces an information design problem, modeled as
Bayesian persuasion (Kamenica and Gentzkow, 2011; Rayo and Segal, 2010). Speci…cally, it
designs two signals about the state: one, which we refer to as the “research report,”is available
only to its subscribers, and the other, which we refer to as the “voting recommendation,”is
publicly observed by all shareholders. One potential way to interpret the design of recommen-
dations are the proxy voting guidelines, which proxy advisors revise each year and announce
publicly. Importantly, as we discuss in the paper, the chosen information design policies are
time-consistent: because the advisor maximizes its ex-ante pro…t from information sales, it
has no ex-post incentive to deviate from the design of either the report or recommendations.
In addition to designing the two signals, the advisor sets a fee for subscribing to its research
report. Each shareholder then decides whether to pay the fee and get the report or whether to
only observe the public recommendation. The state is then realized, the proxy advisor’s report
and recommendation are produced, and shareholders cast their votes based on the information
they receive. The proposal is approved if it receives a majority of the votes.
The fact that the proxy advisor maximizes its pro…t from information sales highlights a
fundamental con‡ict of interest. If, instead, the advisor were maximizing the value for the
downstream entities (asset managers and operating companies), then its public recommenda-
tions would perfectly reveal all the advisor’s information—but then no investors would need
to purchase the reports and the advisor would earn zero revenue. This raises the question of
which design of recommendations and reports maximizes the fees that can be obtained from
the subscribers. There is no obvious answer to this problem. For example, it may be natural
to expect that the advisor will produce totally uninformative public recommendations, so as
not to dilute the value of the private reports, and only give informative signals for a fee. Or, to
the extent that public recommendations reveal some information, it may be natural to expect
that they will be unbiased since all shareholders are aligned at maximizing …rm value.
Nevertheless, we show that the proxy advisor’s pro…t from information sale is maximized
2