NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CURRENCY MANAGEMENT BY INTERNATIONAL FIXED INCOME MUTUAL
FUNDS
Clemens Sialm
Qifei Zhu
Working Paper 29082
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29082
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2021
We thank George Aragon, Yiming Ma, Matteo Maggiori, Lasse Pedersen, Dave Plecha, Savina
Rizova, Nathan Sosner, Matti Suominen, Hong Zhang, conference participants at the 2021 China
International Conference of Finance, the 2021 Virtual Asset Management Seminar, the 2021
Western Finance Association, and the 2021 World Symposium on Investment Research, and
seminar participants at the BI Norwegian Business School, Copenhagen Business School, the
Federal Reserve Board, the Shanghai Advanced Institute of Finance, the University of
Mannheim, the Nanyang Technological University, and the University of Texas at Austin for
helpful comments. Wei Li provided excellent research assistance. Clemens Sialm is an
independent contractor at AQR Capital Management. Qifei Zhu acknowledges the financial
support of the Ministry of Education, Singapore, under its Academic Research Fund 2019-
T1-001-108. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Clemens Sialm and Qifei Zhu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Currency Management by International Fixed Income Mutual Funds
Clemens Sialm and Qifei Zhu
NBER Working Paper No. 29082
July 2021
JEL No. F21,F31,F34,G11,G12,G13,G15,G23,G32
ABSTRACT
Investments in international fixed income securities are exposed to significant currency risks. We
collect novel data on mutual fund currency derivatives and document that around 90% of U.S.
international fixed income funds use currency forwards to manage their foreign exchange
exposure. Funds' currency forward positions differ substantially based on risk management
demands related to portfolio currency exposures, return-enhancement motives such as currency
momentum and carry trade, and strategic considerations related to past performance and fund
clienteles. Funds that hedge their currency risk exhibit lower return variability, but do not
generate inferior abnormal returns.
Clemens Sialm
University of Texas at Austin
McCombs School of Business
2110 Speedway; B6600
Austin, TX 78712-1276
and NBER
clemens.sialm@mccombs.utexas.edu
Qifei Zhu
Nanyang Technological University
qifei.zhu@ntu.edu.sg

I. Introduction
Currency exchange rate fluctuations are an important contributor to the risk and return of
globally-diversified investments, particularly fixed income portfolios. Indeed, over the last
three decades (1990 to 2019), the average U.S. dollar return of the Bloomberg Barclays
Global Aggregate Total Return Index, a widely-used global investment grade debt index,
was 0.47% per month, and its standard deviation was 1.54%. During the same period,
its U.S. dollar-hedged counterpart had a similar average return of 0.49% per month and
a standard deviation of 0.86% – almost one half lower.1 Despite such an economically
significant impact, we know little about the determinants and the consequences of currency
management strategies of international fixed income funds.
Conceptually, mutual funds that are domiciled in the U.S. but invest outside of the
U.S. can manage their currency exposures by changing portfolio allocations or by deploy-
ing currency derivatives.2 In the first approach, a fund adjusts its portfolio between U.S.
dollar denominated foreign bonds and local-currency denominated foreign bonds. Maggiori,
Neiman, and Schreger (2020) show that mutual funds prefer to hold securities denominated
in home currencies, reducing their currency exposure. However, investing in only U.S. dollar-
denominatedbondsconstrainsafund’sinvestmentuniverse,assomeforeignissuersonlyissue
in local currency. Alternatively, funds may hold currency derivatives, which enable them to
alter their currency exposures independent of their portfolio holdings. However, primarily
due to data availability, researchers have not been able to examine mutual funds’ use of cur-
rency derivatives and how derivative holdings affect overall portfolio currency management.3
Our paper fills this gap by documenting the prevalent use of currency derivatives by bond
mutual funds and by analyzing the factors that determine funds’ currency management poli-
1The U.S. dollar-hedged Bloomberg Barclays Global Aggregate Total Return Index uses hypothetical
one-month currency forwards to hedge its currency exposures.
2Investors of US-domiciled mutual funds have to be based in the U.S. for tax and regulatory reasons
(Khorana, Servaes, and Tufano, 2005).
3Information on mutual funds’ derivative positions is not available in commonly-used databases such as
ThomsonReuters,CRSP,orMorningstar. Withoutinformationonfunds’currencyderivatives,priorstudies
assume that a fund’s currency exposure is determined by the currency denomination of its assets.
1

cies. WeassemblethefirstdatasetofcurrencyforwardcontractsusedbyU.S.-domiciledfixed
incomefundsinvestingininternationalmarkets, togetherwiththecurrencydenominationsof
their portfolio holdings. Our final sample contains 476,622 currency forward contracts used
by 6,457 fund–quarters between 2010Q2 and 2018Q4. This novel dataset provides detailed
quarterly snapshots of fund currency exposures that allow us to examine funds’ currency
management practices, especially through their use of currency derivatives.
Currency forwards are the predominant type of currency derivatives used by the funds in
our sample. During our sample period, about 90% of international fixed income funds use
currency forwards. For an average fund, the notional amount of foreign currency forward
sales is equivalent to 19.9% of fund total net assets (TNA), and the notional amount of
forward purchases (of other foreign currencies) is equivalent to 13.1% of fund TNA, resulting
in a net currency exposure reduction of 6.8% through currency forwards. The distribu-
tion of funds’ net currency forward positions is as dispersed as the distribution of funds’
foreign-denominated assets. Some funds use forwards to completely or selectively hedge
their currency exposures from bond holdings, while others use forwards to increase their
exposures to foreign currencies. These stylized facts highlight the importance of accounting
for currency derivatives when studying funds’ currency exposures.
Theories suggest that bond funds’ use of currency derivatives can be driven by both risk
management demands and speculative motives. For risk management, the key determinants
of currency positions are currency return volatility and the covariance between currency
returns and asset returns. Campbell, Serfaty-De Medeiros, and Viceira (2010) show that
globalbondreturnsarealmostuncorrelatedwithcurrencyreturns. Amean-varianceefficient
portfolio hence hedges its currency exposures almost completely. For speculative purposes,
investors may condition their derivative positions on currency characteristics that are known
to predict currency returns. When the expected excess return of particular currencies is
relatively high, investors may buy (or sell less) currency forwards.
Consistent with risk management demands, we find that funds’ use of currency forwards
2