NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SELLING FAST AND BUYING SLOW:
HEURISTICS AND TRADING PERFORMANCE OF INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS
Klakow Akepanidtaworn
Rick Di Mascio
Alex Imas
Lawrence Schmidt
Working Paper 29076
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29076
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2021
We thank Bronson Argyle, Ned Augenblick, Aislinn Bohren, Pedro Bordalo, John Campbell,
Colin Camerer, Cary Frydman, Samuel Hartzmark, David Hirshleifer, Zwetelina Iliewa,
Lawrence Jin, David Laibson, Ulrike Malmendier, Joshua Miller, Terry Odean, Alex Rees-Jones,
Andrei Shleifer, Richard Thaler, Tuomo Vuolteenaho, Russ Wermers, conference and seminar
participants at the NBER Behavioral Finance Meeting, Society of Judgment and Decision Making
Conference, WFA Annual Conference, Booth School of Business, UC Berkeley, briq Institute,
Caltech, ETH Zurich, Florida State, Harvard Business School, Higher School of Economics, New
School of Economics, University of Amsterdam, and University of Frankfurt for helpful
comments. We thank Kushan Tyagi, and especially Brice Green, for outstanding research
assistance. The views expressed in the paper are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the institutions to which the authors are affiliated. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Klakow Akepanidtaworn, Rick Di Mascio, Alex Imas, and Lawrence Schmidt. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Selling Fast and Buying Slow: Heuristics and Trading Performance of Institutional Investors
Klakow Akepanidtaworn, Rick Di Mascio, Alex Imas, and Lawrence Schmidt
NBER Working Paper No. 29076
July 2021
JEL No. D91,G02,G12,G4,G41
ABSTRACT
Are market experts prone to heuristics, and if so, do they transfer across closely related domains
—buying and selling? We investigate this question using a unique dataset of institutional
investors with portfolios averaging $573 million. A striking finding emerges: while there is clear
evidence of skill in buying, selling decisions underperform substantially—even relative to
random selling strategies. This holds despite the similarity between the two decisions in
frequency, substance and consequences for performance. Evidence suggests that an asymmetric
allocation of cognitive resources such as attention can explain the discrepancy: we document a
systematic, costly heuristic process when selling but not when buying.
Klakow Akepanidtaworn Alex Imas
University of Chicago Booth School of Business
5757 S University Ave University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637 5897 S. Woodlawn Avenue
klakowa@uchicago.edu Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
Rick Di Mascio alex.imas@chicagobooth.edu
Inalytics Ltd
12th Floor, Emerald House Lawrence Schmidt
15 Lansdowne Road Sloan School of Management
CR0 2BX, Croydon, UK Massachusetts Institute of Technology
rick@inalytics.com 100 Main Street
Cambridge, MA
ldws@mit.edu
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w29076

1 Introduction
A large literature has demonstrated that market participants use heuristics and are
prone to systematic biases. However, the majority of evidence comes from unsophisti-
cated traders such as retail investors, who have been shown to be overconfident (Barber
and Odean 2001), loss-averse (Larson, List, and Metcalfe 2016) and to exhibit limited
attention in their trade decisions (Barber and Odean 2008; Hartzmark 2014). Com-
paratively little is known about the decision-making of market experts and it remains
important to better understand whether they are prone to behavioral biases and, if so,
the extent to which these biases a↵ect performance.
Thispaperexaminesthedecisionsofsophisticatedmarketparticipants—experienced
institutional portfolio managers (PMs)—using a rich data set containing the entirety of
their daily holdings and trades. Our data is comprised of 783 portfolios, with an aver-
age portfolio valued at approximately $573 million. The modal PM is hired by a single
institutional client such as a pension fund in a separately managed account to generate
excess returns by forming concentrated portfolios that depart substantially from their
benchmarks. More than 89 million fund-security-trading dates and 4.4 million high-
stakes trades (2.0 and 2.4 million sells and buys, respectively) are observed between
2000 and 2016. We evaluate performance by constructing counterfactual portfolios,
and compare PMs’ actual decisions to returns of the counterfactual strategy. Our data
set uniquely allows us to evaluate selling decisions relative to a conservative counter-
factual that assumes no skill: randomly selling an alternative position that was not
traded on the same date.1
We document a striking pattern: While the investors display clear skill in buy-
ing, their selling decisions underperform substantially. Positions added to the portfolio
outperform both the benchmark and a strategy which randomly buys more shares of
1Throughout the paper we construct counterfactuals based on current holdings. In a setting such as
ours with active managers forming concentrated portfolios subject to short-sales constraints, evalu-
ating a selling decision relative to a counterfactual which is unrelated to existing holdings (e.g., a
benchmarkindex)isnotanappropriatecomparison. First,becauseportfoliosdepartquiteabitfrom
the benchmark, selling the benchmark is often not feasible on the margin. Additionally, PMs may
be selling in order to raise capital to buy, or because their opinion about a security has changed. An
asset sold may outperform (underpeform) a benchmark index, but the sale may be optimal (subop-
timal) depending on what is bought with that capital and what other assets could have been sold
(e.g. an alternative may have gone up even more).
1

assets already held in the portfolio by over 100 basis points annually per dollar of
purchase volume. In contrast, selling decisions not only fail to beat a no-skill random
selling strategy, they consistently underperform it by substantial amounts. In our pre-
ferred specification, PMs forgo 80 basis points per year relative to a factor neutral,
random-selling strategy.2 We perform a wide array of robustness checks, constructing
counterfactuals that match assets bought and sold on size, value, idiosyncratic volatil-
ity, prior returns, and momentum, and ‘characteristic selectivity’ (Daniel, Grinblatt,
Titman, and Wermers 1997). We also perform sample splits to account for the po-
tential impact of outflow pressure and price impact. Our results are robust to these
alternative specifications both in terms of statistical significance and economic mag-
nitude. Heterogeneity analyses reveal that underperformance in selling appears most
prominently amongst fundamentals-oriented managers who hold more active, concen-
trated portfolios with higher tracking error; PMs who rely on momentum strategies
exhibit the least underperformance in selling. Finally, we show that the decomposed
buying and selling measures have a meaningful relationship with overall portfolio re-
turns: outperforming (underperforming) the counterfactual when buying (selling) is
strongly predictive of higher (lower) excess portfolio returns.3
Why would a majority of portfolio managers appear to exhibit skill in buying while
at the same time underperforming substantially in selling? At face value, the funda-
mentals of buying and selling to optimize performance are essentially the same: Both
require incorporating information to forecast the distribution of future returns of an
asset.4 Skill in both decisions requires the investor to look for relevant information and
integrateitintotheforecast. However,thereisreasontosuspectthatsellingandbuying
decisions involve di↵erent psychological processes (Barber and Odean 2013). Recent
2As a benchmark, active managers of mutual funds charge between 20 to 50 basis points per year
in fees, depending on the size of the portfolio. The foregone returns due to poor selling are also
substantiallylargerthantheaveragecostdi↵erential(andnet-of-feeperformancedi↵erential)between
mutual funds and institutional seperately managed accounts (SMAs) of the sort we have in our
sample, which is around 10-35 bp per annum (Chen, Chen, Johnson, and Sardarli 2017; Elton,
Gruber, and Blake 2013).
3Moreover, we show that poor selling a↵ects overall performance through two channels: the first is
through the stocks sold outperforming the counterfatual (direct channel), and the second is through
‘fast’ selling leading PMs to prematurely disgard viable investment ideas (indirect channel). As
evidence for the latter, PMs rarely re-purchase assets that have left their portfolio, suggesting that
sales eliminate equities from future consideration sets.
4AsnotedinBarberandOdean(2008), ‘informalmodels, thedecisionstobuyandtoselloftendi↵er
only by a minus sign.’
2