NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PROPAGATION AND AMPLIFICATION OF LOCAL PRODUCTIVITY SPILLOVERS
Xavier Giroud
Simone Lenzu
Quinn Maingi
Holger Mueller
Working Paper 29084
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29084
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2021
We thank Costas Arkolakis, Lorenzo Caliendo, Xavier Gabaix, Cecile Gaubert, Elisa Giannone,
Matthias Kehrig, Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, Philipp Schnabl, Pete Schott, Amit Seru, Andrei
Shleifer, Johannes Stroebel, Amir Sufi, Sharon Traiberman, and various seminar audiences for
helpful comments and suggestions. We are grateful to Jun Wong for excellent research assistance.
Any views expressed are those of the authors and not those of the U.S. Census Bureau. The
Census Bureau's Disclosure Review Board and Disclosure Avoidance Officers have reviewed this
information product for unauthorized disclosure of confidential information and have approved
the disclosure avoidance practices applied to this release. This research was performed at a
Federal Statistical Research Data Center under FSRDC Project Number 1908 (CBDRB-FY21-
P1908-R9062). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Xavier Giroud, Simone Lenzu, Quinn Maingi, and Holger Mueller. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Propagation and Amplification of Local Productivity Spillovers
Xavier Giroud, Simone Lenzu, Quinn Maingi, and Holger Mueller
NBER Working Paper No. 29084
July 2021
JEL No. C51,C68,E23,E24,L23,O4,R12,R13,R3
ABSTRACT
This paper shows that local productivity spillovers propagate throughout the economy through
the plant-level networks of multi-region firms. Using confidential Census plant-level data, we
show that large manufacturing plant openings not only raise the productivity of local plants but
also of distant plants hundreds of miles away, which belong to multi-region firms that are
exposed to the local productivity spillover through one of their plants. To quantify the
significance of plant-level networks for the propagation and amplification of local productivity
shocks, we develop and estimate a quantitative spatial model in which plants of multi-region
firms are linked through shared knowledge. Our model features heterogeneous regions, which
interact through goods trade and labor markets, as well as within-location, across-plant
heterogeneity in productivity, wages, and employment. Counterfactual exercises show that while
knowledge sharing through plant-level networks amplifies the aggregate effects of local
productivity shocks, it widens economic disparities between individual workers and regions in the
economy.
Xavier Giroud Quinn Maingi
Columbia Business School Stern School of Business
Finance Division New York University
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 806 44 West Fourth Street Suite
New York, NY 10027 9-190
and NBER New York, NY 10012
xavier.giroud@gsb.columbia.edu rmaingi@stern.nyu.edu
Simone Lenzu Holger Mueller
Stern School of Business Stern School of Business
New York University New York University
44 West Fourth Street 44 West Fourth Street Suite
Suite 9-190 9-190
New York, NY 10012 New York, NY 10012-1126
slenzu@stern.nyu.edu and NBER
hmueller@stern.nyu.edu

1 Introduction
Local governments spend billions of dollars in subsidies every year for companies to
locate within their jurisdictions (Story, 2012; Bartik, 2020). From an efficiency standpoint,
a common rationale for such place-based incentives is the existence of Marshallian
agglomeration economies—spillovers to the local economy in the form of input sharing,
labor market pooling, and knowledge externalities—that raise the productivity of local
workers and businesses (Moretti, 2010; Kline and Moretti, 2014a; Neumark and Simpson,
2015). In this paper, we provide both reduced-form and model-based evidence that these
local productivity spillovers propagate throughout the economy through the plant-level
networksofmulti-regionfirms.
Identifying local productivity spillovers is difficult. In our reduced-form analysis, we
build on the natural experiments in Greenstone, Hornbeck, and Moretti (2010), who study
the effects of large plant openings (“Million Dollar Plants,” or MDPs) on the productivity
of incumbent plants. In their setting, plants in one or more runner-up counties, which
narrowly lost the competition, provide a counterfactual for incumbent plants in the
“winner” county, where the MDP ultimately located. Using confidential plant-level data
from the Census Bureau, we show that the MDP openings raise the productivity of
incumbent plants by 4%. This (“local”) productivity spillover is strong within a 50 mile
radius around the MDP,weaker within a 100 mile radius, and insignificant beyond. Hence,
consistent with a large empirical literature, we find that productivity spillovers between
(plantsof)differentfirmsdecayrapidlywithgeographicaldistance.1
A different picture emerges when we examine how productivity spillovers spread
within firm boundaries. We consider large multi-plant, multi-region firms which are
exposed to the MDP openings, and thus to the local productivity spillover, by having a
plant in the winner county. We find that, in response to the MDP openings, these firms’
plants outside the winner county (“treated plants”) experience productivity gains of 1.8%,
along with employment gains of 1.6%. To identify the (“global”) productivity spillover on
plants outside the winner county, we compare plants in the same county, industry, and
year that belong to firms which either own plants in the winner county (treatment) or the
runner-up counties (control). This specification accounts for the possibility of correlated
shocks between the county of the treated plant and the winner county, thus addressing
potential concerns that the productivity gains at treated plants may be due to common
regionalshocksratherthaninternalspilloverswithinthefirm’sboundaries.
1Rosenthal and Strange (2004, 2020) and Combes and Gobillon (2015) review the empirical literature on
agglomerationeconomies.Mostempiricalstudiesfindthattheseeconomiesarehighylocalized.
1

What explains the global productivity spillover? While the local productivity gains
may be due to either labor market pooling or knowledge spillovers, it is unlikely that a
thicker labor market in the winner county would affect the productivity of treated plants
hundreds of miles away. Knowledge, on the other hand, can be used in local and distant
plants alike. Indeed, once it spills over to the firm’s local plant, it can be freely shared
with other plants inside the firm’s boundaries (Markusen, 1984). To explore this issue, we
examine ifthe global productivityspillover becomes weakeras we increase thedistance to
the MDP. We find that the estimates remain virtually unchanged if we exclude all plants
within a 500 mile radius, or within the same state or Census division as the MDP. Hence,
unlike the local productivity spillover, which takes place across plants of different firms,
theglobalproductivityspillover,whichtakesplaceacrossdifferentplantsofthesamefirm,
does not decay with geographical distance. Further, and also consistent with knowledge
sharing, we find that the global productivity spillover is much stronger if the distant plant
and either the MDP or the firm’s plant in the winner county are in the same industry or in
(knowledge-based)industriescharacterizedbymutualR&Dflowsorpatentcitations.
Inarecentsurveyarticle,RosenthalandStrange(2020)write:
“Implicitintheideathatspatialconcentrationincreasesproductivityisanother
idea: the degree of proximity matters. Agglomeration economies must decay
with distance. How close, then, do firms and workers need to be to each other
to benefit from agglomeration economies? Or more colloquially, how close is
close?” (p. 27).
Our paper provides a nuanced answer. On the one hand, firms must have a nearby plant
to benefit from knowledge spillovers. As we show, the local agglomeration economy is
strongly significant only within a 50 mile radius around the MDP. On the other hand, not
all of a firm’s plants need to be located nearby. In fact, it may suffice if only one of the
firm’s plants is located in close proximity to the MDP. Once the knowledge spills over to
that plant, it can be passed on to other plants inside the firm’s boundaries, increasing the
productivityofdistantplantshundredsofmilesaway.
To quantify the significance of knowledge sharing through plant-level networks,
we develop and estimate a quantitative spatial model with goods trade, labor mobility,
plant-level networks, and a rich and realistic geography. While we build on the theoretical
framework developed by Allen and Arkolakis (2014), Ahlfeldt et al. (2015), Redding (2016),
and Monte, Redding, and Rossi-Hansberg (2018), we depart from the canonical model in
a number of significant ways.2 Our model features finitely many firms, some of which
2ReddingandRossi-Hansberg(2017)provideacomprehensivetaxonomyofthemodelingassumptionsand
2