NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DYNAMIC SPATIAL GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM
Benny Kleinman
Ernest Liu
Stephen J. Redding
Working Paper 29101
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29101
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2021, Revised December 2022
We are grateful to Princeton University for research support. A previous version of this paper
circulated under the title “Sufficient Statistics for Dynamic Spatial Economics.” A toolkit
illustrating our spectral analysis for a model economy can be downloaded from the authors’
webpages. We would like to thank the editor, three anonymous referees, Treb Allen, Lorenzo
Caliendo, Fernando Parro, Michael Peters, Ricardo Reyes-Heroles, Daniel Xu, and conference
and seminar participants at CEPR ERWIT, Cambridge, Columbia, CREI, Dallas, Dartmouth,
EAGLS, Hong Kong, NBER Summer Institute, London School of Economics, Nottingham,
Princeton, Stanford, Sussex, the Virtual Trade and Macro Seminar, Urban Economics
Association, and Yale for helpful comments and suggestions. We would like to thank Youngjin
Song for sharing data and Maximilian Schwarz and Nan Xiang for excellent research assistance.
The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Benny Kleinman, Ernest Liu, and Stephen J. Redding. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Dynamic Spatial General Equilibrium
Benny Kleinman, Ernest Liu, and Stephen J. Redding
NBER Working Paper No. 29101
July 2021, Revised December 2022
JEL No. F14,F15,R12
ABSTRACT
We incorporate forward-looking capital accumulation into a dynamic discrete choice model of
migration. We characterize the steady-state equilibrium; generalize existing dynamic exact-hat
algebra techniques to incorporate investment; and linearize the model to provide an analytical
characterization of the economy’s transition path using spectral analysis. We show that capital
and labor dynamics interact to shape the economy’s speed of adjustment towards steady-state.
We implement our quantitative analysis using data on capital stocks, populations and bilateral
trade and migration flows for U.S. states from 1965-2015. We show that this interaction between
capital and labor dynamics plays a central role in explaining the observed decline in the rate of
income convergence across U.S. states and the persistent and heterogeneous impact of local
shocks.
Benny Kleinman Stephen J. Redding
Department of Economics Department of Economics &
Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building School of Public and International Affairs
Princeton, NJ 08544 Princeton University
binyamin@princeton.edu Princeton, NJ 08544
and CEPR
Ernest Liu and also NBER
Department of Economics reddings@princeton.edu
Princeton University
20 Washington Road
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
ernestliu@princeton.edu

1 Introduction
A central research question in economics is understanding the response of the spatial distribu-
tionofeconomicactivitytofundamentalshocks,suchaschangesinproductivity. Ingeneral,this
response can be gradual, because of migration frictions for mobile factors (labor), and the grad-
ual accumulation of immobile factors (capital structures). However, a key challenge has been
modeling forward-looking capital investments in economic geography models with population
mobility. The reason is that investment and migration decisions in each location depend on one
another, and on these decisions in all locations in all future time periods, which quickly results in
aprohibitivelylargestatespaceforempirically-realisticnumbersoflocations.
We make two main contributions. First, we develop a tractable framework for incorporating
forward-lookinginvestmentintoadynamicdiscretechoicemigrationmodelthatovercomesthis
challenge of a high-dimensional state space. We characterize the steady-state equilibrium and
generalizeexistingdynamicexact-hatalgebratechniquestoincorporateinvestment. Second,we
linearizethemodeltoobtainaclosed-formsolutionfortheeconomy’stransitionpath,intermsof
animpactmatrixthatcapturestheinitialimpactofshocksandatransitionmatrixthatgovernsthe
updatingofthestatevariables. Weshowthatthedynamicresponseoftheeconomytoanyshock
to fundamentals can be characterized in terms of the spectral properties (the eigenvalues and
eigenvectors)ofthistransitionmatrix. Weusethischaracterizationtoshowthattheinteraction
betweencapitalaccumulationandmigrationdynamicsplaysacentralroleintheobserveddecline
intherateofincomeconvergenceacrossU.S.statesandthepersistentandheterogeneousimpact
ofshocks.
To illustrate our approach as clearly as possible, we build on conventional specifications of
trade, migration and capital accumulation, and make a number of simplifying assumptions in
our baseline specification. We assume a single-sector Armington (1969) model of trade, with a
constantelasticitygravityequationfortradeingoods. Weconsideraconstantelasticitydynamic
discrete choice model of migration following Caliendo et al. (2019), which features a constant
elasticity gravity equation for migration. We adapt a textbook macro specification of capital
accumulation, in which agents choose consumption and investment to maximize intertemporal
utilitysubjecttoanintertemporalbudgetconstraint. Ourmainsimplifyingassumptionistodraw
a distinction between workers and landlords, as in Moll (2014). Workers make forward-looking
migrationdecisions,butdonothaveaccesstoaninvestmenttechnology,andhencelive“handto
mouth.” Landlordsaregeographicallyimmobile,buthaveaccesstoaninvestmenttechnologyin
local capital, such as buildings and structures, and make forward-looking capital accumulation
decisions. We show that this simplifying assumption allows us to incorporate forward-looking
investmentwithoutintroducingaprohibitivelylargestatespace.
1

Our framework allows for many locations that can differ in productivity and amenities, and
a rich geography of bilateral trade and migration costs. Nevertheless, we derive analytical con-
ditions for the existence and uniqueness of the steady-state equilibrium. We show that these
conditions depend only on structural parameters, such as agglomeration and dispersion forces,
andareinvariantwithrespecttoinitialconditions. Giventheobservedvaluesoftheendogenous
variables for an initial equilibrium somewhere along the transition path towards an unobserved
steady-state, we show how to use dynamic exact-hat algebra techniques to solve for the econ-
omy’stransitionpathforanysequenceoffuturechangesinfundamentals.
We next linearize the model to obtain a closed-form solution for the economy’s transition
path in terms of the impact and transition matrices. Both matrices depend solely on trade and
migrationsharesthatareobservedinthedataandstructuralparametersofthemodel. Weusean
eigendecompositionofthetransitionmatrixtoshowthatthedynamicresponseoftheeconomy’s
statevariablestoanyempiricalshocktoproductivityandamenitiescanbeexpressedasalinear
combination of its response to what we term eigen-shocks: a shock to fundamentals for which
the initial impact on the capital and labor state variables corresponds to an eigenvector of the
transition matrix. These eigen-shocks have three key properties. First, we can compute them
fromtheobserveddata. Second,theeconomy’sspeedofconvergencetosteady-stateforaneigen-
shock depends solely on the associated eigenvalue of the transition matrix, which allows us to
provide an analytically sharp characterization of the determinants of the speed of convergence.
Third,wecanrecovertheloadingsofanyempiricalshocktofundamentalsontheseeigen-shocks
fromalinearprojectionoftheempiricalshocksontheeigen-shocks,whichallowsustouseour
frameworktounderstandtheimpactofempiricalshocks.
We apply our framework to the determinants of income convergence across U.S. states from
1965-2015 and the persistent and heterogeneous impact of local shocks. Both issues are central
questions across several fields of economics. We show that the decline in the rate of income
convergence across U.S. states is largely driven by initial conditions rather than changes in the
patternofshockstofundamentals. Weshowthatbothcapitalandlabordynamicsareimportant
for capturing this decline in income convergence, highlighting the relevance of incorporating
forward-looking investment into dynamic discrete choice models of migration. We relate both
the initial gaps of the state variables from steady-state and the empirical shocks to productivity
and amenities over our sample period to the entire spectrum of eigencomponents. We find slow
and heterogeneous rates of convergence to steady-state, with an average half-life of around 20
years and a maximum half-life of around 80 years. We find that the initial gaps of the labor
and capital state variables from steady-state load more heavily on eigencomponents with slow
convergencetosteady-state,whereasthechangesovertimeinproductivityandamenitiesimplied
by the observed data load more heavily on eigencomponents with fast convergence to steady-
2