NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
COMPETITION AND SELECTION IN CREDIT MARKETS
Constantine Yannelis
Anthony Lee Zhang
Working Paper 29169
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29169
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2021, Revised March 2023
We are grateful to Bronson Argyle, Mark Egan, Zhiguo He, Sasha Indarte, Mark Jansen, Jack
Liebersohn, Holger Mueller, Taylor Nadauld, Scott Nelson, Amir Sufi and Toni Whited for
helpful comments, as well as seminar participants at the NBER Household Finance Summer
Institute, Utah Winter Finance Conference, AFA, NFA, ESEM, MFA, Philadelphia Fed, Fourth
Biennial Conference on Auto Lending, 2021 NASMES, Barcelona GSE Summer Forum,
Northwestern University Kellogg School of Management, UCLA Andersen School of
Management, Chicago Corporate and Household Lending Conference and the University of
Chicago Booth School of Business. Yannelis and Zhang gratefully acknowledge financial support
from the Booth School of Business at the University of Chicago. Livia Amato, Baiyang Han,
Peyman Shahidi, Greg Tracey, Julien Weber, Xinkai Wu, and Zichen Zhao provided superb
research assistance. TransUnion (the data provider) has the right to review the research before
dissemination to ensure it accurately describes TransUnion data, does not disclose confidential
information, and does not contain material it deems to be misleading or false regarding
TransUnion, TransUnion’s partners, affiliates or customer base, or the consumer lending industry.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Constantine Yannelis and Anthony Lee Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Competition and Selection in Credit Markets
Constantine Yannelis and Anthony Lee Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 29169
August 2021, Revised March 2023
JEL No. D14,D4,G20,G21,G5,L62
ABSTRACT
Screening in consumer credit markets is often associated with large fixed costs. We present both
theory and evidence that, when lenders use fixed-cost technologies to screen borrowers, increased
competition may increase rather than decrease interest rates in subprime consumer credit markets.
In more competitive markets, lenders have lower market shares, and thus lower incentives to
invest in screening. Thus, when markets are competitive, all lenders face a riskier pool of
borrowers, which can lead interest rates to be higher. We provide evidence for the model’s
predictions in the auto loan market using administrative credit panel data.
Constantine Yannelis
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
constantine.yannelis@chicagobooth.edu
Anthony Lee Zhang
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
anthony.zhang@chicagobooth.edu

1 Introduction
How do the effects of market concentration interact with lender screening in credit markets?
The efficiency of lending markets can be hampered by information imperfections (Akerlof,
1970;StiglitzandWeiss,1981),buttheseharmfuleffectscanbeinpartmitigatedbyimperfect
competition (Mahoney and Weyl, 2017). We propose and test a new channel through which
competition can have adverse effects on consumer credit markets.
Screening in consumer credit markets is often characterized by large fixed costs and small
variable costs. Lending decisions are usually made through automated processes, based on
default rate prediction models.1 Building these models requires large upfront costs, but the
marginal cost of applying these models to additional borrowers are low. Large fixed screening
costs can reverse classical intuitions about how competition affects market outcomes, since
they imply that there are returns to scale from having large market shares. When markets are
concentrated, each lender has a large share of customers, so lenders have high incentives to
screen. In competitive markets, lenders invest less in screening; the population of borrowers
is thus riskier, and equilibrium interest rates can actually increase.
Ourframeworkmakesasimpleandsurprisingempiricalprediction: loanratesandconcen-
tration should be positively associated in low-risk market segments, and negatively associated
in high-risk segments. We test this prediction using administrative credit panel data from
TransUnion. We focus on auto lending, a rapidly growing consumer lending sector with $1.4
trillion in outstanding loan volume as of 2020. Auto lending is characterized by direct lend-
ing to consumers from banks and dealers, segmentation according to consumers’ credit risk,
and the absence of government subsidies and guarantees. All of these features make the auto
lendingmarketidealtoexplorethepredictionsofthetheoreticalmodel. Webuildanationally
representativedataset,atthecountybyyearlevel,splitbyVantageScorecreditscorebins. The
model’s predictions hold in the data: concentration is positively associated with interest rates
for prime borrowers, and negatively associated with rates for subprime borrowers.
1Forexample,lenderscaninvestinbetterpredictiveanalytics,usingmachinelearningorartificialintelligence,
specialized predictive tools or platforms. They can also purchase data, tools to verify information or analytical
toolswhichcanbeusedtoscreenborrowers. Itisalsoimportanttonotethatifscreeningcostsarenonlinear,with
decreasingmarginalcosts–forexample,ifthemarginalcostofpurchasingcreditreportsdeclinesinthenumber
ofreportspurchased–thisisessentiallyequivalenttohavingfixedcostsinoursetting.
1

We analyze a simple model of imperfect lender competition in consumer credit markets,
with fixed screening costs. Competition has two opposing effects on interest rates. The first is
a markup effect: in more competitive markets, lenders set smaller markups over their break-
evenrates. Thesecondisascreeningeffect: inmorecompetitivemarkets,eachlender’smarket
share is lower, so lenders have lower incentives to invest in screening out borrowers likely to
default. This occurs because, in our baseline model, screening is fully fixed-cost: the lender’s
cost depends on the desired default rate, but not on the number of loans made. Lenders
are also differentiated, so they are able to charge prices higher than their marginal costs. In
equilibrium,consumers’interestratesareequaltothebreak-eveninterestrate–whichdepends
on consumers’ default rates – plus a markup which depends on lenders’ market power.
Themainpredictionofourmodelisthattherelationshipbetweenconcentrationandinter-
est rates depends on the level of default risk in the population. In low-risk market segments,
wherebaselinedefaultratesarelow,themarkupeffectdominates, andinterestrateswilltend
to be lower in more competitive markets. In high-risk market segments, the screening force
candominate,soequilibriuminterestratescanactuallyincreaseasmarketsbecomemorecom-
petitive. The model also makes two auxiliary predictions. First, concentrated markets should
always have lower default rates, since lenders have higher incentives to screen. Second, in
high-risk market segments, higher concentration can simultaneously lead to lower quantities
and lower prices, as lenders with market power screen more intensively, but offer lower rates
to borrowers that pass their screening. This cannot occur in an environment without some
form of screening or rationing: demand curves slope downwards, so if lenders offered lower
rates without screening, more customers will want to borrow.
Consistentwithourpredictions,wefindanoppositerelationshipbetweeninterestratesand
marketconcentrationforlow-andhigh-riskborrowers. Forborrowerswithhighcreditscores,
above600,wefindtheclassicalrelationshipthatinterestratesarehigherinmoreconcentrated
markets. Forborrowerswithlowcreditscores, below600, wefindthatinterestratesareactu-
ally lower in areas with more concentrated markets. A 1% increase in HHI is associated with
around a 0.08% to 0.27% increase in interest rates for high-credit score borrowers, compared
toa0.05%to0.08%decreaseininterestratesforlow-creditscoreborrowers. Theseeffectsare
sizable: a 2SD increase in HHI is associated with approximately a 1 percentage point increase
2