NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHY DO BANK BOARDS HAVE RISK COMMITTEES?
René M. Stulz
James G. Tompkins
Rohan Williamson
Zhongxia (Shelly) Ye
Working Paper 29106
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29106
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2021
We thank Christiana Antwi-Obimpeh, Dana Hermanson, and participants in a lunch presentation
at Ohio State for comments. This project would not have been possible without the willingness of
20 risk committee chairs to be interviewed and we thank them. We also appreciate Lele Chen,
Viet Pham, Meng Guo, and Leandro Sanz for scientific assistance. This project was funded in
part by The University of Texas at San Antonio, Office of the Vice President for Research.
Zhongxia (Shelly) Ye also acknowledges great support from the College of Business Summer
grant program. Rohan Williamson is chair of the board of a bank. René Stulz consults for
financial institutions. James Tompkins has provided corporate governance consulting and expert
witness services in the banking industry. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by René M. Stulz, James G. Tompkins, Rohan Williamson, and Zhongxia (Shelly) Ye.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Why do Bank Boards have Risk Committees?
René M. Stulz, James G. Tompkins, Rohan Williamson, and Zhongxia (Shelly) Ye
NBER Working Paper No. 29106
July 2021
JEL No. G21,G28,G34
ABSTRACT
We develop a theory of bank board risk committees. With this theory, such committees are
valuable even though there is no expectation that bank risk is lower if the bank has a well-
functioning risk committee. As predicted by our theory (1) many large and complex banks
voluntarily chose to have a risk committee before the Dodd-Frank Act forced bank holding
companies with assets in excess of $10 billion to have a board risk committee, and (2)
establishing a board risk committee does not reduce a bank’s risk on average. Using unique
interview data, we show that the work of risk committees is consistent with our theory in part.
René M. Stulz Rohan Williamson
The Ohio State University McDonough School of Business
Fisher College of Business Georgetown University
806A Fisher Hall 587 Hariri Building
Columbus, OH 43210-1144 Washington, DC 20057
and NBER and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu rohan.williamson@georgetown.edu
James G. Tompkins Zhongxia (Shelly) Ye
Kennesaw State University Department of Accounting
Michael J. Coles College of Business College of Business
MD 0403 The University of Texas at San Antonio
560 Parliament Garden Way One UTSA Circle
Kennesaw, GA 30144-5591 San Antonio, TX 78249
jtompkin@kennesaw.edu zhongxia.ye@utsa.edu

1. Introduction
There is an extremely large literature in financial economics on corporate boards. Surprisingly, this
literature does not have much to say about how boards should be organized (Adams, Ragunathan, and
Tumarkin 2020). Instead, it is mostly focused on how the board is selected, who should be on the board,
who should chair the board, and on the size of the board (e.g., Adams 2017; Carcello, Hermanson, and Ye
2011; Banerjee, Nordqvist, and Hellerstedt 2020; Khatib, Abdullah, and Elamer 2020). In this study, we
attempt to make progress toward our understanding of how boards are organized by addressing the question
of when a bank board benefits from having a risk committee and what the implications are for a bank’s
risk-taking when it has a board risk committee.
Though the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (DFA) passed in July 2010
required bank holding companies with more than $10 billion of assets to have a board risk committee, a
majority of the banks required to have a risk committee had one before the legislation.1 The presumption
of the legislators apparently was that having a board risk committee would reduce bank risk-taking. As far
as we know, there was no scientific evidence at the time suggesting that requiring the establishment of a
risk committee for banks that did not have one would be valuable either for the banks’ owners or for the
financial system. We develop a model of whether a bank should have a risk committee and show that for a
bank that maximizes shareholder wealth there is no expectation that a board risk committee causes bank
risk-taking to decrease. Our empirical analysis fails to uncover evidence that the existence of a board risk
committee decreases bank risk-taking. We use unique interview data to assess how bank risk committees
work and whether they act as expected with our theory. We find that risk committees play a role that is
consistent with our theory except that they also seem to be a way for regulators to monitor and influence
risk-taking within banks. Though a well-functioning risk committee can be valuable to a bank’s
shareholders, it is also possible for the risk committee to worsen the communication and engagement of a
bank’s board.
1 The Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act of 2018 increased the asset threshold to
$50 billion (https://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/senate-bill/2155).
1

Taking risks is a core activity for banks. Therefore, we would expect the board to pay close attention
to how a bank takes risks and to the risks that a bank is exposed to. For the board to make useful decisions
concerning the bank’s risk-taking, it is necessary for the risk metrics it monitors to be reliable. While the
audit committee makes sure that the accounting metrics are reliable, the accounting metrics are not
sufficient to assess risk-taking for more complex banks. If a bank mostly makes loans, whether the bank
makes the type of loans that help increase shareholder wealth can be assessed using typical metrics that do
not require specialized knowledge. However, as the activities of a bank become more complex, monitoring
the risk and risk-taking of a bank requires non-accounting risk metrics. Assessing the reliability of these
metrics and assessing the bank management’s adherence to board risk-taking targets becomes a more
difficult and more time-consuming exercise. When this exercise becomes sufficiently complex and time-
consuming, it makes sense to have most of it conducted outside of a board meeting by members of the
board who have specialized knowledge. As such, we would expect larger banks and banks with more
complex activities to be more likely to have a risk committee. We find that this was the case before the
DFA was enacted.
Risk metrics differ from accounting metrics in important ways that make the work of a risk committee
different from the work of an audit committee. Risk metrics are typically forecasts. Though some
accounting metrics involve forecasts, most do not. Further, risk metrics are forecasts of higher statistical
moments rather than forecasts of expected values. For instance, when it comes to stock positions, risk
metrics are typically not forecasts of expected returns but forecasts of volatility or other statistics. Therefore,
an obvious concern is whether a firm’s risk metrics capture risks that may affect outcomes for the firm
materially in a reasonable way.
For any bank, there is an optimal amount of risk-taking that maximizes shareholder wealth. A board
focused on maximizing shareholder wealth would want to make sure that the bank takes the right amount
of risk – neither more nor less – that is optimal for shareholders subject to the constraints imposed by
regulators (Stulz 2016). A board focus on shareholder wealth maximization that believes that it will be
more effective in making sure that the bank takes the right amount of risk by having a risk committee would
2