NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HEDGING AND COMPETITION
Erasmo Giambona
Anil Kumar
Gordon M. Phillips
Working Paper 29207
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29207
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2021, Revised September 2021
We thank conference and multiple seminar participants for their helpful comments. We are also
grateful to Sean M. McKenna from the National Organization of Life and Health Insurance
Guaranty Associations for extensive discussions on the insolvency procedures of insurance
companies. We are also thankful to Michael Etkin, Esq. from Lowenstein Sandler LLP and
Shmuel Vasser, Esq. from Dechert LLP for discussions on the legal treatment of derivatives in
insolvency. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Erasmo Giambona, Anil Kumar, and Gordon M. Phillips. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Hedging and Competition
Erasmo Giambona, Anil Kumar, and Gordon M. Phillips
NBER Working Paper No. 29207
September 2021, Revised September 2021
JEL No. D0,D22,D43,G22,G28,G31,G32,G33
ABSTRACT
We study how risk management through hedging impacts firms and competition among firms in
the life insurance industry - an industry with over 7 Trillion in assets and over 1,000 private and
public firms. We show that firms that are likely to face costly external finance increase hedging
after staggered state-level financial reform that reduces the costs of hedging. Post reform
impacted firms have lower risk and fewer negative income shocks. Product market competition is
also impacted. Firms that previously are more likely to face costly external finance, lower price,
increase policy sales and increase their market share post reform. The results are consistent with
hedging allowing firms that face potential costly financial distress to decrease risk and become
more competitive.
Erasmo Giambona Gordon M. Phillips
Syracuse University Tuck School of Business
Martin J. Whitman School of Management Dartmouth College
Finance Department, RM 120-D 100 Tuck Hall
721 University Avenue Hanover, NH 03755
Syracuse, NY 13244-2450 and NBER
egiambon@syr.edu gordon.m.phillips@gmail.com
Anil Kumar
Department of Economics and Business Economics
Aarhus University
Fuglesangs alle 4, DK 8210 Aarhus V
Aarhus 8210
Denmark
akumar@econ.au.dk

1 Introduction
In this paper we examine how risk management and hedging impacts firms and competition among
firms in the insurance industry following staggered state-level financial reform that reduces the
costs of hedging. The insurance industry is one of the largest industries in the U.S. and is also
considered, like the banking industry, to be systemically important and subject to risk from its
underlyingfinancialassets. Froot,Scharfstein,andStein(1993)(FSS)presentanintegratedgeneral
theory of how risk management can impact the investment policies of firms and also the interaction
of firms within an industry. While the rationale for hedging and the impact of hedging on different
aspects of firm policies has been studied - there is no empirical evidence to date on how hedging
impacts competition.1
How might competition be impacted? Early literature, including Telser (1966) and Bolton and
Scharfstein (1990), considers theoretically how the lack of access to finance or costly external fi-
nance can impact weaker and entrant firms ability to invest and survive competition and potential
predation by larger incumbent firms. To the extent that the firms that are subject to financial dis-
tress are able to hedge and become better able to survive competition by the larger well capitalized
firms, the previously constrained firms will be able to offer lower prices with less risk of distress
and thus gain market share.2 Customer demand will thus be directly impacted by pricing and the
ability of firms to survive if the product, like insurance, has a long life.
We examine life insurers whose value and sales depend on the insurer’s ability to survive to
when payouts will occur. The business model of a life insurance company consists of selling insur-
ance policies and invest the premiums in financial assets, such as bonds, stocks, and real estate
mortgages.3 A decrease in the value of these financial assets could affect the ability of an insurer
1Theoretically, Smith and Stulz (1985) consider managerial motives and taxes for hedging. Empirically, the
relationbetweenhedgingandfirmdecisionshasbeenexaminedbyBabenko,Bessembinder,andTserlukevich(2020)
for debt financing, Garfinkel and Hankins (2011) for M&A, Hankins (2011) and Almeida, Hankins, and Williams
(2017) for operational hedging and Adams-Bonaim´e, Hankins, and Harford (2014) for dividends. Chernenko and
Faulkender(2011)documentsthatfirmscanusederivativesbothtohedgeandspeculate. Theyshowhighinvestment
firms use derivatives to hedge.
2Phillips and Sertsios (2017) examines how private forms of financing enhance competition and firms’ ability to
bring new products to market.
3In 2017, the life insurance industry had a total of $7.13 trillion of assets under management, consisting of $3.37
trillioninbonds,$2.29trillioninstock,$0.54trillioninrealestatemortgages,andtheremaining$0.93trillioninvested
in other assets, such as loans to policyholders. Figure A1 in the Appendix contains key facts about life insurance
1

to pay claims and lead to the seizing of the company by the National Association of Insurance
Commissioners (NAIC), or insolvency, which in the worst cases could result in liquidation. Insurers
can hedge to contain the risk that the value of financial assets decreases. In turn, this can help
insurance companies to price their products more competitively and sell more policies. Hedging
canalsohelpinsurerssellmorepoliciesbecausecustomersaremoreinclinedtobuyinsuranceprod-
ucts from companies whose financial stability has improved because of hedging, either directly or
indirectly or through recommendations by external parties.4
We examine life insurers surrounding a staggered state-level financial reform that lowers the
cost of hedging in this industry: the staggered adoption of Section 711 of the Insurer Receivership
Model Act (IRMA). This act was first adopted by Connecticut in 1998 and has since then been
adopted by 22 other states.5 The reform enacted in Section 711 lowers the cost of hedging for
firms as it allows the enforceability of termination clauses that give the non-defaulting derivatives
counterparty the right to end the derivatives contract and claim the collateral posted for margin
if the insurance company triggers a contract-specific covenant (e.g., a rating downgrade), even if
the company is not formally in receivership. This termination clause means that the derivatives
counterparty of a Section 711 insurer can terminate the contract and net out its positions and
capture collateral posted as margin thus allowing the counterparty to avoid the uncertainty typical
offinancialdistress.6 Afterclosingtheposition,thecounterpartyisnotrequiredtoreturncollateral
if the insurer is later placed in receivership. This reform effectively gives counterparties a special
protection against the costly consequences of the automatic stay, which can subject creditors of an
insolvent insurer, including policyholders, to a lengthy receivership proceeding.
We examine the financial stability, hedging and product pricing behavior, as well as subsequent
companies in 2017.
4Froot (2007) considers how when insurer’s financial situation declines customer demand also falls because of
customer’s sensitivity to risk. Froot theoretically shows that the product market sensitivity of customers to risk
createsanadditionalhedgingbenefitgiventhatinsurersareespeciallysensitivetothecostsofholdingriskbothfrom
imperfect capital-markets and also from product market-market sensitivity of customers to risk. Phillips, Cummins,
and Allen (1998) shows empirically that insurers’ demand is impacted when they face an increased probability of
default.
5Thisstaggeredstate-levelreformissimilartothesettingofBertrandandMullainathan(2003),withtheaddition
that not all states adopt this reform. We show that this setting and our results are robust to the concerns about
staggereddifference-in-differenceestimatesraisedbyCengizetal.(2019),CallawayandSant’Anna(2020),andBaker,
Larcker, and Wang (2021). In particular, we use the “never treated states” as control states throughout and show
that there are no yearly pre-trends. We also conduct a number of placebo tests.
6See Berends and King (2015) for more detail on collateral and margins.
2