NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MEASURING MARKET EXPECTATIONS
Christiane Baumeister
Working Paper 29232
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29232
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2021
I am grateful to Jim Hamilton for many insightful discussions and helpful suggestions. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Christiane Baumeister. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Measuring Market Expectations
Christiane Baumeister
NBER Working Paper No. 29232
September 2021
JEL No. C52,E31,E43,E52,G14,Q43
ABSTRACT
Asset prices are a valuable source of information about financial market participants' expectations
about key macroeconomic variables. However, the presence of time-varying risk premia requires
an adjustment of market prices to obtain the market's rational assessment of future price and
policy developments. This paper reviews empirical approaches for recovering market-based
expectations. It starts by laying out the two canonical modeling frameworks that form the
backbone for estimating risk premia and highlights the proliferation of risk pricing factors that
result in a wide range of different asset-price-based expectation measures. It then describes a key
methodological innovation to evaluate the empirical plausibility of risk premium estimates and to
identify the most accurate market-based expectation measure. The usefulness of this general
approach is illustrated for price expectations in the global oil market. Then, the paper provides an
overview of the body of empirical evidence for monetary policy and inflation expectations with a
special emphasis on market-specific characteristics that complicate the quest for the best possible
market-based expectation measure. Finally, it discusses a number of economic applications where
market expectations play a key role for evaluating economic models, guiding policy analysis, and
deriving shock measures.
Christiane Baumeister
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
3028 Jenkins Nanovic Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556
and CEPR
and also NBER
cbaumeis@nd.edu

1 Introduction
Expectations about the future play a key role in decision-making under uncertainty and form a
building block for a wide range of forward-looking models in macroeconomics and …nance. For
example, expectations about future in‡ation will in‡uence the price- and wage-setting behavior of
…rms and the consumption and storage decisions of households. Similarly, expectations about com-
modity price developments will a¤ect production and investment plans as well as economic policy
interventions. One valuable source of information about agents’expectations of future macroeco-
nomic outcomes such as in‡ation, monetary policy, and commodity prices are assets traded in
…nancial and futures markets. This paper surveys the literature on extracting market expectations
from asset prices and summarizes existing empirical methods.
Section 2 reviews the asset pricing theory that forms the basis for the empirical analysis. In
particular, it highlights the problem that …nancial instruments not only incorporate the ratio-
nal expectation of market participants but also a compensation for undiversi…able risk. I revisit
empirical e¤orts to uncover the presence of time-varying risk premia and provide an overview of
modeling techniques used to separate out risk factors from the expectation component consider-
ing two classes of models for estimating time-varying risk premia, return regressions and Gaussian
a¢ ne term structure models.
Section 3 addresses the question of which information set should be used for estimating the
risk premium and introduces a general approach that allows to discriminate among di¤erent esti-
mates. Using the oil futures market for illustration, I document the substantial disagreement on
the magnitude and sign of the time-varying risk premium across predictor variables and discuss
a methodology to identify the optimal estimate of the risk premium that allows to construct a
unique and reliable measure of market expectations which can be used as input in economic deci-
sion problems. Speci…cally, I will show how standard forecasting tools can be applied to obtain the
most credible estimate of the market price of risk and thus the implied market expectation. This
statistical assessment can be supplemented by economic criteria to evaluate the plausibility of the
implied market expectations.
Section4explorestheuniverseof…nancialinstrumentsthatareusefulforobtainingexpectation
measures. It provides a description of the characteristics of di¤erent …nancial and futures markets
that directly in‡uence the extraction of market expectations and discusses the di¢ culties that
certain institutional features and trading frictions entail in accurately measuring expectations. In
particular, I will focus on market-based monetary policy expectations and in‡ation expectations.
Section5presentsanumberofeconomicapplicationswheremarket-basedexpectationmeasures
havebeenusedtoaddressimportantpolicyquestions. Istartwitharetrospectiveanalysisoftheoil
marketthattiestheselectedpriceexpectationmeasuretohistoricaleventsandchangesineconomic
conditions to externally validate the usefulness of this market-based measure. I then consider a
variety of contexts in which market expectations can be used as inputs for empirical exercises and
theoretical models to test hypotheses, model decision problems, and inform policymakers. Speci…c
2

applicationsincludethee¤ectsofregulatorypoliciesonpriceexpectations, suchastheintroduction
of the Renewable Fuel Standard, the management of the U.S. Strategic Petroleum Reserve, and
changes in gasoline taxes; the evaluation of the credibility of central bank policies based on the
anchoring of agents’in‡ation expectations; the detection of speculative bubbles in commodity
markets; thedecisionsrelatedtohouseholdpurchasesofdurablegoodsaswellascapitalinvestment
and inventory accumulation; the derivation of surprise measures, such as monetary policy shocks
and oil price expectation shocks, that capture revisions in market expectations and are key to
understanding the transmission of shocks to the economy and designing policy responses; and
the implications for real-time out-of-sample forecasts and macroeconomic projections generated by
central banks and international organizations. In discussing these various applications, I will o¤er
some suggestions for promising directions for future research.
Section 6 brie‡y concludes.
2 Market Expectations and the Price of Risk
It is common practice for central banks, international organizations, the private sector, and the
…nancialpresstotreatthepricesoffutures,forwards,andother…nancialinstrumentsasmeasuresof
market expectations. For example, Bernanke (2008) stresses that "policymakers and other analysts
have often relied on quotes from commodity futures markets to derive forecasts of the prices of
key commodities." This practice …nds its origin in the notion that the price of a futures contract
Fh with maturity h purchased at time t equals the expected value of the spot price S at expiry:
t
Fh = E (S ) where E denotes the expectations operator conditional on information available at
t t t+h t
time t. Thus, under the expectations hypothesis the expected payo¤of holding a futures contract
until maturity is zero since in e¢ cient and rational …nancial markets, it is impossible to devise a
trading strategy based on all relevant information that leads to making economic pro…ts. This is
equivalent to postulating that the prices of futures or forward contracts are unbiased predictors of
future spot prices.
2.1 Testable Implications
This proposition can be tested using forecast e¢ ciency regressions of the form:
(S S ) (Fh S )
t+h (cid:0) t = (cid:11)+(cid:12) t (cid:0) t +" (1)
t+h
S S
t t
where the dependent variable is the realized percent change in the spot price between t and t+h,
the independent variable is the current futures-spot spread expressed in percent changes and "
t+h
denotes the error term.1 If futures prices are rational expectations of the future spot price, then we
1Muchoftheliteratureonforecaste¢ ciencyregressionsuseslogchangeswhichareagoodapproximationifprice
changes are relatively small. However, some of the commodity prices considered in the empirical analysis below
exhibit large ‡uctuations which makes the use of percent changes more appropriate.
3