NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EFFECTS OF GOING PUBLIC ON FIRM PERFORMANCE
AND COMMERCIALIZATION STRATEGY:
EVIDENCE FROM INTERNATIONAL IPOS
Borja Larrain
Gordon M. Phillips
Giorgo Sertsios
Francisco Urzúa
Working Paper 29219
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29219
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2021
We thank comments and suggestions from Reena Aggarwal, Sreedhar Bharath, Murray Carlson,
Sonia Falconieri, Naveen Khanna, Max Maksimovic, Amiyatosh Purnanandam, and seminar
participants at the Virtual Corporate Finance Seminar, the Bocconi-St. Gallen Conference on
Owners as Strategists, and the 2021 China International Conference in Finance. Larrain
acknowledges funding from Proyecto Fondecyt Regular #1180593. We also thank Augusto
Orellana for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Borja Larrain, Gordon M. Phillips, Giorgo Sertsios, and Francisco Urzúa. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effects of Going Public on Firm Performance and Commercialization Strategy: Evidence
from International IPOs
Borja Larrain, Gordon M. Phillips, Giorgo Sertsios, and Francisco Urzúa
NBER Working Paper No. 29219
September 2021
JEL No. G32
ABSTRACT
We study the effects of going public using a unique panel of firms in 16 European countries for
which we observe financial data before and after firms' initial-public-offering (IPO) attempts. We
compare firms that complete their IPO with firms that withdraw their IPO. We instrument the
going public decision using prior market returns. We find that firm profitability goes up after
going public—contrary to previous results in the literature. We also find an post-IPO expansion
in the number of subsidiaries and countries in which IPO firms operate. Our results are stronger
for firms in financially dependent industries and in countries with higher investor protection
consistent with going public relaxing financial constraints and with a stronger impact when
agency conflicts are lower. Overall, our results are consistent with going public inducing a shift
towards a strategy of commercialization to increase profitability.
Borja Larrain Giorgo Sertsios
Escuela de Administracion University of Wisconsin Milwaukee
Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile Lubar School of Business
Avda Vicuna Mackenna 4860 3202 N Maryland Ave
Macul, Santiago Milwaukee, WI 53202
Chile sertsios@uwm.edu
borja.larrain@uc.cl
Francisco Urzúa
Gordon M. Phillips City University of London
Tuck School of Business Cass Business School
Dartmouth College London
100 Tuck Hall United Kingdom
Hanover, NH 03755 francisco.urzua@city.ac.uk
and NBER
gordon.m.phillips@gmail.com

1 Introduction
Going public is a key decision for many firms. Explanations for why firms go public include
diversification and liquidity for previous owners, as well as to raise capital for expansion.
There are conflicting benefits and costs of going public. There is the positive effect of
additional capital that allows the firm to undertake new investment opportunities. There
are also potential agency costs as going public changes concentrated ownership to dispersed
ownership where the incentives of managers and investors can diverge (Jensen and Meckling,
1976), or managers faced with stock market pressure can become myopic (Stein, 1989). The
stylized fact in the literature so far is that, on average, profitability falls after IPOs, which
seems to speak againstthe benefits of public status(Degeorge and Zeckhauser1993, Jain and
Kini 1994, Mikkelson, Partch, and Shah 1997). In addition, Bernstein (2015) shows that IPO
firmshavelowerpatentingratesandfewercitationsaftergoingpublic. Theseresultscouldbe
interpreted as as evidence of short-termism or agency costs of being public (Kahle and Stulz,
2017). However, going public might alternatively be associated with an optimal change in
strategy to raise funds for commercialization and also to focus on increasing profitability.
Our paper explores whether this shift in strategy is associated with going public.
In order to provide a definitive answer it is crucial to distinguish the selection and causal
effects of going public. Selection means that firms time their IPO decisions according to
their life-cycle, profitability shocks, or industry shocks (P´astor, Taylor, and Veronesi 2009,
Spiegel and Tookes 2020, Maksimovic, Phillips, and Yang 2020). The dynamics of these
other variables can explain many post-IPO outcomes, and not going public in itself. The
true causal effect of going public, instead, refers to changes that happen to firms because
they go public, and not simply changes that are correlated with the going public decision.
Maksimovic, Phillips, and Yang (2020) argue that the causal effect of going public can be
as big as the selection effect. However, isolating and estimating this causal effect has been
elusive. In this paper we try to fill this gap.
Our empirical design sheds light on the rationale and consequences of going public in two
1

ways. First, we collect novel data on firms’ commercialization activities as well as data on
firmsthatwithdrawtheir IPOs fromthemarket, whichrepresenta reasonable counterfactual
for firms that go public and allow us to control for a host of self-selection issues. Our sample
of approximately 3,400 firms, spread across 16 European countries between 1997 and 2017,
contains pre- and post-IPO-attempt information irrespective of whether firms complete or
withdraw their IPO. In particular, the post-withdrawal profitability of private firms has not
been available in the previous literature. The panel structure of the data allows us to include
firm fixed effects and therefore to control for all time-invariant characteristics at the firm
level.
We use withdrawn IPOs as counterfactual for completed IPOs, but the decision to with-
draw is still endogenous. Therefore, a second crucial element of the identification strategy is
to instrument for the likelihood of IPO completion. In the same spirit as Bernstein (2015),
weusemarketreturnsovertheprevious30daystoinstrumentfortheIPOdecision. These30
days coincide with the marketing and book-building phase of the IPO. Firms that pull their
IPOs usually blame poor market conditions for the withdrawal. In line with previous evi-
dence, we find that positive market returns in the previous 30 days increase the likelihood of
IPO completion by 6.9% (from an unconditional probability of 87%). The pre-choice return
is basically uncorrelated with firm characteristics of candidate IPOs, so it is well-balanced
as an instrument. Market returns in this short window are unlikely to directly affect firm
outcomes several years after the attempt, which is what the exclusion restriction requires. In
short, our identification strategy is based on the idea that good returns are simply a nudge
for some firms that are at the margin between listing or not, but have no effect on the firm
except for their impact on the going public decision.
We find that the OLS effect on profitability (return on assets, ROA) of completing an
IPOversuswithdrawingisbasicallyzero. Asinthepreviousliterature, wefindthattheROA
of IPO firms goes down after going public. However, firms that withdraw their IPOs also
experience a similar decline in profitability. This suggests that the previously documented
2