NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DIVERSE POLICY COMMITTEES CAN REACH UNDERREPRESENTED GROUPS
Francesco D’Acunto
Andreas Fuster
Michael Weber
Working Paper 29275
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29275
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2021
We thank Carola Binder, Lisa Cook, Michael Ehrmann, Luigi Guiso, Anne Hannusch, Andrei
Shleifer, Stefanie Stantcheva, Jeremy Stein, and seminar and conference participants at the
University of Chicago, University of Mannheim, the Center for the Foundations of Law and
Finance at Goethe-Universität Frankfurt (DFG project FOR 2774), Toulouse School of
Economics, Yale SOM, Bank of Italy, the Monetary Meeting of the Verein für Socialpolitik,
Econometric Society Winter Meetings, the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, the Bundesbank
International Conference on Household Finance, JILAEE seminar, the Ifo Conference on Macro
and Survey Data, the Bank of Ukraine Research Conference, the CEBI Workshop on Subjective
Beliefs in Macroeconomics and Household Finance, the Bank of Finland – CEPR Joint
Conference on New Avenues for Monetary Policy, and the MiSoC Workshop on Subjective
Expectations. Weber gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Fama Research Fund at
the University of Chicago Booth School of Business and the Fama-Miller Center. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Francesco D’Acunto, Andreas Fuster, and Michael Weber. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Diverse Policy Committees Can Reach Underrepresented Groups
Francesco D’Acunto, Andreas Fuster, and Michael Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 29275
September 2021
JEL No. D84,E52,E58,E70,G53
ABSTRACT
Increasing the diversity of policy committees has taken center stage worldwide, but whether and
why diverse committees are more effective is still unclear. In a randomized control trial that
varies the salience of female and minority representation on the Federal Reserve’s monetary
policy committee, the FOMC, we test whether diversity affects how Fed information influences
consumers’ subjective beliefs. Women and Black respondents form unemployment expectations
more in line with FOMC forecasts and trust the Fed more after this intervention. Women are also
more likely to acquire Fed-related information when associated with a female official. White
men, who are overrepresented on the FOMC, do not react negatively. Heterogeneous taste for
diversity can explain these patterns better than homophily. Our results suggest more diverse
policy committees are better able to reach underrepresented groups without inducing negative
reactions by others, thereby enhancing the effectiveness of policy communication and public trust
in the institution.
Francesco D’Acunto Michael Weber
Boston College Booth School of Business
Carroll School of Management University of Chicago
dacuntof@bc.edu 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
Andreas Fuster and NBER
Swiss Finance Institute @ EPFL michael.weber@chicagobooth.edu
Quartier UNIL-Dorigny
Extranef 216
Lausanne CH-1015
Switzerland
and CEPR
andreas.fuster@gmail.com

“Weshouldmirrorthesocietyweserve.”
ECBPresidentChristineLagarde,2020.
“[D]iversity is a hallmark of successful organizations because diverse organizations draw from a richer pool
ofexperienceandreflectmorepointsofview—theyoftenmakebetterdecisions. Diverseorganizationsarealso
betterabletorelatetoandtalktomanydifferentcommunities.”
FederalReserveChairJeromePowell,2018.
1 Introduction
Over the last few years, the lack of demographic diversity in the composition of important
policy committees such as the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) at the US Federal
Reserve or the European Central Bank’s Governing Council has climbed to the top of the
agenda of policymakers and public debates around the world. Advocates of higher diversity
argue unequal representation of different groups (e.g., based on race or gender) is a form of
discrimination and may undermine equity and fairness in the policy process. Advocates also
argue more diverse committees reflect more viewpoints and experiences, which may lead to
betterdecisions.1
Whereas ethical motives are important, they are hard to quantify. Economists can instead
test empirically for the channels through which higher diversity might increase the effective-
nessofpolicymakingbodies. Forinstance,whenaprimarychannelofmonetarypolicytrans-
mission is the management of households’ expectations (Coibion et al., 2020b; D’Acunto
et al., 2021b), diverse committees might be better able to relate to and be trusted by more
communitiesandhencebeabletoinfluencetheirexpectations.
Testingthishypothesisfacestwomajorchallenges. First,thecompositionofexistingcom-
mitteessuchastheFOMCcannotbemodifiedatrandom. Second,ifwecomparedconsumers’
reactionsacrosstimesinwhichcommitteediversityvaried,wecouldnotdisentangletheeffect
of changing diversity from other time-varying shocks that led the committee and consumers
tobehavedifferently.
1For a discussion of these points, see, for example, the Center for American Progress article, “We Need to
IncreaseDiversityinPolicymaking,”availablehere,orthediscussionintheNewYorkTimeson“JeromePowell
advocatesgreaterdiversityattheFederalReserve,”availablehere.
1

Toovercomethesehurdles,webuildonalargebodyofresearchinsocialpsychologyand
cultural economics and design an information-treatment randomized control trial (RCT) on a
representative survey population of more than 9,000 US consumers (see Haaland, Roth, and
Wohlfart, 2021, for an overview of information-treatment experiments in economics). In our
RCT, subjects read the FOMC’s medium-term macroeoconomic forecasts for unemployment
or inflation, but face contexts in which the salience of the FOMC’s demographic diversity
varies randomly. We create this variation by including with the FOMC forecasts one of three
pictures of same-rank FOMC members at random: Thomas Barkin (White man), Raphael
Bostic (Black man), and Mary Daly (White woman).2 In a separate survey, we verify the
effectiveness of this experimental intervention, in that exposure to the Black or female com-
mitteememberinducessubjectsofalldemographics,onaverage,toperceiveahigherpresence
ofthesetraditionallyunderrepresentedgroupsontheFOMC.
Ourmaintestcomparesthesubjectivemacroeconomicexpectationsofconsumerswhobe-
longtothesamedemographicgroupandseethesameforecastbutforwhomFOMCdiversity
saliencevaries. WealsoelicittrustintheFederalReserveandproxiesfortheattentionsubjects
paytothesurveyinformationtotestforpossibleeconomicchannelsdrivingourresults.
WeapproachthisRCTwithapre-registeredtwo-sidedhypothesis,andourfindings,what-
ever their sign, should be assessed against the ethical value of more equal representation. If
highercommitteediversityledfemaleandnon-Whiterespondents—thegroupsthathavebeen
underrepresented on the FOMC and most other policy committees—to update their beliefs
moreinlinewiththoseofpolicymakers,ourresultswouldprovideaneconomicargumentfor
increasing committee diversity above and beyond the ethical debate, which is based on non-
quantifiable and possibly incompatible views of the world. If, instead, diversity awareness
did not help influence underrepresented groups’ beliefs and affected overrepresented groups
negatively, our paper would help quantify potential costs of reducing unequal representation
inpolicycommittees.
2AllthreearepresidentsofregionalFederalReserveBanksandwerenon-votingmembersattheJune2020
FOMC meeting, from which we draw the forecasts. Non-voting (or alternate) FOMC members participate in
discussionsandalsocontributetheirforecaststotheSurveyofEconomicProjections,whichistheinformation
sourcewepresenttosubjects. Aswediscussinmoredetailbelow,ourdesignalsoincludesacontrolgroupthat
didnotreceiveanymacroeconomicforecastsanddidnotseethepicturesofanyFOMCmembers.
2