NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LENDER AUTOMATION AND RACIAL DISPARITIES IN CREDIT ACCESS
Sabrina T. Howell
Theresa Kuchler
David Snitkof
Johannes Stroebel
Jun Wong
Working Paper 29364
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29364
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2021, Revised November 2022
Previously circulated as “Automation and Racial Disparities in Small Business Lending:
Evidence from the Paycheck Protection Program”. This paper subsumes results in an earlier note
from December 2020 titled “Which lenders had the highest minority share among their Payment
Protection Program (PPP) loans?” We are grateful to Georgij Alekseev, Sara Gong, and
Cangyuan Li for superb research assistance, and to Enigma, Middesk, Lendio, Biz2Credit, and
Ocrolus for sharing part of their data. In particular, we thank Scott Monaco at Ocrolus for his
insights and analytical work. We are also grateful for help from Sriya Anbil, Rohit Arora,
Venkatesh Bala, Brock Blake, Katherine Chandler, Christine Dobridge, Kyle Mack, Karen Mills,
David Musto, Hicham Oudghiri, Madeline Ross, Kurt Ruppel, and Sam Taussig. We thank
seminar and conference participants at the NBER, the AFA Meetings, Cornell, Chicago Booth,
Princeton, Maryland Smith, Arizona State University, the Government Accountability Office,
Northeastern University, the Boston Fed, the Virtual Corporate Finance Seminar, NYU, the NY
State Department of Financial Services, and the University of Georgia as well as Michael
Faulkender and the reviewing team at the Journal of Finance (the editor Amit Seru, as well as an
associate Editor and multiple anonymous referees) for their helpful comments. Howell’s work on
this project is funded by the Kauffman Foundation. Snitkof is an employee and Howell an unpaid
contractor at Ocrolus, which provided some data for the project. There are no further relevant
financial or other conflicts of interest to disclose.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Sabrina T. Howell, Theresa Kuchler, David Snitkof, Johannes Stroebel, and Jun
Wong. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Lender Automation and Racial Disparities in Credit Access
Sabrina T. Howell, Theresa Kuchler, David Snitkof, Johannes Stroebel, and Jun Wong
NBER Working Paper No. 29364
October 2021, Revised November 2022
JEL No. G21,G23,G28,G41,J15
ABSTRACT
Process automation reduces racial disparities in credit access through enabling smaller loans, broadening
banks’ geographic reach, and removing human biases from decision-making. We document these findings
in the context of the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP), a setting where private lenders faced no
credit risk but decided which firms to serve. Black-owned firms primarily obtained PPP loans from
automated fintech lenders, especially in areas with high racial animus. After traditional banks automated
their loan processing procedures, their PPP lending to Black-owned firms increased. Our findings
cannot be fully explained by racial differences in loan application behaviors, pre-existing banking
relationships, firm performance, or fraud rates.
Sabrina T. Howell Johannes Stroebel
NYU Stern School of Business Stern School of Business
KMC 9-93 New York University
44 West 4th Street 44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012 New York, NY 10012
and NBER and NBER
showell@stern.nyu.edu johannes.stroebel@nyu.edu
Theresa Kuchler Jun Wong
Stern School of Business University of Chicago
New York University junwong@uchicago.edu
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
tkuchler@stern.nyu.edu
David Snitkof
Ocrolus
101 Greenwich St
New York, NY 10006
dsnitkof@ocrolus.com

Researchers and policy makers in the U.S. and elsewhere have long been concerned about racial
disparities in access to financial services (Crutsinger, 2021; Abrams, 2021; Crowell, 2021). The recent
emergenceoffintechlendershasraisednewandimportantquestionsabouthowtheirtechnologies—notably
algorithmic underwriting and process automation—might affect racial disparities in lending. Much of the
resulting literature has focused on the effects of algorithmic underwriting practices on racial disparities in
creditaccess(Blattneret al.,2021;Bartlettetal.,2021; Fuster etal.,2022). Inthispaper, westudytherole
ofprocessautomationseparatelyfromthatofalgorithmicunderwriting,andshowthatautomatingprocesses
suchasincomeandpayrollverificationcansubstantiallyreduceracialdisparitiesinsmallbusinesslending.
Weexplorethreepossiblechannelsforthisfinding. First,sinceautomatedlendershavelowerfixedcosts
per loan, they can serve smaller businesses, which are more likely to be minority-owned. Second,
automation generally goes hand-in-hand with online loan origination procedures. This allows automated
lenders to more easily serve customers in regions with higher minority shares that are traditionally
underserved by the branch networks of less automated lenders. Third, automation reduces human influence
on decisions such as the order in which to process loans when facing capacity constraints, and can thus
mitigate racial discrimination—whether of the taste-based or statistical variety—in lending. Using an array
of novel datasets, we show that automation appears to reduce racial disparities in small business lending
throughallthreechannels,includingthroughaneconomicallyimportantreductionindiscrimination.
One challenge to understanding the determinants of racial disparities in credit markets is the need to
disentangle the independent role of race from other factors, such as differences in credit risk, that might be
correlatedwithracewhilealsodirectlyinfluencingcreditoutcomes. Toovercomethesechallenges,westudy
small business lending in an important setting with no role for confounding factors such as credit risk and
selectiononcontractterms. OursettingisthePaycheckProtectionProgram(PPP),whichwasestablishedby
the CARES Act in March 2020 to help small businesses struggling during the COVID-19 pandemic. With
morethan$800billioninloans,itisoneofthelargestsinglepublicfinanceprogramsinU.S.history. Three
featuresmakethePPPapromisingsettingtostudyracialdisparitiesinsmallbusinesslending.
First,PPPloansizewassetasafixedpercentageofpayroll,andtherewasnovariationinothercontract
terms. Second, PPP loan distribution occurred via private lenders, which were compensated with a fixed
share of the loan amount. Most lenders originated PPP loans using processes designed for pre-existing
small business lending volume. When confronted with 100 or 1,000 times the normal application volumes,
lenders faced severe capacity constraints, forcing them to prioritize among applicants (Morel et al., 2021;
Zhou, 2020; Flitter and Cowley, 2020). The Small Business Administration (SBA) did not issue specific
guidance on loan distribution, leaving the private lenders to independently determine which businesses to
servegiventhefeestructureandotherfactorssuchaslendercoststructureorprocessingcapacity. Third,PPP
loanswere100%guaranteedbythefederalgovernment,sotheoriginatinglendershadnofinancialexposure
to the borrower’s performance. Consequently, any observed racial disparities in lending should not reflect
differencesinexpectedinterestrevenuesorloanlosses. Studyingasettingwithnocreditriskalsoallowsus
to isolate the role of process automation (e.g., automating application intake and payroll verification) from
the role of algorithmic underwriting (e.g., predicting default risk using machine learning), which has been
thefocusofmuchoftherelatedresearchinfinancialeconomics.
WeworkwithpublicadministrativedatafromtheSBAon11.8millionPPPloansmadebetweenApril3,
1

2020,andMay31,2021. Werestrictthesampleto“firstdraw”loansmadebeforeFebruary24,2021,when
program rules were changed to explicitly prioritize lending to small firms and minority-owned businesses.
Inafirststep,webuildonawell-establishedliteraturetopredicttheraceorethnicityoftheownersofPPP-
funded businesses based on the owners’ names and locations (Imai and Khanna, 2016; Humphries et al.,
2019; Tzioumis, 2018). After collecting owner names from business registrations in collaboration with the
data analytics firm Middesk, we assign race and ethnicity to the business owners for 4.2 million PPP loans.
This predicted race based on signals provided by name and location is particularly relevant in our context,
sinceloanofficerstypicallyobservethosecharacteristicsbutdonotknowborrowers’actualrace. However,
ourresultsarerobusttousingonlythesubsampleofPPPborrowerswithinformationonself-identifiedrace.
Ourapproachtoestablishingtheeffectofautomationonracialdisparitiesinsmallbusinesslendinguses
two sets of comparisons. First, we study the rates of lending to minority-owned businesses across lender
types with different degrees of automation, with a particular focus on fintech firms as the lenders with the
most automated lending systems, and small banks as those with the least automated systems. (We use data
on bank branch-level software spending to show that automation generally increases in bank size.) Second,
we analyze within-lender changes in PPP lending to minority-owned businesses in a subset of traditional
lenders which automated their loan origination processes during the PPP period. Across both types of
analyses, we show that lenders with more automated loan processing systems were more likely to extend
PPP loans to minority-owned firms. Our evidence suggests this happens partly because lenders with more
automated systems can make smaller loans and loans in higher-minority areas, and partly because
automated loan processing reduces the scope for human biases to lead to discrimination of minority-owned
firms. DatafromasubsetofPPPloanapplicationsprovidesevidencethatracialdifferencesinloanapproval
ratesatconventionallenders(butnotatfintechs)contributestotheobservedacross-lenderpatterns.
Wefirstdocumentvariationacrosstypesoffinancialinstitutionsintheunconditionalpropensitytoextend
PPPloanstobusinessesownedbydifferentraces. Fintechlenderswiththemostautomatedlendingsystems
made 26.5% of their PPP loans to Black-owned businesses. Among traditional banks, PPP loan shares to
Black-owned businesses increased with bank size, ranging from 3.3% at small banks to 6.2% at the largest
fourbanks(WellsFargo,BankofAmerica,JPMorganChase,andCitibank). Wealsoshowthatbankbranches
withmoreautomation,asmeasuredbysoftwarespending,lendmoretoBlack-ownedfirms. Overall,fintech
lenders were responsible for 53.6% of PPP loans to Black-owned businesses, while only accounting for
17.4% of all PPP loans. There are also some smaller differences across lenders in the propensity to lend to
White-, Asian-, and Hispanic-owned firms. However, the differences in lending to Black-owned businesses
acrossdifferentlendertypesaremuchmoredramatic,sowefocusourpaperonunderstandingthisdisparity.
To directly test whether automating the loan origination process increases PPP lending to Black-owned
businesses, we analyze lending at a number of smaller banks that automated during the PPP period by
outsourcing theback-end processingof theirPPP loan applications toa third-partysoftware provider. Inan
event study differences-in-differences analysis, we find that relative to other comparable banks that did not
automate their processes, automation increased the automating banks’ shares of PPP loans to Black-owned
businessesby6percentagepoints,relativetoapre-automationshareof4.4%.
We next explore why automation might increase lending to Black-owned businesses. We first focus on
automated lenders’ ability to make smaller loans and originate loans without relying on a branch network.
2