NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CLO PERFORMANCE
Larry Cordell
Michael R. Roberts
Michael Schwert
Working Paper 29410
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29410
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2021
We thank Jeremy Brizzi, Alan Huang, Yilin Huang, Akhtar Shah, and the customer support team
at Intex Solutions for their invaluable assistance in constructing the data set for this paper, and
Xudong An, Bo Becker, Darrell Duffie, Daniel Green, Fotis Grigoris, John Griffin, Fred
Hoffman, Chris James, Arthur Korteweg, Mark Mitchell, Taylor Nadauld, Jordan Nickerson,
Greg Nini, Yoshio Nozawa, Matt Plosser, Todd Pulvino, Bill Schwert, Serhan Secmen, Rob
Stambaugh, Rene Stulz, Fabrice Tourre, Stephane Verani; seminar participants at the Corporate
Finance Virtual Seminar series, Dartmouth College, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Federal
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, Frankfurt School of Finance, London Business School, New York
University, Ohio State University, Rutgers University, University of Florida, University of
Rochester, Wharton; and conference participants at the SFS Cavalcade, WFA, and NBER
Summer Institute for helpful comments. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the
Jacobs Levy Equity Management Center. The views expressed in this paper are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the position of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia or
the Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Larry Cordell, Michael R. Roberts, and Michael Schwert. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

CLO Performance
Larry Cordell, Michael R. Roberts, and Michael Schwert
NBER Working Paper No. 29410
October 2021
JEL No. G12,G14,G23,G24
ABSTRACT
We study the performance of collateralized loan obligations (CLOs) to understand the market
imperfections giving rise to these vehicles and their corresponding economic costs. CLO equity
tranches earn positive abnormal returns from the risk-adjusted price differential between
leveraged loans and CLO debt tranches. Debt tranches offer higher returns than similarly rated
corporate bonds, making them attractive to banks and insurers that face risk-based capital
requirements. Temporal variation in equity performance highlights the resilience of CLOs to
market volatility due to their closed-end structure, long-term funding, and embedded options to
reinvest principal proceeds.
Larry Cordell Michael Schwert
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Assistant Professor of Finance
10 Independence Mall The Wharton School
Philadelphia, PA 19106 3620 Locust Walk-SHDH 2451
larry.cordell@phil.frb.org University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
Michael R. Roberts schwert@wharton.upenn.edu
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk, #2319
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
mrrobert@wharton.upenn.edu
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w29410

Collateralized loan obligations (CLOs) have received a great deal of attention in recent
years because oftheir rapid growthand broad reach. Standard & Poor’s (2020b) reportsthat
two-thirds, or $2.1 trillion, of leveraged loan issuance since the 2008 financial crisis has been
funded by CLOs. A broad array of financial institutions invest in CLOs, including banks,
insurers, pension funds, mutual funds, and hedge funds. As a result, U.S. and European
regulators have expressed concerns about the growth of the CLO market and the financial
system’s exposure to these vehicles (MarketWatch (2019), Standard & Poor’s (2020a)).
In this paper, we address two questions arising from the growth of CLOs. What market
imperfections are CLOs designed to address, and how large are the economic costs of these
imperfections? With perfect capital markets, there is no role for CLOs, or securitization
more broadly, because economic agents can costlessly transform cash flows. Thus, CLOs
exist because of market imperfections. We test the implications of different imperfections
for the performance of CLO assets and liabilities. In doing so, we provide the first large-
sample evidence on CLO performance, shedding light on the risks and rewards of these
vehicles.
We begin by constructing a novel data set that offers a near-comprehensive view of the
CLOmarket. ThedataincludethefullhistoryofcashdistributionstoeveryCLOtranche, as
well as information on contract terms, collateral holdings, and trading activity. The sample
period, August 1997 to March 2021, encompasses three distinct business cycles including the
financial crisis and the first year of the Covid-19 pandemic.
Our central finding is that CLO equity tranches provide statistically and economically
significant abnormal returns, or “alpha,” against a variety of public benchmarks. Using the
generalized public market equivalent (GPME) framework of Korteweg and Nagel (2016), we
findthattheaveragecompletedCLOequityinvestmentoffersanetpresentvalue(NPV)of66
cents per dollar invested, net of fees. This estimate equates to approximately $33 million, or
6.6% of total assets, for the typical deal. The exact magnitude of the NPV estimate depends
onthestochasticdiscountfactor(SDF)specification,butalloftheestimatesareeconomically
1

large and statistically significant. Before-fee GPME estimates imply that managers capture
approximately 40% of the before-fee surplus. Because many managers fund a portion of the
equity tranche in the CLOs they manage, this fraction is a conservative estimate of the total
compensation of CLO managers.
Since equity investors receive the residual cash flow from the collateral pool after debt
tranches are paid, these abnormal returns must be due to risk-adjusted price differentials
between the leveraged loans in the collateral pool and the debt tranches issued to finance
the vehicle. We confirm this relation by applying the GPME framework to the cash flows
producedbyCLOcollateralanddebttranches. Althoughtheconclusionsregardingabnormal
performance depend on the choice of SDF, debt tranches offer lower risk-adjusted returns
than loan collateral in every specification.
Closer inspection reveals that the abnormal equity returns are concentrated among CLOs
originated before 2010, so-called “CLO 1.0” transactions, and in particular by CLOs issued
just before the onset of the financial crisis. CLOs issued in 2006 and 2007 locked in low-cost
financing prior to the crisis and reinvested in high-yielding loans during and after the crisis.
The result was a windfall of excess interest and principal for CLO equity investors as the
economy recovered. CLOs have also proven resilient to the Covid-19 crisis, which has thus
far had a negligible effect on equity distributions.
This resilience is attributable to several structural features of CLOs. First, CLOs are
closed-end vehicles in which capital inflows and outflows are limited. Second, coverage
tests are based on par values and credit ratings instead of market prices. Consequently,
market volatility does not cause the diversion of cash flows to pay down debt tranches
unlessthevolatilitycoincideswithratingdowngradesanddefaults. Third, embeddedoptions
to reinvest collateral and reissue debt after a non-call period enable opportunistic trading
and refinancing by CLO managers. Finally, CLOs employ a long-term funding structure
known as “term leverage” that insulates the vehicle from rollover risk. Unlike most levered
investment vehicles that use short-term debt (e.g., hedge funds), CLOs issue long-term debt
2