NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SCRAMBLING FOR DOLLARS:
INTERNATIONAL LIQUIDITY, BANKS AND EXCHANGE RATES
Javier Bianchi
Saki Bigio
Charles Engel
Working Paper 29457
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29457
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2021, Revised March 2023
We would like to thank the discussants Benjamin Hebert, Oleg Itskhoki, Rohan Kekre, Ernest
Liu, Dmitry Mukhin, Jesse Schreger, Jenny Tang, and Motohiro Yogo, as well as Andy Atkeson,
Roberto Chang, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Martin Eichenbaum, Sebnem
Kalemli-Ozcan, Matteo Maggiori, Ken Miyahara, Sergio Rebelo, and Hélène Rey for excellent
comments. We also thank participants at various conferences and seminars. Engel acknowledges
support through NSF award #1918340. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Javier Bianchi, Saki Bigio, and Charles Engel. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Scrambling for Dollars: International Liquidity, Banks and Exchange Rates
Javier Bianchi, Saki Bigio, and Charles Engel
NBER Working Paper No. 29457
November 2021, Revised March 2023
JEL No. F41,F44,G20
ABSTRACT
We develop a theory of exchange rate fluctuations arising from financial institutions’ demand for
dollar liquid assets. Financial flows are unpredictable and may leave banks “scrambling for
dollars.” Because of settlement frictions in interbank markets, a precautionary demand for dollar
reserves emerges and gives rise to an endogenous convenience yield on the dollar. We show that
an increase in the dollar funding risk leads to a rise in the convenience yield and an appreciation
of the dollar, as banks scramble for dollars. We present empirical evidence on the relationship
between exchange rate fluctuations for the G10 currencies and the quantity of dollar liquidity,
which is consistent with the theory.
Javier Bianchi Charles Engel
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Department of Economics
90 Hennepin Avenue University of Wisconsin-Madison
Minneapolis, MN 55401 1180 Observatory Drive
javieribianchi@gmail.com Madison, WI 53706-1393
and CEPR
Saki Bigio and also NBER
Department of Economics cengel@ssc.wisc.edu
University of California at Los Angeles
8283 Bunche Hall
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
sbigio@econ.ucla.edu
An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w29457

1 Introduction
Thewell-known“disconnect”ininternationalfinanceholdsthatforeignexchangerates
showlittleempiricalrelationshiptothemacrovariables,suchasinterestratesandoutput
(ObstfeldandRogoff,2000). Morerecentworkcontendsthatthesourceofthedisconnectis
infinancialmarkets(ItskhokiandMukhin,2021a). Moreover,therehaslongbeenevidence
oftime-varyingexpectedexcessreturnsinforeignexchangemarkets,andfurthermore,it
appearsthattheUSdollarisparticularlyspecial,asdollarassetsofferloweraveragereturns
relativeto therest ofthe majorcurrencies whenmeasured onhistoricaldata (Gourinchas
andRey, 2007a). Toaccount fortheexchangerate disconnectandassociated puzzles,the
literaturehasturnedtomodelswithcurrencyexcessreturnsasthepotential“missinglink.”
Thesourceorsourcesoftheseexcessreturns,however,remainsanunsolvedmystery.
Inthispaper,wedevelopatheoryofexchangeratefluctuationsarisingfromtheliquidity
demand byfinancial institutions withinan imperfect interbank market. We build ontwo
observations of the international financial system. First, US dollars are the dominant
sourceof foreign-currencyfunding. According tothe BISlocationalbanking statistics, in
March 2021, the global banking and non-bank financial sector had cross-border dollar
liabilitiesof over$11trillion. Second,dollar fundingmayturn unstable. As documented,
for example, in Acharya, Afonso and Kovner (2017), banks are occasionally subject to
largefundinguncertaintyorinterbankmarketfreezingthatcanleavethem“scrambling
fordollars.” NarrativediscussionsattributefluctuationsintheUSdollarexchangerateto
such vicissitudes in the short-term international money markets. A contribution of our
paper is to develop aframework to formally articulate thischannel and provide empirical
evidenceconsistentwithit.
Weconstructamodelinwhichfinancialinstitutions,whichwerefertosimplyas“banks,”
hold assets and liabilities in two currencies. Banks face the risk of sudden outflows of
liabilities. If a bank ends up short of liquid assets to settle those flows, it needs to find a
counterparty,buttheremaybetimeswhenbanksmayloseconfidenceinoneanotherand
createfrictionsintheinterbankmarket. Asinsuranceagainsttheseoutflows,banksmaintain
abufferofliquidassets—especiallydollarliquidassets,inlinewiththeaforementioned
observations on the international financial system. To the extent that funding risk and
the frictions inthe interbankmarketsvaryovertime,thischangesthe relative demandfor
currencies,resultinginmovementsintheexchangerate.
The theory uncovers how frictions in the settlement of international deposit flows
emerge as a dollar liquidity premium. This dollar liquidity premium generates a time-
1

varying wedge in the interest parity condition, or “convenience yield,” which plays a
pivotal role in the determination of the exchange rate. Critically, the convenience yield
isendogenousanddependsonthequantityofoutsidemoney(liquidassets)andpolicy
rates,aswellasthematchingfrictionsintheinterbankmarketandthevolatilityofdeposit
flows in different currencies. Through this endogenous convenience yield, we link the
nominalexchangeratesandthedollarliquiditypremiumto thereservepositionofbanks
indifferentcurrencies,fundingrisk,andconfidenceintheinterbankmarket.
On the surface, the model resembles the seminal monetary exchange rate model of
Lucas(1982). Inthat model,twocurrencies earna liquiditypremiumoverbonds because
certain goodsmust bebought with correspondingcurrencies. A money demand equation
determinespricesinbothcurrencies,andrelativepricesdeterminetheexchangerate. Our
modelsharesLucas’ssegmentationoftransactionsandexchangeratedetermination. How-
ever,inourmodel,thedemandforreservesineithercurrencystemsfromthesettlement
demandbybanks,givingrisetodifferentpredictionsofhowtheexchangeratereactsto
shocksandtopolicy. Inparticular,ourmodelrationalizeswhythedollartendstoappre-
ciateintimesofhighvolatility,thereforeactingasa“safehaven”. Thisisaphenomenon
thathasbeenchallengingtoreconcilewithexistingmodelsoffinancialintermediaries(see,
Maggiori,2017).1
Manyrecenttheorieshavefocusedprimarilyonriskpremiaorexternalfinancingpremia
toexplainexcesscurrencyreturnsandexchangeratemovements. Riskpremiummodels
explainexcessdollarreturnsasstemmingfromhowcurrenciesotherthanthedollarhave
greater exposure to global pricing factors. External financing premium models account
for excessdollar returnsas emergingfrom banks’ balancesheet constraintsand limitsto
internationalarbitrage.2 Weprovideanalternativetheorybasedonaliquiditypremium.
Ourbaselinemodelabstractsfromriskpremiaandlimitstointernationalarbitragetofocus
squarely on liquidity. At the center of the model is the idea that funding risk may leave
banksscramblingfordollars.
We provide empirical evidence consistent with the theory by relating the banking
sector’s balance sheet data to the foreign currency price of US dollars. According to
the theory, the financial sector increases its demand for liquid dollar assets relative to
dollar funding—US government obligations, including Treasuries and reserves held at
the Federal Reserve—when fundingbecomes more uncertain,and this inturn translates
1Maggiori(2017)showsthatinaglobaldownturn,UShouseholdsbearalargershareofthelossesrelative
totherestoftheworld. Withhomebias,thismeansthatthedollarmustexperiencearealdepreciationina
globaldownturn.
2See Lustig, Roussanov and Verdelhan (2011, 2014) and Gabaix and Maggiori (2015) for important
examplesinthesetwostrandsoftheliterature.
2