NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SOURCES AND TRANSMISSION OF COUNTRY RISK
Tarek Alexander Hassan
Jesse Schreger
Markus Schwedeler
Ahmed Tahoun
Working Paper 29526
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29526
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2021
For excellent research assistance, we thank Nanyu Chen, Angus Lewis, Meha Sadasivam, and
George Vojta. We are grateful to seminar participants at the AEA annual meeting, the Bank of
Canada, the NBER Summer Institute, the Macro Finance Society, the Chicago International
Finance and Macro Conference, Hoover, Boston University, Columbia University, Princeton
University, University of Geneva, University of British Columbia, University of Maryland,
University of Virginia, University of Wisconsin. In particular, we thank Tom Ferguson, Pia
Malaney, Geert Bekaert, Karen Lewis, Matteo Maggiori, Chris Moser, Fernanda Nechio,
Tommaso Porzio, Laura Veldkamp, Frank Warnock, Shang-Jin Wei, and Chenzi Xu for their
comments. Tahoun sincerely appreciates continued support from the Institute for New Economic
Thinking (INET). Schreger thanks the Jerome A. Chazen Institute for Global Business at
Columbia Business School for financial support. The data in this paper are publicly available at
www.country-risk.net. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Tarek Alexander Hassan, Jesse Schreger, Markus Schwedeler, and Ahmed Tahoun.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Sources and Transmission of Country Risk
Tarek Alexander Hassan, Jesse Schreger, Markus Schwedeler, and Ahmed Tahoun
NBER Working Paper No. 29526
November 2021
JEL No. D21,F23,F3,F30,G15
ABSTRACT
We use textual analysis of earnings conference calls held by listed firms around the world to
measure the amount of risk managers and investors at each firm associate with each country at
each point in time. Flexibly aggregating this firm-country-quarter-level data allows us to
systematically identify spikes in perceived country risk (“crises”) and document their source and
pattern of transmission to foreign firms. While this pattern usually follows a gravity structure, it
often changes dramatically during crises. For example, while crises originating in developed
countries propagate disproportionately to foreign financial firms, emerging market crises transmit
less financially and more to traditionally exposed countries. We apply our measures to show that
(i) elevated perceptions of a country's riskiness, particularly those of foreign and financial firms,
are associated with significant falls in local asset prices, capital outflows, and reductions in firm-
level investment and employment. (ii) Risk transmitted from foreign countries affects the
investment decisions of domestic firms. (iii) Heterogeneous currency loadings on perceived
global risk can help explain the cross-country pattern of interest rates and currency risk premia.
Tarek Alexander Hassan Markus Schwedeler
Department of Economics Boston University
Boston University 270 Bay State Road
270 Bay State Road Boston, MA 02215
Boston, MA 02215 mschwed@bu.edu
and NBER
thassan@bu.edu Ahmed Tahoun
London Business School
Jesse Schreger 26 Sussex plc, Regent's Park
Columbia Business School London NW1 4SA
3022 Broadway United Kingdom
Uris Hall 821 atahoun@london.edu
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
jesse.schreger@columbia.edu
A website with all of the underlying data is available at www.country-risk.net

Researchers and policymakers often argue that global perceptions of risk are a major
driver of international capital flows, financial contagion, and sudden stops. In addition,
business leaders often cite crises in foreign markets where they may produce, sell, or be
otherwise exposed as affecting their investment and employment decisions. Although such
notions of country risk and its transmission across borders feature prominently in policy
circles and boardrooms, documenting the sources of country risk and its channels of global
transmission has proven more difficult.
This paper aims to provide a micro-to-macro approach to studying the sources and trans-
mission of country risk. We measure perceived country risk at the firm-country-quarter level
by computing the share of time that global firms’ executives and investors spend discussing
risks related to countries around the world. In particular, we apply natural language pro-
cessing (NLP) to more than 300,000 English-language conference call transcripts of publicly
listed firms headquartered in 82 countries to measure the perceived risks and opportunities
that each firm associates with each of the 45 largest economies in the world, collectively
covering more than 90% of world GDP.
The primitive of our analysis and our key contribution is to measure how much risk
firm i headquartered in country d(i) associates with country c in quarter t. The major
advantage of this granular approach to measuring country risk is that it allows for flexible
aggregations: for example, we can separate global risks from those associated with particular
countries, firms, and industries; separate the perceptions of different types of firms, such as
financial vs. non-financial firms; and trace the transmission of risk between countries. A
second advantage is that our approach to measurement is based on the semantic content of
text. This enables us to distinguish variation in perceived risk (the second moment) from
variation in perceived opportunities (the first moment), and to understand the sources of
risks and opportunities that firms face.
After validating our granular measure, we successively aggregate it into four different
dimensions. In the first step of our analysis we average across all firms in our sample to
obtain an aggregate measure of risk for each of our 45 countries: “Country Risk.”1 To
validate these aggregate measures we show that increases in a country’s perceived riskiness
1Thus we use “Country Risk” to mean the perceived risk associated with a given country, not as a
synonym for sovereign default risk as it is occasionally used (i.e. Eaton et al. (1986)).
1

areaccompaniedbysharpdeclinesinequityprices,increasesinequityvolatility,andincreases
in sovereign credit default swap (CDS) spreads.
We then use these aggregate measures of country risk to systematically describe its
sources. We first identify local and global spikes in risk (“crises”) over the last two decades.
Leveraging the semantic content of our measures, we use the excerpts of underlying text that
drive the spike in the aggregate series to pinpoint the specific concerns that led investors and
executives to focus their conversations on risks associated with the country in question. In
this sense, our approach allows us to identify the perceived sources of variation in Country
Risk without much guesswork.
Havingidentifiedanddescribedtheperceivedsourcesoftwoglobaland33country-specific
crises in our sample, we turn to studying the transmission of these risks across borders. To
this end, we construct a measure of the aggregate flow of risk from each origin country
to each destination country by calculating the average country risk firms headquartered in
country d associate with country c at time t (that is, we average across all i in d). We refer to
this measure as “Transmission Risk” and we find that during normal times, the transmission
of risk across countries follows a gravity structure. In other words, firms on average worry
more about risks originating in countries geographically closer to them, that speak the same
language, and that were in a common colonial relationship.
However, despite this regular pattern of transmission of risk during normal times, we find
that these patterns shift significantly during periods of crisis. To systematically quantify
these shifts, we calculate the pattern of transmission for each of the 33 major country-
specific crises identified in the first step of our analysis, and then regress this crisis-specific
pattern onto the regular pattern of transmission from that origin country in non-crisis times.
We argue that the predicted values, slope estimates, and R2 from these regressions usefully
characterize how a crisis associated with a particular origin country affects the perceived risk
of firms based in other countries. For example, our analysis shows that the beginning of the
Global Financial Crisis (GFC) in the United States in 2008 and the start of the Coronavirus
pandemic in China in the first quarter of 2020 are the two crises with the largest degree of
global transmission in our sample: they transmit risk to firms in virtually all parts of the
world. By contrast, crises originating in emerging markets (such at the Thai Floods of 2011
and the Egyptian Revolution of 2011) tend to come with strong bilateral transmission of risk:
2