NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LET THE WORST ONE FAIL:
A CREDIBLE SOLUTION TO THE TOO-BIG-TO-FAIL CONUNDRUM
Thomas Philippon
Olivier Wang
Working Paper 29560
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29560
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2021
We are grateful to our discussants Jean-Edouard Colliard, Jason Donaldson, and Jeremy Stein, to
Jean Tirole for his many insightful comments, and to participants at the 2021 Adam Smith Work-
shop, the 2021 NYU-NY Fed Conference, the 2021 NBER Summer Institute, Johns Hopkins,
WUSTL, Harvard, Princeton, HEC, Toulouse, and Rutgers. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Thomas Philippon and Olivier Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Let the Worst One Fail: A Credible Solution to the Too-Big-To-Fail Conundrum
Thomas Philippon and Olivier Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 29560
December 2021
JEL No. G01,G2,G33,G34,G38,H12
ABSTRACT
We study time-consistent bank resolution mechanisms. When interventions are ex post efficient,
a government cannot commit not to inject capital into the banking system. Contrary to common
wisdom, we show that the government may still avoid moral hazard and implement the first best
allocation by using the distribution of bailouts across banks to provide ex ante incentives. In
particular, we analyze properties of credible tournament mechanisms that provide support to the
best performing banks and resolve the worst performing ones, including through mergers. Our
mechanism continues to perform well if banks are partially substitutable, and if they are
heterogeneous in their size, interconnections, and thus systemic risk, as long as bailout funds can
be targeted to particular banks.
Thomas Philippon
New York University
Stern School of Business
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
tphilipp@stern.nyu.edu
Olivier Wang
New York University
Kaufman Management Center
44 West Fourth Street
New York, NY 10012
olivier.wang@nyu.edu

Governments often bail out large financial firms during financial crises because they
perceive that the economic costs of letting these firms fail exceed the fiscal costs of the
bailouts themselves. This recurrent issue came to a head during the global financial
crisis (GFC) of 2008-2009 because of the magnitude and scope of the bailouts. In
the aftermath of the Great Recession, governments pledged to end the “too-big-to-fail”
problem, and G20 Leaders endorsed the global implementation of a set of reforms for
systemically important banks (SIBs). These financial stability reforms rely on three
pillars: capital requirements (and other forms of loss absorbing capacity), enhanced
supervision,andresolutionregimes. Thereformshaveachievedsignificantprogressalong
thefirsttwodimensions. Capitalrequirementshaveroughlydoubledandthesupervision
of large banks has become tighter (Financial Stability Board, 2021). These evolutions
are somewhat uneven across jurisdictions, but regulators and market participants view
banks as significantly safer than before the GFC.
The same cannot be said, however, of the third pillar: resolution regimes. Despite
10 years of efforts, there is still no consensus about the ability of governments to resolve
large banks during times of economic stress. The root of the skepticism is that one
cannot expect policy makers to let a majority of banks – or even a significant number
of large ones – fail at the same time. As a result, the argument goes, the expectation of
bailouts will remain and will continue to distort funding costs and to feed moral hazard.
We argue that this skepticism is misplaced. More precisely, while we agree with
the premise (letting several large banks fail is not a realistic option), we show that the
pessimistic conclusion does not follow. The logic of the standard argument is flawed in
two ways. Firstly, it assumes that if regulators cannot let a majority of banks fail then
no bank can fail at all. Secondly, it assumes that private incentives depend only on the
average level of the bailout. We show that both arguments are incorrect.
The main idea of our paper is to apply the logic of tournaments to the issue of too-
big-to-failinthecontextofimperfectresolutionregimes. Weassumethatitisimpossible
for governments to credibly commit not to intervene to support the financial sector as a
whole during a crisis. However, this does not mean that the government has to support
every bank in the same way. Time consistency might pin down the size of the bailout
but it does not generally pin down its distribution, and the distribution of bailout funds
(or taxes) matters for incentives.
We write a simple model where bailouts can be ex post efficient because of a neg-
ative externality on the real economy when the financial system is undercapitalized.
Bailout anticipations affect the incentives of banks to engage in costly risk mitigation
2

strategies ex ante. When we assume, as in the existing literature, that bailout funds
are distributed in a symmetric way across banks, we obtain the standard moral hazard
results: bailouts inefficiently increase risk taking as in Chari and Kehoe (2016), create
strategic complementarities across banks’ risk management choices as in Farhi and Ti-
role (2012), and the situation is worse the deeper the pockets of the government. This
line of argument strongly calls for limiting the funds available for bailouts and tying the
hands of regulators ex post to the extent possible.
To establish our first main result we use the systemic risk model of Acharya et al.
(2016) where the negative externality on the real economy depends on the aggregate
capital shortfall in the banking system. In this case the optimal bailout takes the form
ofaweaklyincreasingfunction (K R)whereK istheaggregatecapitalrequirement
M −
and R the aggregate return. With N banks, time consistency requires that the set of
bailout payments satisfies
(cid:80)N
m = (K R) for any value of R =
(cid:80)N
r . This
i=1 i M − i=1 i
places no restrictions of the distribution of m around its mean. In stark contrast to
i
{ }
the conventional results, we then show that we can implement the first best equilibrium
by conditioning government support on a relative performance mechanism such as a
rank-order tournament, in which banks performing above the median get a higher m
than banks performing below the median. The scheme is fully time consistent since it
takes as given the overall size of the bailout. Punishing the banks that perform poorly
while rewarding those who perform well works because, despite knowing that the median
bank will be saved, each individual bank strives to make sure it does not end up in the
lower half. This race to the top generate first best ex ante incentives for all the banks.
The optimal contract requires punishment of bad banks. When we extend our model
by adding limited liability constraints, we find that the common wisdom regarding deep
pockets is overturned. We show that the set of implementable policies improves mono-
tonically with fiscal slack. The more slack, the more incentives the government can pro-
vide, the less moral hazard, and with enough slack the first best is always implementable
despite limited liability. When the limited liability constraint binds, our model offers a
macro-prudential justification for increasing TLAC requirements and also for mandat-
ing clawback provisions in executive compensation contracts. The reason is that these
contracts reduce the tightness of the constraint and therefore increase the range of time
consistent outcomes. For the same reason, we show that although the fire sales that
occur during systemic crises must be met by larger bailouts, they also make it easier to
provide ex ante incentives. Fire sales hurt the outside options of weak banks relative to
the transfers proposed by the regulator. Reducing bank leverage improves risk-taking
3