NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PRIVATE OR PUBLIC EQUITY? THE EVOLVING ENTREPRENEURIAL FINANCE
LANDSCAPE
Michael Ewens
Joan Farre-Mensa
Working Paper 29532
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29532
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2021, Revised February 2022
We thank Minmo Gahng, Oleg Gredil, and Jay Ritter for generously sharing data. Kexin Feng
provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Michael Ewens and Joan Farre-Mensa. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Private or Public Equity? The Evolving Entrepreneurial Finance Landscape
Michael Ewens and Joan Farre-Mensa
NBER Working Paper No. 29532
December 2021, Revised February 2022
JEL No. G23,G24,G28,G34,G38
ABSTRACT
The U.S. entrepreneurial finance market has changed dramatically over the last two decades.
Entrepreneurs raising their first round of venture capital retain 30% more equity in their firm and
are more likely to control their board of directors. Late-stage startups are raising larger amounts
of capital in the private markets from a growing pool of traditional and new investors. These
private market changes have coincided with a sharp decline in the number of firms going public
—and when firms do go public, they are older and have raised more private capital. To
understand these facts, we provide a systematic description of the differences between private and
public firms. Next, we review several regulatory, technological, and competitive changes
affecting both startups and investors that help explain how the trade-offs between going public
and staying private have changed. We conclude by listing several open research questions.
Michael Ewens
California Institute of Technology
MC 228-77
1200 East California Avenue
Pasadena, CA 91125
and NBER
mewens@caltech.edu
Joan Farre-Mensa
University of Illinois at Chicago
2122 University Hall
601 S. Morgan Street
Chicago, IL 60607
jfarre@uic.edu
A Paper's companion website is available at https://privatepublicmkts.com

1. Introduction
This article describes the changes undergone by the U.S. entrepreneurial finance market over the
last two decades and provides a framework to analyze the causes and consequences of these
changes. These changes have impacted both early-stage and late-stage startups, and they are the
result of shifts in both the supply and demand for private and public equity capital.
At the early-stage level, technological innovations such as cloud computing in 2006 have
decreased startups’ financing needs, particularly during the initial, experimental stage of the
entrepreneurial process. At the same time, the emergence of incubators and of new online
platforms that help connect investors to startups—alongside the regulatory changes that have
facilitated them—have contributed to a marked increase in the fundraising options available to
early-stage startups. We show that a key consequence of these changes is that entrepreneurs are
increasingly able to retain control of their board and a higher equity stake after raising their
initial financing rounds.
As these entrepreneurs’ startups mature, they gain access to a late-stage private equity market
that has grown five-fold: In 2002, the aggregate amount of private equity capital invested in
venture capital (VC)-backed startups raising a Series C or higher round was $14.2 billion; in
2019, it was $80 billion. Much of this late-stage capital is now supplied by non-traditional
startup investors such as private equity (PE) funds, mutual funds, and hedge funds.1 This
abundant supply of late-stage private capital means that many late-stage startups have little need
to go public to continue growing. As a result, firms are now less likely to go public and when
they do go public, they are older and have raised more private capital than in the 1990s. In fact,
we show that the number of startups raising over $99 million in a single financing round, a sum
historically only available via the public markets, grew 31-fold from 2002 to 2019.
What explains the increase in the supply of late-stage private capital? First, regulatory
changes such as the National Securities Markets Improvement Act (NSMIA) of 1996 now make
it easier for VC and PE funds to raise large funds. In addition, these funds have benefited from a
1
Throughout this article, “PE funds” are funds traditionally focused on leveraged buyouts, and increasingly also on
growth-equity investments (see Section 3.2.2); they do not include VC funds.
2

sharp increase in allocations to private equity by institutional investors such as public pension
funds and higher-education endowments—in the case of pension funds, perhaps in an attempt to
close their ballooning funding gaps. Third, the entry into the private equity market of mutual
funds and hedge funds—traditional public investors—has likely been spurred by the increased
competition they face from passively managed index funds: Investing in private firms can help
active funds beat the returns of their passive counterparts, thereby helping justify the active
funds’ higher fees.
Of course, the fact that successful startups can continue financing their growth while
remaining private does not mean that they have to remain private. We argue that, in addition to
the increased supply of late-stage private capital, two demand-side changes help explain why
many startups choose to remain private longer. First, founders’ increased control of their firms
after raising their initial financing rounds means that they enjoy greater bargaining power vis-à-
vis investors at the time of making exit decisions—and they can use this bargaining power to
fulfill their desire to maintain control of their firms by delaying an exit. Second, the secular
growth in the importance of R&D investments and intangible assets means that firms face greater
disclosure costs. As a result, the benefits of staying private and thus avoiding the disclosure
regulations that apply to public firms have increased.
The article proceeds as follows. Section 2 begins by describing the differences between
public and private firms. Section 3 describes the changes in the entrepreneurial finance market
over the last two decades, using Section 2 as a framework to understand these changes. Section 4
concludes by listing several open research questions.
2. How do public and private firms differ?
This section defines public and private firms, describes the differences between them, and
discusses how these differences impact a firm’s listing decision. Our focus throughout this
section is on the current regulatory environment surrounding public and private firms; Section 3
will discuss how these regulations have evolved over the last two decades.
3