NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INDIVIDUAL AND COLLECTIVE INFORMATION ACQUISITION:
AN EXPERIMENTAL STUDY
Pëllumb Reshidi
Alessandro Lizzeri
Leeat Yariv
Jimmy H. Chan
Wing Suen
Working Paper 29557
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29557
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2021
We thank Marina Agranov, Roland Benabou, Tim Cason, Stephen Morris, Salvo Nunnari, and
Wolfgang Pesendorfer for very helpful discussions and feedback. We gratefully acknowledge the
support of NSF grants SES-1629613 and SES-1949381. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Pëllumb Reshidi, Alessandro Lizzeri, Leeat Yariv, Jimmy H. Chan, and Wing Suen.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Individual and Collective Information Acquisition: An Experimental Study
Pëllumb Reshidi, Alessandro Lizzeri, Leeat Yariv, Jimmy H. Chan, and Wing Suen
NBER Working Paper No. 29557
December 2021
JEL No. C91,C92,D7,D8
ABSTRACT
Many committees—juries, political task forces, etc.—spend time gathering costly information
before reaching a decision. We report results from lab experiments focused on such information-
collection processes. We consider decisions governed by individuals and groups and compare
how voting rules affect outcomes. We also contrast static information collection, as in classical
hypothesis testing, with dynamic collection, as in sequential hypothesis testing. Several insights
emerge. Static information collection is excessive, and sequential information collection is non-
stationary, producing declining decision accuracies over time. Furthermore, groups using
majority rule yield especially hasty and inaccurate decisions. Nonetheless, sequential information
collection is welfare enhancing relative to static collection, particularly when unanimous rules are
used.
Pëllumb Reshidi Jimmy H. Chan
Department of Economics Department of Economics
Princeton University Chinese University of Hong Kong
Julis Romo Rabinowitz Hong Kong
Princeton, NJ 08544 Hong Kong
preshidi@princeton.edu jimmyhingchan@cuhk.edu.hk
Alessandro Lizzeri Wing Suen
Department of Economics Room 908, K.K. Leung Building
Princeton University The University of Hong Kong
Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building Pokfulam Road Hong Kong
Princeton, NJ 08544 wsuen@econ.hku.hk
and NBER
lizzeri@princeton.edu
Leeat Yariv
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Julis Romo Rabinowitz
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
lyariv@princeton.edu
An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w29557

1 Introduction
1.1 Overview
Information acquisition precedes a variety of important decisions—juries attend to testimonies,
boards of directors research investment prospects, government agencies such as the FDA or the
EPA require evidence prior to the approval of new drugs or policies. In practice, information
collection takes two broad forms. At times, it occurs in one shot: a volume of evidence is decided
upon at the outset, after which a decision is taken. This method is often referred to as classical
hypothesis testing. At other times, information is collected in increments and responsive to what
has already been learned. This dynamic approach, pioneered by Wald (1947), is commonly termed
sequential hypothesis testing. Although both methods are prevalent and heavily studied in the
theoretical literature, there is a dearth of data on how each performs in practice. This paper
reports results from an array of lab experiments inspecting both static and sequential information
collection. We consider individuals as well as groups operating within various institutions.
There are several clear patterns in our data. Sequential information collection approximates
the theoretically predicted decision accuracies, but these decline over deliberation time; static
informationcollectionisexcessive;andgroupsexhibitmarkedlydifferentbehaviorsthanindividuals.
As theoretically predicted, welfare is higher when information is collected dynamically. However,
institutions interact non-trivially with the information-collection protocol: Dynamic information
collection with groups using unanimity rule generate the highest welfare, whereas groups using
majority rule yield especially hasty and inaccurate decisions.
Our results have implications for institutional design when information collection is an impor-
tant component of decision making. Using committees, rather than individuals, can be beneficial
even if increasing the size of the decision body does not affect the overall information available.
However, the rules governing how collective decisions are made and the information protocol in
place—static or dynamic—need to be customized in tandem.
At the core of our experimental design is the following decision problem. There are two ex-ante
equally likely states, A or B. The state can represent a guilty or an innocent defendant, a safe or
unsafe drug, an investment that is profitable or not, etc. Ultimately, each participant must guess
the state of the world and gets rewarded when correct. Each state is associated with a Brownian
2

motion. The drift is µ when the state is A and −µ when the state is B. The Brownian motion’s
variance is state-independent. As time goes by, the realized sample path of the Brownian motion
becomes increasingly informative about the underlying state. There is a flow cost of information
collection. Wheneverinformationcollectionterminates, participantsknowtheposteriorprobability
that the state is A and submit their guess. Naturally, the optimal guess corresponds to the more
likelystate. Ourfocusisonthetrade-offpertainingtoinformationcollection: waitinglongerbefore
making a decision increases accuracy but comes at a cost.
We consider both static and dynamic information-collection procedures. The static setting
emulates the classical hypothesis testing setup. Participants determine, at the outset, the time
horizon during which they collect information by observing the Brownian path. They then see the
path unravel for their desired time, get informed of the ultimate posterior over states, and make
their guess. The dynamic setting implements the sequential sampling setup.1 Participants track
the evolution of the Brownian path and can stop at any time to submit their guess.
In our benchmark treatments, decisions are made by individuals, as in the canonical paradigms.
Since many applications involve committees as decision-makers, in additional treatments, decisions
are made in groups. When in a group, we consider two commonly-used institutions: majority and
unanimity. In the static setting, group members all submit their desired information-collection
horizon at the outset. Under majority rule, the median time is implemented for the group, whereas
under unanimity, the maximal time is implemented. In the dynamic setting, group members decide
whether to stop or continue information collection at each point in time. Under majority, whenever
two members agree on a guess, information collection terminates for the group, and the majority
guess is submitted. Analogously, under unanimity, whenever all members agree on the guess,
information collection terminates, and that guess is implemented. In all our group treatments,
information is public: group members are privy to the same information. Furthermore, group
members receive the same payoff, derived from the common costs accrued during the group’s
information-collection period and the group’s guess accuracy.
Our individual treatments offer a natural benchmark for the basic predictions emerging from
the classical statistical information-collection procedures. In the static setting, our parameters are
such that the optimal information-collection horizon is 30 seconds. In our experiments, on average,
1Specifically, our setup mimics that of Dvoretzky et al. (1953).
3