NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RACIAL DISCRIMINATION AND HOUSING OUTCOMES
IN THE UNITED STATES RENTAL MARKET
Peter Christensen
Ignacio Sarmiento-Barbieri
Christopher Timmins
Working Paper 29516
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29516
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2021
We thank students in the University of Illinois Big Data and Environmental Economics and
Policy (BDEEP) Group and the Duke Environmental Justice Lab for research assistance. We
acknowledge generous support from the National Science Foundation Economics Program and
the Russell Sage Foundation Social, Political and Economic Inequality Program. All errors are
our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Peter Christensen, Ignacio Sarmiento-Barbieri, and Christopher Timmins. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Racial Discrimination and Housing Outcomes in the United States Rental Market
Peter Christensen, Ignacio Sarmiento-Barbieri, and Christopher Timmins
NBER Working Paper No. 29516
November 2021
JEL No. J15,R31
ABSTRACT
We report evidence on discriminatory behavior from the largest correspondence study conducted
to date in the rental housing market. Using more than 25,000 interactions with rental property
managers across the 50 largest U.S. cities, the study reveals that African American and Hispanic/
LatinX renters continue to face discriminatory constraints in the majority of U.S. cities although
there are important regional differences. Stronger discriminatory constraints on renters of color
(particularly African Americans) are also associated with higher levels of residential segregation
and larger gaps in intergenerational income mobility. Using matched evidence on the actual rental
outcomes at the properties in our experiment, we show that correspondence study measurements
of discrimination do indeed predict actual outcomes.
Peter Christensen Christopher Timmins
Agriculture and Consumer Economics Department of Economics
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Duke University
431 Mumford Hall 209 Social Sciences Building
Urbana, IL 61801 P.O. Box 90097
pchrist@illinois.edu Durham, NC 27708-0097
and NBER
Ignacio Sarmiento-Barbieri christopher.timmins@duke.edu
Department of Economics
University of Los Andes
Calle 19A No. 1-37 Este Bloque W, Of. 821
Bogota, CU 111711
Colombia
i.sarmiento@uniandes.edu.co

Introduction
Over the past decade, a range of studies have shown that racial discrimination continues to
constrain the choices faced by minority households searching for high-quality housing (1–4)
and high-opportunity neighborhoods (5,6). By limiting the access of certain groups to the
beneficial effects of high amenity neighborhoods, discriminatory behavior may contribute to
racial inequality through impacts on short-run, long-run and even intergenerational outcomes
(7–9).
The present study reports evidence from the largest correspondence experiment conducted
todateinthehousingmarket. UsingasoftwarebotdevelopedattheNationalCenterforSuper-
computing Applications, the study examines more than 25,428 interactions between property
managers and fictitious renters engaged in search on an online rental housing platform, re-
vealing patterns of discrimination encountered in the initial stage of a search. The technology
was designed to scale data collection and the execution of statistically powered experimental
discrimination monitoring at low cost. The sampling strategy was designed to provide a di-
rect comparison of the magnitude of discriminatory behavior across the 50 largest cities in the
UnitedStates,allowingforastatisticalrankingofthemarketswiththehighestandlowestrates
ofdiscriminatoryconstraints.
While correspondence and audit experiments provide powerful evidence of disparate treat-
ment in housing and other markets (10), their key limitation is that the researcher never di-
rectly observes the effects of constraints faced by fictitious applicants on actual housing out-
comes (11). The present study advances correspondence research by providing the first avail-
able evidence on the relationship between disparate treatment and subsequent rental housing
outcomes by obtaining data on the renters that ultimately inhabit the properties sampled in the
experiment.
2

Experimental Design
The correspondence experiment used a computer bot that sent inquiries from fictitious renters
to 8,476 property managers across the fifty largest metropolitan housing markets in the United
States. MetropolitanhousingmarketsweredelineatedusingCore-BasedStatisticalAreas(CB-
SAs)asdefinedbytheUSCensus. Thesamplingprotocolwasbalancedacrossthe50markets,
such that rounds of experimental trials were conducted in unison. This balance ensures com-
parison of discriminatory constraints across different markets, avoiding conflation of regional
differenceswithtemporal(seasonal)variation.
Theexperimenttargetedlistingsindowntownandsuburbanareasofeachmarketontheday
following the day on which each property was listed on the platform (see SM 1.1). For each
listing, the bot then initiated a three day sequence of inquiries, sending one inquiry per day
using fictitious identities drawn in random sequence from a set of 18 first/last name pairs that
were selected to elicit cognitive associations with one of three racial/ethnic categories: African
American, Hispanic/LatinX, and white. Property managers never received inquiries from two
different identities on the same day. To account for the fact that names not only signal race but
alsootherunobservedcharacteristicssuchasincome(12,13),thebotfurtherstratifiedsampling
of first names using maternal educational attainment and gender. Responses from property
managerswereregisteredassuchiftheywerereceivedwithinsevendaysandindicatedthatthe
propertywasavailable(SeeSM1).
Housing Discrimination in U.S. Cities
We estimate the effects of racial bias on housing access using a linear probability model that
limitsidentifyingvariationtowithin-propertydifferencesinbehavior. Experimentallyidentified
relative response rate differentials measure the difference in the probability of response to an
3