NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
IMMIGRANT LABOR AND THE INSTITUTIONALIZATION
OF THE U.S.-BORN ELDERLY
Kristin F. Butcher
Kelsey Moran
Tara Watson
Working Paper 29520
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29520
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2021
We thank the National Institute on Aging at the NIH (1R03AG051861-01) and the Peterson
Foundation’s Project 2050 for financial support for this project. We thank Marissa Caldwell and
Seha Karabacak for excellent research assistance and David Jaeger for providing country of
origin definitions. We appreciate helpful feedback from participants at the Brookings Institution,
the Essen Health Conference, Society of Labor Economists annual meetings, the Population
Association of America Conference, the “All New Zealand” Economics seminar, and the Western
Economic Association Conference. This material is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program under Grant No. 1122374. Any
opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation, the
National Institutes of Health, the Peterson Foundation, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w29520.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Kristin F. Butcher, Kelsey Moran, and Tara Watson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Immigrant Labor and the Institutionalization of the U.S.-born Elderly
Kristin F. Butcher, Kelsey Moran, and Tara Watson
NBER Working Paper No. 29520
November 2021
JEL No. I11,J14,J15,J61
ABSTRACT
The U.S. population is aging. We examine whether immigration causally affects the likelihood
that the U.S.-born elderly live in institutional settings. Using a shift-share instrument to identify
exogenous variation in immigration, we find that a 10 percentage point increase in the less-
educated foreign-born labor force share in a local area reduces institutionalization among the
elderly by 1.5 and 3.8 percentage points for those aged 65+ and 80+, a 26-29 percent effect
relative to the mean. The estimates imply that a typical U.S-born individual over age 65 in the
year 2000 was 0.5 percentage points (10 percent) less likely to be living in an institution than
would have been the case if immigration had remained at 1980 levels. We show that immigration
affects the availability and cost of home services, including those provided by home health aides,
gardeners and housekeepers, and other less-educated workers, reducing the cost of aging in the
community.
Kristin F. Butcher Tara Watson
Department of Economics Department of Economics
Wellesley College Williams College
106 Central Street 24 Hopkins Hall Drive
Wellesley, MA 02481 Williamstown, MA 01267
and The Brookings Institution and NBER
and NBER tara.watson@williams.edu
kbutcher@wellesley.edu
Kelsey Moran
Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Bldg E52-300
Cambridge, MA 02139
kmoran@mit.edu

I. Introduction
The U.S. population is aging, with the population age 85 and older projected to grow from 2
percent today to 4 percent by the year 2040 (U.S. Census). This aging carries substantial costs, as
8 percent of total U.S. healthcare spending—or $286.2 billion—was spent on nursing facilities
and home health care in 2019 (CMS 2020). The vast majority of the elderly report that they would
prefer to age in place (live in their homes) rather than live in an institution (Binette & Vasold,
2018). Yet, more than 45 percent of those age 80 report some form of difficulty with cognition,
mobility, sight, hearing, or self‐care.1 Of those aged 65 and older with disabilities who remain in
their communities, over 35 percent hire formal home care (Van Houtven et al. 2020). Currently,
immigrants play a disproportionate role in caregiving and household services, particularly in roles
that may be crucial complements to aging in place. This study examines whether immigration
causally impacts the likelihood that the U.S.‐born elderly age in place rather than live in an
institutional setting.
The production of care for the elderly relies on a mix of less‐educated labor, more‐educated
labor, and capital. Institutions serve as a way to share the fixed costs of capital, and the care that
takes place in institutions tends to be more capital‐intensive than home‐based care. A robust
supply of less‐educated workers may lead to a different equilibrium in the production of
caregiving services – one that is less capital intensive and more likely to be based in a home
setting.
Earlier work suggests that immigrant labor supply affects household decisions in other contexts.
For example, Cortes and Tessada (2011) find that an increase in immigration increases high‐wage
women’s labor supply, presumably by allowing for the substitution of less‐educated immigrant
labor in home production. This study examines whether there is a similar link between immigrant
labor and the production of elder care, which in turn is linked to the decision of the elderly to live
outside of institutionalized settings.
1 Authors’ calculation using the 2017 American Community Survey. See Figure 1 for more information.
3

We analyze whether U.S.‐born elderly living in areas with more less‐educated immigrant labor
make different decisions about institutionalization. To address the potential endogeneity of the
location choices of immigrants, we follow Bartel (1989), Altonji and Card (1991), and many others
and use a shift‐share instrument based on historical migration patterns. The instrument is the
predicted share of the working‐age population that is less‐educated foreign‐born; this prediction
is based on 1970 immigrant residential patterns across U.S. commuting zones (CZs) interacted
with subsequent changes in the national population of less‐educated immigrants by country‐of‐
origin. The first stage shows that the instrument indeed predicts the actual share of a CZ’s labor
force that is a less‐educated and foreign‐born. Notably, the shift‐share instrument is less
predictive in more recent years, so we focus our analysis on the 1980‐2000 period. Recent work
(Jaeger et al., 2018) highlights challenges of such shift‐share instruments, and we discuss these
below.
Using the shift‐share instrument to predict immigrant labor supply in a CZ, we show there is a
negative and statistically significant relationship between the less‐educated foreign‐born labor
force share and institutionalization of the U.S.‐born elderly. Our preferred specification suggests
that a 10 percentage point increase in the less‐educated labor force share is associated with a
1.5 percentage point reduced probability of living in an institution for those ages 65 and up, on a
base of 5.2 percent, and a 3.8 percentage point lower probability for those ages 80 and up, on a
base of 14.8. These effects represent 26‐29 percent reductions relative to the mean. These
results are robust to controlling for proxies for cohort health status.
To address the issue of selective migration of the elderly, we construct a secondary instrument
based on birth state rather than current residence, using historical migration patterns of U.S.
natives within the United States. The results using this alternative instrument are significantly
negative and of comparable or larger magnitude, suggesting that selective migration of healthier
elderly individuals to places with more immigrants is unlikely to be driving the main results.
4