NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MONETARY POLICY AND ENDOGENOUS FINANCIAL CRISES
Frederic Boissay
Fabrice Collard
Jordi Galí
Cristina Manea
Working Paper 29602
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29602
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2021
The views expressed in this paper are our own and should not be interpreted as reflecting the
views of the Bank for International Settlements, the Deutsche Bundesbank, the Eurosystem, or
the National Bureau of Economic Research. We thank F. Alvarez, G. Barlevy, C. Borio, F. De
Fiore, P. Disyatat, M. Hoffmann, T. Holden, E. Mendoza, B. Mojon, C. Pflueger, L. Svensson, P.
Rungcharoentkitkul, H. Uhlig, R. Wouters, E. Zakrakšek as well as seminar and conference
participants at the NBER Summer Institute, EEA-ESEM 2021 Congress, Ridge Conference,
Danmarks Nationalbank–Bundesbank– Norges Bank Conference, Deutsche Bundesbank,
National Bank of Belgium, Bank for International Settlements, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Trinity
College, and European Central Bank for helpful discussions. Galí acknowledges financial support
from the European Research Council under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and
innovation program, Advanced Grant (882332–HEMPEF), from the Spanish Ministry of
Economy and Competitiveness, through the Severo Ochoa Programme for Centres of Excellence
in R&D (CEX2019–000915–S), and from the Generalitat de Catalunya, through CERCA and
SGR Programme (2017–SGR-1393).
At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w29602.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Frederic Boissay, Fabrice Collard, Jordi Galí, and Cristina Manea. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Monetary Policy and Endogenous Financial Crises
Frederic Boissay, Fabrice Collard, Jordi Galí, and Cristina Manea
NBER Working Paper No. 29602
December 2021
JEL No. E32,E44,E52
ABSTRACT
We study whether a central bank should deviate from its objective of price stability to promote
financial stability. We tackle this question within a textbook New Keynesian model augmented
with capital accumulation and microfounded endogenous financial crises. We compare several
interest rate rules, under which the central bank responds more or less forcefully to inflation and
aggregate output. Our main findings are threefold. First, monetary policy affects the probability
of a crisis both in the short run (through aggregate demand) and in the medium run (through
savings and capital accumulation). Second, a central bank can both reduce the probability of a
crisis and increase welfare by departing from strict inflation targeting and responding
systematically to fluctuations in output. Third, financial crises may occur after a long period of
unexpectedly loose monetary policy as the central bank abruptly reverses course.
Frederic Boissay Jordi Galí
Centralbahnplatz, 2 Centre de Recerca en Economia Internacional (CREI)
CH-4002 Basel Ramon Trias Fargas 25
Switzerland 08005 Barcelona
frederic.boissay@bis.org SPAIN
and NBER
Fabrice Collard jgali@crei.cat
Toulouse School of Economics
fabrice.collard@gmail.com Cristina Manea
Deutsche Bundesbank
Taunusanlage 5
Frankfurt am Main 60329
Germany
cristina.manea@bundesbank.de

“While monetary policy may not be quite the right tool for the job, it
has one important advantage relative to supervision and regulation
—namely that it gets in all of the cracks.” (Stein (2013))
1 Introduction
The effect of monetary policy on financial stability is ambivalent. On the one hand, loose
monetary policy can help stave off financial crises. In response to the Covid–19 shock, for
example, central banks swiftly lowered interest rates and acted as a backstop to the financial
sector. These moves likely prevented a financial collapse that would otherwise have exacerbated
the damage to the economy. On the other hand, empirical evidence shows that, by keeping their
policy rates too low for too long, central banks may entice the financial sector to search for yield
and feed macro–financial imbalances.1 Loose monetary policy is thus sometimes regarded as one
of the causes of the 2007–8 Great Financial Crisis (GFC). Taylor (2011), in particular, refers to
the period 2003–2005 in the US as the “Great Deviation”, which he characterizes as one when
monetary policy became less rule–based, less predictable, and excessively loose.
This ambivalence prompts the question of the adequate monetary policy in an environment
where credit markets are fragile and financial crises may have multiple causes.2 What are
the channels through which monetary policy affects financial stability? Should central banks
deviate from their objective of price stability to promote financial stability? To what extent may
monetary policy itself brew financial vulnerabilities? We study these questions within a novel
New Keynesian (NK) model, where crises may arise endogenously, after a protracted boom or in
the face of adverse non–financial shocks. Further, to precisely identify the effects of monetary
policy, we abstract from any other type of policy, such as tax or macroprudential policies.3
Our model departs from the textbook —three–equation— NK model in four important
ways. First, it features endogenous capital accumulation, so that the economy may deviate
persistently from its steady state and feature protracted booms and macro–financial imbalances.
Second, firms are subject to idiosyncratic productivity shocks, in addition to aggregate ones.
This heterogeneity gives rise to capital reallocation between productive and unproductive firms
via a credit market.4 Third, we introduce financial frictions that make this credit market fragile.
1Empiricalevidenceonthepotentialadverseeffectsofloosemonetarypolicyonfinancialstabilitycanbefound
in e.g., Maddaloni and Peydro´ (2011), Jim´enez, Ongena, Peydro´, and Saurina (2014).
2The Federal Reserve and European Central Bank (ECB)’s recent strategy reviews both emphasize that the
importance of financial stability considerations in the conduct of monetary policy has increased since the Great
Financial Crisis (Goldberg, Klee, Prescott, and Wood (2020), ECB (2021), Schnabel (2021)).
3In this paper, we consider financial stability risks emanating from the fragility of credit markets (“market
runs”), as opposed to those emanating from the fragility of financial institutions (e.g. “bank runs”). In our
case, macroprudential policies that apply to financial institutions are therefore less relevant. Another reason
for abstracting from macroprudential policies is that they may not always offer full protection against financial
stability risks, for example if they prompt regulatory arbitrage or the emergence of shadow banks.
4One may interpret this credit market as a disintermediated corporate bond market or as an intermediated
loan market, where banks would stand in–between buyers and sellers, the former taking bank loans to buy capital
goods and the latter depositing the proceeds of the sales into the banks. Provided that banks are not themselves
2

One friction is that investors may not be able to seize the wealth of a defaulting borrower, thus
allowing firms to borrow and abscond. This limited enforcement problem induces investors to
constrain the amount of funds that each firm can borrow. Another friction is that idiosyncratic
productivities are private information. Together, these frictions imply that the loan rate must
be above a minimum threshold to entice the least productive firms to lend —rather than borrow.
When the marginal return on capital is too low, not even high–productivity firms can afford
paying the minimum loan rate and the credit market collapses. This is what we call a financial
crisis. Most crises in our model break out toward the end of a protracted economic boom, when
there is excess capital in the economy and the marginal productivity of capital is low. Crises are
also characterized by capital misallocation and a severe recession. Finally, the fourth departure
from the textbook model is that we solve our model globally, which allows us to capture the
non–linearities embedded in the endogenous booms and busts of the credit market.
We study whether monetary policy can tame such booms and busts and, more generally,
whether a central bank should deviate from its objective of price stability to promote financial
stability. In the process, we compare the performance of the economy under simple linear interest
rate rules, non–linear rules, and discretion. Our main findings are threefold.
First, monetary policy affects the probability of a crisis not only in the short run through its
usual effects on output and inflation, but also in the medium run through its effects on capital
accumulation. In particular, policies that systematically dampen output fluctuations tend to
slow down the accumulation of savings. The lower saving rate stems excess capital accumulation
and helps prevent financial crises. As these effects go through agents’ expectations, they require
that the central bank commit itself to a policy rule, and only materialize themselves in the
medium run.
Second, a central bank can increase welfare by departing from strict inflation targeting
(henceforth, SIT) and responding systematically to fluctuations in output. For example, we
show that welfare may be higher under a Taylor–type rule, whereby the central bank responds
to both inflation and output, than under SIT, even though the latter policy is optimal in the
absence of financial frictions.
Third, we study the effects of discretionary monetary policy interventions, i.e. deviations
from the rule, on financial stability. We show that financial crises may occur after a long period
of unexpected monetary easing and that, in those instances, they break out when the central
bank reverses course and abruptly raises its policy rate.
At last, we discuss the welfare gain of following more complex —but perhaps less realistic—
monetary policy rules, whereby the central bank commits itself to doing whatever it takes
whenever needed to forestall a crisis. We find that such policy significantly improves welfare
but also increases the fragility of the financial sector, forcing the central bank to backstop the
financial sector relatively often.
subject to financial frictions, adding banks is inessential and will not change anything to our results. Abstracting
from banks, though, makes clear that entity–based regulations or policies may not suffice to contend with credit
markets’ intrinsic fragility (Stein (2013)).
3