NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE MARGINAL COST OF MORTALITY RISK REDUCTION:
EVIDENCE FROM HOUSING MARKETS
Kelly Bishop
Nicolai V. Kuminoff
Sophie Mathes
Alvin Murphy
Working Paper 29622
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29622
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2021
We are grateful for insights and suggestions from Joe Aldy, Glenn Blomquist, Greg Caetano,
Tatyana Deryugina, Catie Hausman, Jonathan Ketcham, Edson Severnini, Aradhya Sood, and
seminar audiences at the ASSA Annual Meetings, the UEA North American Meeting, the AERE
Annual Meeting, and the AREUEA Annual Meeting. This study analyzed secondary data on
human subjects under Arizona State University IRB ID STUDY00001990. This study was
financed in part by the Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Nivel Superior - Brasil
(CAPES) - Finance Code 001. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w29622.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Kelly Bishop, Nicolai V. Kuminoff, Sophie Mathes, and Alvin Murphy. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Marginal Cost of Mortality Risk Reduction: Evidence from Housing Markets
Kelly Bishop, Nicolai V. Kuminoff, Sophie Mathes, and Alvin Murphy
NBER Working Paper No. 29622
December 2021
JEL No. H0,I0,Q0,R0
ABSTRACT
We provide the first evidence that spatial variation in all-cause mortality risk is capitalized into
US housing prices. Using a hedonic framework, we recover the annual implicit cost of a 0.1
percentage-point reduction in mortality risk among older Americans and find that this figure is
both relatively low and decreasing in age, from $1,346 for a 67 year old to $246 for an 87 year
old. These estimates are one-fifth of the size of comparable estimates found in the labor market,
suggesting that the housing market provides an alternative, substantially cheaper channel to
reducing mortality risk.
Kelly Bishop Sophie Mathes
Department of Economics Department of Economics
Arizona State University FGV EPGE
PO Box 879801 Praia de Botafogo, 190
Tempe, AZ 85287-9801 Rio de Janeiro, RJ 22250-900
kelly.bishop@asu.edu Brazil
sophie.mathes@fgv.br
Nicolai V. Kuminoff
Department of Economics Alvin Murphy
Arizona State University Department of Economics
P.O. Box 879801 Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85287 PO Box 879801
and NBER Tempe, AZ 85287-9801
kuminoff@asu.edu Alvin.Murphy@asu.edu

1 Introduction
Recent studies of the US Medicare population show that where an individual lives after
the age of 65 causally affects their remaining life expectancy (Deryugina and Molitor, 2020;
Finkelstein et al., 2021). While the precise mechanisms are not fully understood, the idea
that mortality risk varies causally across residential locations, combined with the fact that
individuals are free to move across locations, implies that mortality risk may be capitalized
into residential property values. However, any potential capitalization effects may be damp-
ened by frictions associated with the availability of information and the costs associated with
migration (Chetty et al., 2020). The rate of capitalization answers an important question:
How much would an older American need to pay via the housing market to reduce their
mortality risk? We answer this question using national data describing the US Medicare
population (including migration and mortality), the stock of houses, and location-specific
amenities to estimate the implicit cost of reducing mortality risk.
We estimate the rate at which housing markets capitalize location-based mortality risk
using a modern version of hedonic property-value techniques developed in Rosen (1974)
and Roback (1982). We start by constructing our variable of interest following Finkelstein
et al. (2021). Specifically, we apply the identifying assumptions and econometric methods
from that paper to Medicare data (describing 7.2 million older Americans aged 65 and
above) to recover estimates of age- and location-specific mortality risk. Following Finkelstein
et al. (2021), we refer to the resulting estimates as measures of “causal” mortality risk.
We merge these causal mortality-risk estimates with Census data describing house values
and characteristics and with multiple datasets describing an extensive set of location-based
amenities.
Our hedonic estimation strategy addresses two key challenges in identifying the capi-
talization rate of causal mortality risk. The first challenge is that location-specific causal
mortality risk may be measured with error. To address this, we employ an Instrumental-
Variables (IV) estimation approach and instrument for causal mortality risk using the raw,
population-based measures of location-specific mortality reported by the U.S. Centers for
2

Disease Control and Prevention. As these measures are simple population statistics, they
are unlikely to embed measurement error.
The second challenge is the potential for correlation between mortality and unobserved
determinants of housing prices. In particular, location-specific amenities that are associated
with mortality, such as environmental quality, may affect the quality of life and be directly
capitalized into housing prices. The difficulty in fully observing and controlling for ameni-
ties may therefore lead to confounding through capitalization of amenities that households
observe but researchers do not. To overcome this, we narrow our focus to within-state varia-
tion in mortality risk and housing prices and control for an extensive set of location-specific
amenities. Thus, our estimates of the implicit costs of reducing mortality risk are purged
of differences in housing prices that may be explained by observed physical housing char-
acteristics and location-specific amenities that affect housing prices directly. The amenity
controls include 18 variables measuring climate, air pollution, crime, school quality, trans-
portation, and cultural amenities. These controls absorb approximately two-thirds of the
variation in causal mortality risk. The residual variation in causal mortality risk that we use
for identification may be attributed to location features that are less likely to be capitalized
into housing prices through channels other than mortality risk (Muehlenbachs et al., 2015;
Ma, 2019; Hausman and Stolper, 2020; Christensen and Timmins, 2021). Finally, we use
the insights from Altonji et al. (2005), Nevo and Rosen (2012), Altonji et al. (2015), and
Oster (2019) and include an analysis that assesses the direction of any remaining potential
biases that could arise from residential amenities that buyers and sellers observe, but that
researchers do not.
We find that causal mortality risk is indeed capitalized into housing prices. Our IV
estimates suggest that the marginal cost to reduce annual mortality risk by 0.1 percentage
points (pp) is approximately $575 (year 2010 dollars) at age 77. A 0.1pp reduction in annual
mortality risk is approximately equal to the within-state standard deviation of mortality risk
across locations. We findthis implicitcost tobedeclining inage, froma high of$1,346 atage
67toalowof$246atage87. Thisisaresultofthefactthatthespatialvariationinmortality
3