NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ZOMBIE LENDING AND POLICY TRAPS
Viral V. Acharya
Simone Lenzu
Olivier Wang
Working Paper 29606
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29606
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2021, Revised December 2025
First draft: September 2021. Stefano Pastore provided excellent research assistance. We are grateful
to three anonymous referees, as well as Juliane Begenau, Ricardo Caballero, Charles Calomiris,
Tim Eisert, Kinda Hachem, Martina Jasova, Anil Kashyap, David Martinez-Miera, Simon Mayer,
Cecilia Parlatore, Enrico Perotti, Silvio Petriconi, Giorgia Piacentino, Alexi Savov, Philipp
Schnabl, Sascha Steffen, Johannes Stroebel, Javier Suarez, and seminar participants at Amsterdam
Business School, NYU Stern, Norges Bank, the Virtual Finance Theory Seminar, the Fixed Income
and Financial Institutions (FIFI) Conference at University of South Carolina, Richmond Fed, Bank
of Italy, IMF, Northwestern Kellogg, Pompeu Fabra, CEMFI, FIRS, SED, EFA and Yale SOM for
comments. We are also highly indebted to Tim Eisert for providing us with data underlying the
motivating evidence for Europe. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Viral V. Acharya, Simone Lenzu, and Olivier Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Zombie Lending and Policy Traps
Viral V. Acharya, Simone Lenzu, and Olivier Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 29606
December 2021, Revised December 2025
JEL No. E44, E52, G01, G21, G28, G33
ABSTRACT
We model how accommodative policy can become trapped due to credit misallocation and its
spillovers, as witnessed in Japan in the 1990s and in Europe in the 2010s. Following large negative
shocks, the effective lower bound prevents stimulating bank lending through rate cuts.
Unconventional policies that subsidize risk-taking such as regulatory forbearance can still expand
credit, but excessive accommodation induces poorly-capitalized banks to lend to low-productivity
“zombie” rms. Due to persistent congestion externalities of zombie lending on healthier rms,
policymakers avoiding short-term recessions can get trapped into protracted low rates, excessive
forbearance, and persistent output losses.
Viral V. Acharya Olivier Wang
New York University New York University
Leonard N. Stern School of Business olivier.wang@nyu.edu
and CEPR
and also NBER
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu
Simone Lenzu
New York University
slenzu@stern.nyu.edu

1 Introduction
Inthispaper,webuildamodelwithheterogeneousfirmsandbankstoanalyzehowmonetaryand
banking policies affect credit allocation and long-term economic outcomes. In particular, we ex-
plainwhypolicymaygettrappedintoprotractedlowratesandexcessiveregulatoryforbearance
towardsbanksthatarecoincidentwithpermanentoutputlosses.
Since the housing and banking crisis in Japan in the early 1990s, regulatory forbearance to-
wards banks—effectively allowing severely under-capitalized or insolvent banks to continue op-
eratingbybackstoppingbankcreditors—hasbeenincreasinglyusedinconjunctionwithaccom-
modative monetary policy in a bid to restore economic growth in the aftermath of aggregate
shocks. This policy combination also found favor in the Eurozone following the global finan-
cial crisis of 2007–08 and especially after the European sovereign debt crisis in 2010–12. In both
cases,despiteanoperativeperiodexceedinginlengththeinitialintentionsandexpectations,this
policy script’s impact on economic growth remained relatively muted. Starting with Peek and
Rosengren(2005)andCaballero,HoshiandKashyap(2008),theliteraturehasattributedthisinef-
fectivenessofemployedpolicies(atleastinpart)tocreditmisallocationand,inparticular,tothe
phenomenonofzombielending: theprovisionofsubsidizedcredittopoorly-performingfirmsby
weakly-capitalizedbanks.1
Section2putstheexperiencesofJapanandEuropeintoperspective,presentingstylizedfacts
that document the proliferation of zombie lending in the aftermath of the crisis outbreaks, the
negativeexternalitiesthatzombielendinggenerated,anditsfeedbackloopwithpolicyinterven-
tions. Importantly, the evidence suggests that adverse effects of credit misallocation due to the
proliferationofzombielendingpersistandevencompoundovertime.
Motivatedbythesefacts,webuildatractablemodelthatprovidesaunifiedframeworksimul-
taneouslyexplainingandconformingtoallofthem. Theeconomyispopulatedbyheterogeneous
firms that differ in their productivity and risk. Firms’ investments require credit, which is pro-
vided by banks that are themselves heterogeneous in their level of capitalization. Banks face a
portfolioproblem,whosesolutiondependsontheircapital: theydecidewhethertoinvestinsafe
assets (meant to capture a wide range of non-loan assets, such as central bank reserves or safe
government bonds and mortgage-backed securities) or lend to the corporate sector, and if so, to
whichtypeoffirms.
Policies play a crucial role in banks’ incentives, and thereby the equilibrium allocation of
credit. We summarize all the components of policy that affect bank decisions into two simple
1Poorly-capitalizedbankssupplycredittopoorly-performingfirmseitherbecausetheyareincentivizedtoen-
gage in risk-shifting (gambling for resurrection) or because they attempt to avoid reporting losses on distressed
positions,asdocumentedinGiannettiandSimonov(2013),Acharyaetal.(2019),Blattneretal.(2023),Groppetal.
(2020),FariaECastroetal.(2021),Acharyaetal.(2021),andSchivardietal.(2021),amongothers.
2

instruments: the risk-free rate Rf set by conventional monetary policy, and an unconventional
“forbearancepolicy”p thatdeterminesthelevelofgovernmentguaranteesgrantedtobanksthat
are willing to lend. Accommodative conventional monetary policy makes lending to corporates
more attractive relative to the alternative, by lowering the return on the safe assetsRf. This is a
standard bank lending channel. Increasing forbearance also stimulates lending, by compressing
the cost of funds associated with lending: a higher p lowers the cost of funds because a larger
partofthebankloanriskisbornebypublicauthorities(thegovernment,thecentralbank,orthe
deposit insurance agency). However, excessive forbearance can shift banks’ portfolios towards
riskierloanstolessproductivefirms,whichwerefertoasthe“zombielendingchannel”.
Thetwo-sidedfirm-bankheterogeneityopensthedoortothe“diabolicalsorting”documented
in the data: banks with low capital and high leverage end up lending to less productive firms,
even though aggregate output would be raised by letting these firms exit and be replaced by
more productive entrants. The reason is that the subsidy from forbearance increases with the
interaction of banks’ asset risk and leverage. This sorting between banks and firms leads to a
delicate policy trade-off. While zombie lending and depressed creative destruction are the main
perilsonthesideofpoorly-capitalizedbanks,policymakersmustalsoencouragewell-capitalized
banks to lend to the good firms. Well-capitalized banks are not tempted by zombie lending, but
may simply invest in safe assets. The tension between inducing well-capitalized banks to lend
and preventing poorly-capitalized banks from engaging in zombie lending is at the heart of our
analysisoftheoptimalpolicymixinresponsetoexogenousshocks.
Suppose that an aggregate productivity or demand shock hurts firms’ profitability. If both
zombie loans and safe assets generate less output than loans to good firms, output reaches its
potentialifandonlyifallbankslendandthereisnozombielending. Aslongastherisk-freerate
isnotconstrained,conventionalmonetarypolicyalonewithoutanyforbearancecanachievethis
objective. Without forbearance, there is no zombie lending by weak banks, while a sufficiently
low risk-free rate (i.e., the “natural interest rate” in our economy) encourages banks to lend.
However, larger negative shocks to healthy firms’ profitability must be accommodated by lower
interest rates. Hence, if the shocks are large enough, conventional monetary policy runs into an
effective lower bound on interest rates (ELB), assumed exogenously in the model. This is where
unconventional policy in the form of regulatory forbearance and its unintended consequences
comeintoplay.
We show that a small amount of forbearance is always beneficial, as it can substitute for the
constrained conventional monetary policy and help lower banks’ funding costs, thereby stimu-
lating lending and output. Pushing on the forbearance string, however, eventually spurs zombie
lending by weak banks. Zombie lending reduces aggregate output and productivity because of
themisallocationofcreditand,asdocumentedintheempiricalliterature,becauseitcangenerate
3