NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SCHOOLS, JOB FLEXIBILITY, AND MARRIED WOMEN'S LABOR SUPPLY
Benjamin Hansen
Joseph J. Sabia
Jessamyn Schaller
Working Paper 29660
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29660
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2022, Revised August 2022
We thank Sandra Black, Claudia Goldin, Jacob Goodman, Jennifer Heissel, Gary Solon,
anonymous referees, and participants at seminars at Dartmouth College, the Southern Economics
Association 2021 Meetings, and the Society of Economics of the Household 2022 Conference for
helpful comments. We also thank Rebecca Margolit, Samuel Safford, Hannah Stuart and Marissa
Talcott for excellent research assistance. Funding for research assistance was provided by the
Center for Health Economics and Policy Studies at San Diego State University and the Lowe
Institute for Political Economy at Claremont McKenna College. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w29660.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Benjamin Hansen, Joseph J. Sabia, and Jessamyn Schaller. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Schools, Job Flexibility, and Married Women's Labor Supply
Benjamin Hansen, Joseph J. Sabia, and Jessamyn Schaller
NBER Working Paper No. 29660
January 2022, Revised August 2022
JEL No. I21,I38,J08,J11,J12,J21,J22,J48
ABSTRACT
This study examines the employment effects of a large shock to mothers' childcare costs
generated by the availability of in-person K-12 instruction during the COVID- 19 pandemic. We
proxy for school attendance using smartphone data from Safegraph. Using a difference-in-
differences approach, we find K-12 reopenings are associated with increases in employment and
hours among married women with school-aged children with no measurable effects on labor
supply of childless women, custodial fathers, or unmarried women. Event-study analyses are
consistent with a causal interpretation. Major activity responses show school reopenings reduced
married women remaining out of the labor force to care for children.
Benjamin Hansen Jessamyn Schaller
Department of Economics Robert Day School of Economics and Finance
1285 University of Oregon Claremont McKenna College
Eugene, OR 97403 500 E Ninth St
and NBER Claremont, CA 91711
bchansen@uoregon.edu and NBER
jschaller@cmc.edu
Joseph J. Sabia
San Diego State University
Department of Economics
Center for Health Economics
& Policy Studies
5500 Campanile Drive
San Diego, CA 92182
and IZA & ESSPRI
jsabia@sdsu.edu

1 Introduction
The dramatic increase in employment among married women in the United States is among
the most striking and transformational labor market trends of the past century. Bolstered
by social change, wage gains, time-saving advancements in household technology, increasing
control over fertility, and steep increases in college attendance, married women entered the
labor force in droves during the 20th century. While only 10% of married women were
employed in 1930, by 1990, that rate was 68%.1 However, over the past 30 years married
women’s employment and earnings have stagnated far short of equality with those of men
(Blau and Kahn, 2007; Eckstein et al., 2019).
Many explanations have been put forth for the stagnation of married women’s relative
labor supply, including rising expenses associated with childcare, lack of policy support for
working parents, and the inflexibility of traditional jobs (Goldin, 2021). Research has also
documented the persistence of women’s primary role in household labor and parenting tasks.
Indeed, even highly educated women and women who outearn their spouses contribute more
to housework and are more likely to scale back their careers after having children than their
male counterparts (Bertrand et al., 2010, 2015). Meanwhile, the time costs of raising children
have increased over time (Dotti Sani and Treas, 2016). There is evidence that motherhood
induces lower labor force participation (Lundborg et al., 2017; Jacobsen et al., 1999) and
better female labor market opportunities lead to lower fertility (Schaller, 2016), suggesting
women still face a strong push-and-pull trade-off between family and career.
Though there is a great deal of interest in understanding the determinants of married
1Authors’ calculations using 5% decennial census samples.
1

women’s labor supply, it is difficult to identify causal effects in this literature, particularly
of supply-side factors (i.e., changes in the opportunity cost of employment). The COVID-19
pandemicprovidesauniqueopportunitytogaininsightintothecompetingfactorsunderlying
observed trends in married women’s labor supply. Married women were, of course, impacted
by the same forces that caused widespread uncertainty, fear, and reduced economic activity
and led to layoffs and furloughs among millions of American workers. However, the pandemic
also had unprecedented effects on the demands on maternal time at home as childcare facil-
ities, in-home care and services, and K-12 schools shut down nationwide in March 2020 and,
for the most part, did not begin to resume until the fall. Recent research has documented
the pandemic’s disproportionate impacts on the labor supply of women in general, and in
particular of married women and of women with school-aged children (Albanesi and Kim,
2021; Couch et al., 2022).2
Pandemic-related school closures have generated a rare chance to study a supply-side
shock to married women’s labor force participation and, more broadly, the labor market
costs of changes in caregiving demands for mothers. Previous research has mostly examined
changesinaccesstochildcare,pre-K,andkindergarten,withsomestudiesfindingsubstantial
effectsonlaborsupplyamongmarriedmothersofyoungchildren(Gelbach,2002;Bakeretal.,
2008; Ilin et al., 2021) and others finding no effects (Cascio, 2009; Fitzpatrick, 2010).3 During
the pandemic, changes in in-person instruction resulted first in a dramatic increase (when
schools closed) and then decrease (when schools reopened) in the opportunity cost of time
2Couch et al. (2022) attribute the disproportional decrease in labor supply among women of school-aged
children to their additional childcare responsibilities. In this paper, we also show that their disproportional
employment in the K-12 education sector was an important factor.
3GarciaandCowan(2022)andRussellandSun(2020)studytheimpactsofchildcareclosuresduringthe
COVID-19 pandemic and find effects on the labor supply mothers of young children.
2