NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
UNDERSTANDING THE OWNERSHIP STRUCTURE OF CORPORATE BONDS
Ralph S. J. Koijen
Motohiro Yogo
Working Paper 29679
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29679
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2022, Revised April 2023
We thank Pete Klenow, Simon Oh, and four anonymous referees for comments. This paper is
based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under grant 1727049. Koijen
acknowledges financial support from the Center for Research in Security Prices at the University
of Chicago and the Fama Research Fund at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
We declare that we have no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research
described in this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Ralph S. J. Koijen and Motohiro Yogo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Understanding the Ownership Structure of Corporate Bonds
Ralph S. J. Koijen and Motohiro Yogo
NBER Working Paper No. 29679
January 2022, Revised April 2023
JEL No. G12,G22
ABSTRACT
Insurers are the largest institutional investors of corporate bonds. However, a standard theory of
insurance markets, in which insurers maximize firm value subject to regulatory or risk
constraints, predicts no allocation to corporate bonds. We resolve this puzzle in an equilibrium
asset pricing model with leverage-constrained households and institutional investors. Insurers
have relatively cheap access to leverage through their underwriting activity. They hold a
leveraged portfolio of low-beta assets in equilibrium, relaxing other investors’ leverage
constraints. The model explains recent empirical findings on insurers’ portfolio choice and its
impact on asset prices.
Ralph S. J. Koijen
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
Ralph.koijen@chicagobooth.edu
Motohiro Yogo
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
myogo@princeton.edu

2 AER: INSIGHTS
The corporate bond market plays an essential role in the funding of corpora-
tions. Unsurprisingly, fluctuations in corporate bond prices are strongly related
to investment (Philippon, 2009) and economic activity more broadly (Gilchrist
and Zakrajsek, 2012). Since 1945, US corporate bonds have been held primarily
through institutional investors rather than directly by households, and insurers
have accounted for the largest share of institutional ownership. In this paper, we
study the ownership structure of corporate bonds with a focus on the central role
of insurers.
We start by summarizing the ownership structure of corporate bonds and the
composition of insurers’ bond portfolios. In 2017, insurers owned 38 percent of
US corporate bonds, which was the largest share among institutional investors.
An important fact is that both life insurers and property and casualty insurers
allocate a larger share of their portfolio to corporate bonds than Treasury bonds,
and this portfolio tilt has strengthened over time. Within the corporate bond
portfolio, insurers tilt toward highly rated bonds relative to the market portfolio
and thus have a preference for low-beta assets. Theallocation to corporate bonds
leads to credit risk mismatch because traditional liabilities are not sensitive to
credit risk. Moreover, variable annuities, which are life insurers’ largest liability,
are exposed to equity risk that is positively correlated with credit risk (Koijen
and Yogo, 2022).
The fact that insurers take on credit risk is puzzling from the perspective of
a standard theory of insurance markets, in which insurers maximize firm value
subjecttoarisk-basedcapitalorvalue-at-riskconstraint(Gron,1990;Froot,2001;
Koijen and Yogo, 2015). On the one hand, allocation to riskier assets requires
additional capital and tightens the risk-based capital constraint. On the other
hand,allocationtoriskierassetshasnobenefittoshareholdersiffinancialmarkets
are efficient, so that risk-adjusted expected returns are equated across assets.
Therefore, the theory predicts that insurers hold riskless bonds to minimize the
impact on risk-based capital.
The main contribution of this paper is to develop an equilibrium asset pricing
model that resolves the puzzle by predicting that insurers hold low-beta assets
such as investment-grade corporate bonds. Households buy annuities to insure
idiosyncratic longevity risk and save the remaining wealth in a portfolio of risky
assets subject to a leverage constraint. Insurers invest the annuity premiums
in a portfolio of risky assets and a riskless asset subject to a risk-based capital
constraint. Other institutional investors also choose between risky assets and a
riskless asset subject to a leverage constraint.
The presence of leverage constraints implies an important deviation from the
Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM). The CAPM predicts that an asset’s ex-
pected excess return is equal to the expected excess market return times its beta
(i.e., the covariance of an asset’s returns with market returns divided by the vari-
ance of market returns). The empirical relation between average excess returns
and betas is weaker than the theoretical prediction, meaning that the slope is

VOL. NO. OWNERSHIP STRUCTURE OF CORPORATEBONDS 3
actually less than the average excess market return. Thus, low-beta assets earn
positivealpha(i.e., highrisk-adjustedexpectedreturns)andhigh-betaassetsearn
negative alpha relative to the CAPM. Leverage constraints are a potential expla-
nation for this “low-beta anomaly” (Black, 1972; Frazzini and Pedersen, 2014).
In this environment, insurers maximize firm value by holding a leveraged port-
folio of low-beta assets. Households and institutional investors cannot replicate
the insurers’ portfolio due to leverage constraints and instead hold the insurers’
equity, which is equivalent to a highly leveraged portfolio of low-beta assets. This
result holds even when capital regulation is not sensitive to risk. When capital
regulation is sensitive to risk, the demand for low-beta assets strengthens. The
model provides a unifying explanation of recent empirical findings on insurers’
portfolio choice and its impact on asset prices (Ellul et al., 2011; Ge and Weis-
bach, 2021; Becker et al., 2022). We conclude the paper by discussing potential
extensions.
This paper is part of a growing literature on intermediary asset pricing. The
theoretical literature studies the impact of institutional investors’ agency fric-
tions or leverage constraints on asset prices. The empirical literature focuses on
frictions in a particular sector, such as risk factors that arise from broker-dealers’
leverageconstraints(Adrianetal.,2014;Heetal.,2017). Westudytheimportant
role of insurers among other institutional investors who are subject to leverage
constraints. A key implication of the model is that insurers hold low-beta assets
in response to the leverage constraints of other institutional investors.
I. Facts about the Ownership Structure of Corporate Bonds
A. Institutional Ownership of Corporate Bonds
Figure 1 shows the institutional ownership of US corporate bonds from 1945 to
2017. Insurers have always been the largest institutional investors of corporate
bonds and thus play a central role in corporate funding and investment. In 2017,
insurers owned 38 percent of corporate bonds, which is higher than 16 percent
for pension funds, 10 percent for banks, and 30 percent for mutual funds.
B. Insurers’ Bond Portfolios
Figure 2 shows the bond holdings of life insurers and property and casualty
insurers from 1994 to 2019. We focus on insurers’ bond holdings because their
equityholdingstendtobesmall,whichcanbepartlyexplainedbythehighcapital
requirements on equities. We break down the bond holdings into US Treasury
bonds, US agency bonds, publicly traded corporate bonds, other US government
bonds, local and foreign government bonds, and private corporate bonds. The
first three categories represent publicly traded and non-asset-backed securities
with coverage in Mergent (2021).
Lifeinsurersholdmostoftheirportfolioinpubliclytradedandprivatecorporate
bonds instead of Treasury bonds. In the 1990s, property and casualty insurers