NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LIQUIDITY, LIQUIDITY EVERYWHERE, NOT A DROP TO USE – WHY FLOODING
BANKS WITH CENTRAL BANK RESERVES MAY NOT EXPAND LIQUIDITY
Viral V. Acharya
Raghuram Rajan
Working Paper 29680
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29680
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2022, Revised August 2023
We are grateful to Richard Berner, Douglas Diamond, Will Diamond, Wenxin Du, Darrell
Duffie, Mariassunta Giannetti, Charles Goodhart, Robin Greenwood, Sam Hanson, Zhiguo He,
Yunzhi Hu, Max Jager, Zhengyang Jiang, Anil Kashyap, Yiming Ma, Maurice Ma, Stefan Nagel,
Bill Nelson Carolin Pflueger, Charles Plosser, Rafael Repullo, Bruce Tuckman, Alexi Savov,
Philipp Schnabl, Andrei Sheleifer, Jeremy Stein, Adi Sunderam, Quentin Vandeweyer, Annette
Vissing-Jorgensen, Olivier Wang, Yao Zheng, and participants at seminars at the Annual Finance
Association (AFA) Meetings of 2023, Bank of England – GRETA Sovereign Debt Conference
(2022), CEMFI, Chicago Booth, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, HEC Paris, NBER Risk of
Financial Institutions Meeting (Summer Institute 2022), New York University Stern School of
Business, the Office of Financial Research (OFR), the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland and
OFR’s 2021 Financial Stability Conference “Planning for Surprises, Learning from Crises”,
Riksbank 2022 conference on “Evaluating the Monetary Policy Toolkit: Lessons for the Future”,
and University of Mannheim for helpful comments and discussions. We benefited from excellent
research assistance from Huan He, Stefano Pastore and Yang Su. Rajan thanks IGM and the
Fama Miller Center at the Booth School as well as the Hoover Institution for research support.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Viral V. Acharya and Raghuram Rajan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Liquidity, Liquidity Everywhere, Not a Drop to Use – Why Flooding Banks with Central Bank
Reserves May Not Expand Liquidity
Viral V. Acharya and Raghuram Rajan
NBER Working Paper No. 29680
January 2022, Revised August 2023
JEL No. E0,G0
ABSTRACT
Central bank balance sheet expansion is run through commercial banks. While liquid central bank
reserves held on commercial bank balance sheets increase, demandable uninsured deposits issued
to finance the reserves also increase. A subsequent shrinkage in the central bank balance sheet
may entail a shrinkage in bank-held reserves without a commensurate reduction in deposit claims.
Furthermore, during episodes of liquidity stress, when many claims on liquidity are called,
surplus banks may hoard reserves. As a result of such bank behavior, central bank balance sheet
expansion may create less systemic liquidity than typically thought, and in fact, the demand for
liquidity can occasionally exceed available reserves, exacerbating liquidity stress.
Viral V. Acharya
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-65
New York, NY 10012
and CEPR
and also NBER
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu
Raghuram Rajan
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
raghuram.rajan@ChicagoBooth.edu

1
Despite a significant expansion in central bank balance sheets, some markets like the US money market
have experienced increasing interest rate volatility, including alarming spikes in the repo rate, notably in
December 2018 and September 2019 (see D’Avernas and Vandeweyer (2021)). The disruption in
markets that depend intimately on the availability of liquidity seems puzzling when Fed officials set
reserve levels not just at a multiple of levels before the global financial crisis, but also above their
estimate of private sector demands, with adequate buffers for unexpected variations such as in the
Treasury’s Fed account (see Logan (2019)).2 Greater private sector reserves holdings do not seem to have
made markets for liquidity fully immune to liquidity shocks. Indeed, even after the Fed injected more
reserves in September 2019, markets were disrupted yet again in March 2020 at the onset of the COVID-
19 pandemic, and the banking system was found short in its ability to accommodate the demand for
liquidity.3 In response, the Federal Reserve expanded its balance sheet yet more (see, for example, Kovner
and Martin (2020)), buying financial assets from the private sector and placing large quantities of liquid
reserves with it (or promising to do so). And in March 2023, a number of mid-sized regional banks failed
whereupon the authorities made liquidity freely available through the discount window and a new facility,
in addition to lending by the Federal Home Loan Banks, while the Treasury implicitly guaranteed all
demandable deposits. Where had all the prior liquidity gone?
A number of answers have been suggested, including changes in liquidity- or capital regulations
and supervision, and changes in the public demand for liquidity.4 While these have merit, our intent is to
augment them by asking a fundamental question: what theoretical effect should the expansion of central
bank balance sheets have on systemic liquidity, taking into account the endogenous response of the
banking system?
Intuition would suggest that when the central bank issues more liquid central bank reserves to
finance its balance sheet expansion, the supply of liquidity to the financial system increases, bringing
down illiquidity premia in markets, and reducing private financing costs. This intuition neglects three key
private sector responses. First, central banks effectively issue these reserves to commercial banks
(henceforth “banks”), which typically finance them with short-term liabilities such as uninsured deposits,
2 Copeland, Duffie and Yang (2021) estimate that banks made do with about $50 billion in reserve balances before
the global financial crisis, and had $1.3 trillion in balances in September 2019.
3 Corporate debt, but also segments of the US Treasuries market experienced significant illiquidity, see Duffie
(2020), Fleming and Ruela (2020), He, Nagel and Song (2020), Liang and Parkinson (2020), Schrimp, Shin and
Sushko (2020)), and Vissing-Jorgensen (2020). Corporates drew down bank credit lines, see Kashyap (2020) and
Acharya, Engle and Steffen (2021); and, dealer banks found it difficult to make markets, see Boyarchenko, Kovner
and Shachar (2020), Breckenfelder and Ivashina (2021), Kargar et al. (2021), and Vissing-Jorgensen (2020).
4 See, for example, Copeland, Duffie and Yang (2021), Correa, Du and Liao (2021), D’Avernas and Vandeweyer
(2021, 2022), IAWG Treasury Market Surveillance Report (2021), Lopez-Salido and Vissing-Jorgensen (2022),
Poszar (2019), and Yang (2021).

2
an offsetting claim on liquidity. Second, available reserves could shrink for a variety of reasons. Third,
banks may exacerbate shortages by hoarding spare liquidity. In short, central bank reserves expansion
works through commercial bank balance sheets, which could raise the future demand for liquidity and
constrain its supply, limiting its benefits and potentially creating costs.
On net then, the free liquidity generated by central bank balance sheet expansion can be much
smaller than one might think if bank behavior were disregarded. Indeed, central bank balance sheet
expansion can leave the financial system more dependent on liquidity, and hence more vulnerable to
adverse liquidity shocks such as those the existing explanations analyze. Particularly consequential could
be liquidity shocks emanating from adverse macroeconomic shocks, such as the onset of the pandemic, or
interest rate hikes.
Let us elaborate. We assume the central bank wants to expand its balance sheet over the medium
term (via Quantitative Easing or QE), buying financial assets from the private sector with newly issued
reserves. We take any direct effect of the asset purchases on economic activity initially as given, so as to
focus on what happens to liquidity after that. Reserves eventually find their way back to commercial bank
balance sheets (so non-banks cannot hold reserves, as is typically the case in most financial systems, and
the public does not need more cash). More specifically, if the central bank simply buys long-term
securities from the commercial banks, the commercial banks will be swapping securities for central bank
reserves. This requires no financing. However, a significant expansion of the central bank balance sheet
will require it to buy securities from non-banks. In this case, commercial bank balance sheet expansion
occurs automatically; the non-banks deposit the central bank’s check in their banks, giving the
commercial banks both reserves and offsetting deposits. Of course, banks rebalance their balance sheet
after these transactions (which we allow in our model), but banks in aggregate have to hold the reserves.
Key in our analysis is the mix of how banks finance these reserves. A number of authors
(Calomiris and Kahn (1991), Dang, Gorton, and Holmstrom (2010), Flannery (1986), and Gorton and
Pennacchi (1990), among others) have argued that banks have a comparative advantage in issuing short-
term or demandable debt. Others (see, for example, Diamond and Dybvig (1984) or Stein (2012)) have
attributed an implicit liquidity/money premium to demandable bank liabilities that makes them relatively
attractive for investors, and Diamond and Rajan (2001) argue that one leads to the other. We are agnostic
as to why longer-term financing (that is, capital) is costlier for banks, but assume functional forms that
make it so. Naturally then, a first effect of QE is that banks finance a large portion of the reserve
expansion with demandable deposits, an effect the literature has underemphasized.