NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE INFORMATION CONTENT OF CORPORATE EARNINGS:
EVIDENCE FROM THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
Oliver Binz
John Graham
Working Paper 29747
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29747
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2022
We appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Hami Amiraslani, Dan Bens, Thomas
Bourveau, Greg Burke, Gavin Cassar, Scott Dyreng, Fabrizio Ferri, Elia Ferracuti, Robert
Holthausen, Xu Jiang, Peter Joos, Matt Kubic, Mark Lang, Bill Mayew, Francine McKenna,
Steve Monahan, Suresh Nallareddy, Katherine Schipper, Mani Sethuraman, Kevin Standridge,
Robert Stoumbos, Rahul Vashishtha, Mohan Venkatachalam, Lauren Vollon, an anonymous
reviewer and editor, and the workshop participants at Duke University, INSEAD, the European
Accounting Symposium for Young Scholars (EASYS) webinar, the Early Insights in Accounting
webinar, the Virtual Corporate Finance Fridays webinar, and the University of Miami. We thank
Adarsh Abhinav, Sai Challa, Akshay Jituri, Maksym Kosachevskyy, Jairaj Joshi, Tyler Johnson,
Rishi Badola, Vache Darbinyan, Darshit Parekh, Srushti Deshpande, and Sheilvy Soetanto for
excellent research assistance. All errors remain our own. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Oliver Binz and John Graham. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Information Content of Corporate Earnings: Evidence from the Securities Exchange Act
of 1934
Oliver Binz and John Graham
NBER Working Paper No. 29747
February 2022
JEL No. B26,G14,G18,K22,M41,M48
ABSTRACT
We examine whether the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 increased the information content of
corporate earnings disclosures. Prior research questions whether the Act improved disclosure
quality but generally relies on long-window tests and yields mixed results. We focus on whether
the Act increased earnings informativeness, improving upon prior designs by focusing on short
earnings announcement windows and employing a difference-in-differences design to control
for potential contemporaneous structural changes. We document an increase in earnings
informativeness following the Act, which is larger for treatment firms (which withheld disclosure
before the Act) than for control firms. The increase in informativeness is more pronounced for
firms that are subject to stronger enforcement.
Oliver Binz
INSEAD
Boulevard de Constance
Fontainebleau 77305
France
oliver.binz@insead.edu
John Graham
Duke University
Fuqua School of Business
100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708-0120
and NBER
john.graham@duke.edu

1. Introduction
The Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (hereafter “the Act”) is the most expansive secondary
market regulation enacted in the history of the United States.1 The Act was the first federal law to
mandate disclosure of audited financial statements, established the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) as an enforcement body, and is still the basis of most financial litigation.2 Given
that the Act changed the reporting environment from no federal mandatory reporting to mandatory
reporting and increased enforcement, it provides an ideal setting to study whether its implementation
improved the informativeness of accounting numbers. A report from the President and the Council
of Economic Advisers (2003, pp. 96-97) indicates that this important issue is still unresolved: “whether
SEC enforced disclosure rules actually improve the quality of information that investors receive
remains a subject of debate among researchers almost 70 years after the SEC’s creation.” Some even
argue that the Act did not improve the quality of information at all (Benston 1969, 1973).
To date, researchers have examined firms’ unconditional stock return performance around the
Act and documented no change in returns but a decrease in return volatility. However, the scarcity of
evidence and the sharp disagreement about interpretation led Easterbrook and Fischel (1984, p. 714)
to conclude that “there is no good evidence that the disclosure rules are beneficial [but] there is [also]
no good evidence that the rules are harmful, or very costly.” These prior studies generally rely on long-
run returns tests, which measure the net benefit of the Act and cannot speak to specific costs and
benefits (e.g., whether firms’ financial disclosures became more informative as a result of the Act). We
hand-collect financial statement data and earnings announcement dates for the period around the Act
1 Rajan and Zingales (2003) argue that the Securities Act of 1933 and the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 laid “the
accounting, regulatory, and legal foundation […] for today’s vibrant financial system in the United States,” which they
identify as one of the main drivers of the unprecedentedly rapid economic growth observed over the past century.
2 Of the core private class action securities fraud lawsuits filed in 2019, 87% were based on the Act’s Section 10b-5, which
regulates security purchases and sales (Cornerstone Research 2020, Figure 9).
1

and directly analyze short windows of market activity to determine whether the Act provided a specific
benefit: more informative financial reporting.
We examine two market outcome variables to measure the informativeness of earnings
announcements: perfect-foresight hedge portfolio returns and earnings response coefficients (ERCs).3
Returns on perfect-foresight hedge portfolios (that are long in stocks of firms that report an earnings
increase and short in stocks of firms that report an earnings decrease) measure the value of accounting
to investors as the trading return investors could earn if they knew the accounting information before
it was released to the public (Ball and Brown 1968). ERCs, the coefficients obtained from regressing
returns on earnings news, measure how much investors bid up (down) stock prices upon the
announcement of favorable (unfavorable) news. Thus, if the Act increased financial reporting
informativeness, we would expect perfect-foresight hedge portfolio returns and ERCs to increase.
We begin our analysis of a large, representative sample of New York Stock Exchange (NYSE)
firms by studying the cumulative returns of perfect-foresight hedge portfolios. Consistent with a large
increase in the value of accounting information, hedge portfolio returns during earnings
announcement windows are significantly higher after than before the Act.4 By calculating market
3 We examine the robustness of our results to alternative approaches, such as the one proposed by Ball and Shivakumar
(2008), and generally find evidence confirming our inferences. However, we focus on perfect-foresight hedge portfolio
returns and ERCs because they are based on earnings information, while these alternative approaches are not. Given that
our research question is whether the Act increased the information content of corporate earnings, conditioning our
inferences on earnings information is crucial because alternative approaches are generally reflective not only of the earnings
information, but also of all other information released in the earnings announcement (e.g., Beaver, McNichols, and Wang
2020).
4 These findings raise the question of whether the net benefit of the Act was positive or negative. We are not able to
answer this question because of a lack of data on the costs of the Act. If one were to accept the prior literature’s conclusion
that the Act did not on net affect welfare, this suggests that the costs of the Act are approximately as large as the benefits
we estimate. Phillips and Zecher (1981) estimate that the aggregate direct costs of complying with SEC regulation were $1
billion in 1980. However, they also estimate that in the same year, firms incurred costs of approximately $2 billion just by
distributing voluntary disclosures to investors, which also suggests that firms would have incurred much of the compliance
costs voluntarily even in the absence of regulation. Thus, direct compliance costs appear to be small. However, indirect
compliance costs—such as proprietary costs arising from product market competition; increased noise arising from
mandatory, uninformative disclosures; and the substitution of mandatorily disclosed, less useful information for voluntarily
disclosed, more useful information—may be substantial but are hard to measure (Verrecchia 1983; Easterbrook and
Fischel 1984).
2