NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MACHINE-LEARNING THE SKILL OF MUTUAL FUND MANAGERS
Ron Kaniel
Zihan Lin
Markus Pelger
Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Working Paper 29723
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29723
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2022
The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Ron Kaniel, Zihan Lin, Markus Pelger, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Machine-Learning the Skill of Mutual Fund Managers
Ron Kaniel, Zihan Lin, Markus Pelger, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
NBER Working Paper No. 29723
February 2022
JEL No. G0,G11,G23,G5
ABSTRACT
We show, using machine learning, that fund characteristics can consistently differentiate high
from low-performing mutual funds, as well as identify funds with net-of-fees abnormal returns.
Fund momentum and fund flow are the most important predictors of future risk-adjusted fund
performance, while characteristics of the stocks that funds hold are not predictive. Returns of
predictive long-short portfolios are higher following a period of high sentiment or a good state of
the macro-economy. Our estimation with neural networks enables us to uncover novel and
substantial interaction effects between sentiment and both fund flow and fund momentum.
Ron Kaniel Markus Pelger
University of Rochester Stanford University
Simon School of Business Department of Management Science
500 Wilson BLVD & Engineering
Carol Simon Hall 312 Huang Engineering Center
Box 270100 (Room CS3-312) Stanford, CA 94305
ron.kaniel@simon.rochester.edu mpelger@stanford.edu
Zihan Lin Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Stanford University Columbia University
475 Via Ortega Graduate school of Business
Suite B060 Uris Hall, office 809
Stanford, CA 94305 3022 Broadway
zihanl@stanford.edu New York, NY 10027
and NBER
svnieuwe@gsb.columbia.edu

1 Introduction
Theassetmanagementindustryisenormousandgrowingrapidly. U.S.mutualfundshad$24tril-
lioninassetsundermanagementattheendof2020,morethanhalfofwhichwereinequitymutual
funds. Over100millionAmericansrelyonsuchfundstosaveforretirementandmeetotherfinan-
cialobjectives. Manyofthesemutualfundsactivelytradestocksinanefforttoout-performtheir
benchmarks and create value for their investors. The literature has found mixed results in terms
of the investment performance of actively-traded equity mutual funds. We revisit the evidence
usingmoderntechniques,andaskwhich–ifany–characteristicsofmutualfundsandofthestocks
they hold can help separate the corn from the chaff. We uncover new evidence that fund flows
and fund return momentum are the only two characteristics that can meaningfully and robustly
helpdistinguishfundsthatoutperformfromthosethatunder-perform. Therelativeperformance
oftopandbottomperformersisparticularlylargeintimesofhighinvestorsentiment.
Specifically, we study the universe of actively-traded U.S. equity mutual funds between 1980
and2019andthestocksthattheyhold. Theobjectwepredictistheabnormalfundreturn,defined
asthefour-factoralphaofthemutualfund. Thepredictorsarealonglistof46stockcharacteristics
weightedbythefunds’holdingsand13fundandfund-familycharacteristics. Fundcharacteristics
include fund return momentum and fund flow. We also include a variable that summarizes the
overall state of the market, either proxied by investor sentiment or by a comprehensive measure
of macro-economic activity. Our main method is an artificial neural network model, namely a
feedforwardneuralnetwork,whichcanreliablyestimateacomplexfunctionalrelationshipamong
alargesetofvariables. Itistrainedandtunedononesubsetofthedataandevaluatedonanother
subsetofthedata. Hence,allofourpredictionsareout-of-sample. Itidentifiesfundcharacteristic
information, and specifically fund flow and fund momentum, as the key predictors of mutual
fundout-performance. Moreover,thesetwofundcharacteristicsmattermuchmorewheninvestor
sentimentishigh. Thatis,thereisanimportantinteractioneffect,whichlinearmodelsfailtopick
up.
The model predictions generate a large difference in performance out-of-sample. Buying the
tenpercentofmutualfundswiththebestpredictedperformanceeachmonth,andusingthemodel
notonlytoselectbutalsotoweightthefundswithinthetopdecile,generatesacumulativeabnor-
malreturnof72%overoursampleperiod. Buyingthetenpercentofmutualfundswiththeworst
predicted performance each month produces a cumulative abnormal return of -119%. The 191%
difference in out-of-sample performance based on the model’s predictions is economically large
andstatisticallysignificant. Sincethebestandtheworstfundshavesimilarfees,itholdsforboth
before-andafter-feeabnormalreturns. Moreover,topperformingfundsexhibitpositiveabnormal
performance net-of-fees as well. This performance improves further when we use a model that
directlypredictsnet-of-feesperformance
1

Theperformancedifferentialisnearlyidenticalifweconstrainthemodelbyremovingallstock
characteristicinformation. Infact,wecanalsoremovemostfundandfundfamilycharacteristics.
Thepredictionsofamodelthatareonlyfedfundflow,fundmomentum,andsentimentarenearly
as good as those of the full model. They deliver out-performance of nearly 50 basis points per
monthforthetoprelativetothebottomdecilesofpredictedperformers. TheSharperatioonthis
strategyis0.25permonth.
Having uncovered flow and fund momentum as the key predictors, we show that they each
predict fund performance in a univariate analysis. However, such a univariate analysis fails to
accountforthenon-linearinteractioneffectsofthesetwocharacteristicswithinvestorsentiment.
Thestateofthemacro-economy,measuredbytheChicagoFedNationalActivityIndex(CFNAI),
predictsthebestandworstfundperformersaswellassentimentdoeswhencombinedwithfund
characteristics. However, CFNAI is not as good at predicting the relative returns within the top
and bottom deciles as sentiment. We trace back this difference to a lack of interaction effects
betweenCFNAIandfundcharacteristics.
We decompose the fund abnormal return into a between-disclosure component, which holds
fixedthefunds’stockholdingsattheirpreviousquarter-endvalues,andawithin-disclosurecom-
ponent, which accounts for mutual fund trades during the quarter. The latter is the sum of the
returngapandariskexposuredifferential.1 Wefindthatabouthalfoftheoutperformancecomes
from the model’s ability to predict between-disclosure abnormal returns and the other half from
predicting within-disclosure abnormal returns. Both fund flow and fund momentum predict the
return gap and the risk exposure differential, while most stock characteristics that predict the re-
turn gap do so by taking on more systematic risk resulting in little within-disclosure abnormal
return. Theseresultsshedadditionallightonthesourcesandpersistenceofout-performance.
Insum,mutualfundreturnsarepredictableinrealtime. Thepredictabilitylastsforthreeyears,
andiseconomicallymeaningful. About10-20%offundsgeneratepositiveabnormalreturnseven
afterfees. Mostofthebenefitsaccruefromavoidingtheworst-performingfunds.
The salience of flow and fund return momentum as the key predictors suggests that some
investors can detect skill and (re)allocate their investment towards such skilled managers. This
reallocationofinvestmentflowsisnotasstrongasthefrictionlessmodelofBerkandGreen(2004)
predicts. Skill leaves a trail in the form of fund return momentum for investors to exploit in the
next period. Put differently, the flows are gradual and small enough that it takes several periods
untilthefundrunsintozeromarginalabnormalreturns.
Theresultsarepotentiallyalsoconsistentwithfundsandfundfamiliesattractingflowsthrough
marketing rather than—or in addition to—through investment skill (Ibert, Kaniel, Van Nieuwer-
burgh, and Vestman, 2018; Roussanov, Ruan, and Wei, 2021). Marketing-induced inflows create
1The return gap is the difference between the fund’s actual returns over the period and the hypothetical returns
generatedbykeepingthefund’sportfolioholdingsconstant.
2