NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PATENT PUBLICATION AND INNOVATION
Deepak Hegde
Kyle F. Herkenhoff
Chenqi Zhu
Working Paper 29770
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29770
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2022
We are grateful to Luis Cabral, Wesley Cohen, Alberto Galasso, Nancy Gallini, Bernhard
Ganglmair, Daniel Gross, Bronwyn Hall, Dietmar Harhoff, Joachim Henkel, Sabrina Howell,
Zorina Khan, Hong Luo, Petra Moser, Alan Marco, Gaétan de Rassenfosse, Bhaven Sampat,
Rosemarie Ziedonis, and seminar participants at Stanford, University of California, Berkeley,
Northwestern University, University of Colorado, Boulder, and New York University. This
research was supported by National Bureau of Economics Research, Innovation Policy Grant.
Hegde acknowledges the support of the United States Patent and Trademark Office's Thomas
Alva Edison Visiting Scholars program. All errors are our own. The views expressed in this paper
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the position of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Deepak Hegde, Kyle F. Herkenhoff, and Chenqi Zhu. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Patent Publication and Innovation
Deepak Hegde, Kyle F. Herkenhoff, and Chenqi Zhu
NBER Working Paper No. 29770
February 2022
JEL No. D23,E02,G24,L26,O34
ABSTRACT
How does the publication of patents affect innovation? We answer this question by exploiting a
large-scale natural experiment—the passage of the American Inventor's Protection Act of 1999
(AIPA)—that accelerated the public disclosure of most U.S. patents by two years. We obtain
causal estimates by comparing U.S. patents subject to the law change with “twin” European
patents which were not. After AIPA's enactment, U.S. patents receive more and faster follow-on
citations, indicating an increase in technology diffusion. Technological overlap increases between
distant but related patents and decreases between highly similar patents, and patent applications
are less likely to be abandoned post-AIPA, suggesting a reduction in duplicative R&D. Firms
exposed to one standard deviation longer patent grant delays increased their R\&D investment by
4% after AIPA. These findings are consistent with our theoretical framework in which AIPA
provisions news shocks about related technologies to follow-on inventors and thus alters their
innovation decisions.
Deepak Hegde Chenqi Zhu
Stern School of Business University of California at Irvine
New York University 4293 Pereira Dr
40 West Street Irvine, CA 92697
Suite 722 chenqiz1@uci.edu
New York, NY 10012
dhegde@stern.nyu.edu
Kyle F. Herkenhoff
University of Minnesota
Department of Economics
4-101 Hanson Hall
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and IZA
and also NBER
kfh@umn.edu
An online appendix is available at: http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w29770

1 Introduction
“When a patent is granted and the information contained in it is circulated to the gen-
eral public and those especially skilled in the trade, such additions to the general store
of knowledge are of such importance to the public weal that the Federal Government
is willing to pay the high price of 17 years of exclusive use for its disclosure, which
disclosure, it is assumed, will stimulate ideas and the eventual development of further
significant advances in the art.” – U.S. Supreme Court, Kewanee Oil Co. v. Bicron
Corp. (1974; No. 73-187)
Patent publications divulge inventors’ proprietary knowledge to the world. For example, Thomas
Edison’s light bulb patent (USPTO patent # 223,898–see Figure 1) revealed methods of creating
incandescent filaments and paved the way for subsequent innovations in electric lighting by others.
The U.S. patent office has published over ten million such inventions, as part of a grand bargain
that exchanges invention disclosure for inventors’ temporary monopoly rights.1 As emphasized
by the U.S. Supreme Court, the publication requirement seeks to inform the work of follow-on
inventors and reduce duplicative research and development (R&D). Thus, the patent system’s
net effect on technological progress depends on the completeness and rate at which patents are
disclosed to the public (Scotchmer and Green (1990) and Fromer (2009)). Yet, and despite the fact
that technological progress is central to endogenous growth models (e.g., Romer (1990), Lucas Jr
and Moll (2014), Luttmer (2014), and Perla and Tonetti (2014)), little is known about the effects
of patent publication on technology diffusion.2
In this study, we provide causal evidence that patent publication facilitates knowledge diffu-
sion, reducestechnologyduplication, informsfollow-oninventors’patentingdecisions, andpossibly
increases R&D. Thus, our study advances what little we know about the effects of patent publi-
cation (Graham and Hegde (2015), Hegde and Luo (2018), Lu¨ck, Balsmeier, Seliger, and Fleming
(2020), Furman, Nagler, and Watzinger (2021)).3 The few studies on this topic offer contradictory
conclusions: survey-based research suggests that inventors consider patents an important source
of relevant technical knowledge (Ouellette (2017)) and information on rivals’ R&D activities (Co-
hen, Goto, Nagata, Nelson, and Walsh (2002)); however, some legal scholars argue that “patent
disclosures play an insignificant role in promoting R&D spillovers” (Roin (2005), p. 2027).
1ThedisclosurerequirementforpatentabilityintheU.S.states: “the[patent]specificationshallcontainawritten
description of the invention . . . in such full, clear, concise and exact terms as to enable any person skilled in the
art . . . to make and use the same.”(35 U.S.C. § 112).
2Efforts in other fields have sought to identify the effects of peer-to-peer entrepreneur knowledge flows (e.g.
Brooks, Donovan, and Johnson (2018) and Brooks, Donovan, and Johnson (2020)) and coworker knowledge flows
(e.g. Herkenhoff, Lise, Menzio, and Phillips (2018), Jarosch, Oberfield, and Rossi-Hansberg (2021), Nix (2020),
Gregory (2020)), often finding sizeable effects of knowledge diffusion on real output, productivity, and other aggre-
gates.
3In contrast, over 100 published and working papers examine the effect of the monopoly rights awarded by
patents (see Hall, Helmers, Rogers, and Sena (2014) and Williams (2017) for surveys of the relevant literature).
2

We measure the effects of patent publication by leveraging the enactment of the American
Inventor’s Protection Act of 1999 (P.L.106-113; henceforth, “AIPA”) as a natural experiment.
AIPA harmonized U.S. patent laws with those of the rest of the world by requiring applications
filed on or after November 29, 2000, to be published 18 months from the filing date. Before AIPA,
inventors were allowed to keep the existence of their U.S. patent applications secret until the
patent was granted, which, in 2000, averaged about 3.5 years. Thus, AIPA reduced the period of
secrecy for U.S. patent applications by about two years, on average, allowing us to measure the
effects of patent publication on knowledge diffusion and follow-on innovation.
To guide our empirical analysis, we develop a theoretic framework in which AIPA provisions
news shocks to inventors about recent technologies, and we derive a set of testable assumptions
and implications. Our main assumption is that under AIPA, the technological know-how embed-
ded in patents enters the stock of public knowledge faster than during the pre-AIPA regime. In
this new information environment inventors see related inventions in the patent system earlier
prior to filing their own patents. First, we show that inventors’ search effort for prior knowledge,
proxied by patent citations, increases. Better information about competing inventions reduces du-
plicate patent applications, which, in turn, reduces abandonments and similarity between closely
related inventions. Under AIPA, inventors also draw more on recently disclosed patents and take
smaller inventive steps, raising technology similarity among related, but not substitute, applica-
tions. Overall patent activity and innovation under AIPA may increase, decrease, or stay the
same, depending on the net effect of the two countervailing forces of (i) lower invention costs due
to superior information on the one hand, and (ii) free-riding by follow-on inventors on the other.
We provide tests of our theory using a Difference-in-Difference (DID) regression design, which
we refer to as the “twin” study design. We build a sample of 316,563 patent applications filed at
the USPTO between 1998 and 2003, each of which has an equivalent patent filed at the European
Patent Office (EPO).4 The U.S. patents form our treatment group, while their EP “twins” form
our control group. The EPO required 18-month disclosure of applications well before AIPA’s
enactment—since its establishment in 1977—and we show that the European twins of U.S. patents
were not plausibly affected by AIPA’s enactment.
This “twin” study design allows us to control for unobserved characteristics of each patent
family (comprising the U.S. patent and its EP twin) and to account for quality-based selection
into patenting or early disclosure using family-fixed effects. Thus, we isolate AIPA’s causal effects
by analyzing differences in the diffusion patterns of identical twin patents, one filed in the U.S.
and the other in Europe, before and after AIPA. This design identifies the effect of the USPTO’s
18-month patent disclosure alone since the EPO disclosed the European twins of U.S. patents at
18 months both before and after AIPA (twin applications are published nearly simultaneously
after AIPA—18 months from the filing date of the earliest twin, called the “priority date”). By
4WerefertopatentsfiledattheUSPTOasU.S.patentsandpatentsfiledattheEPOasEuropeanpatents(EP
patents) throughout the paper, regardless of the applicants’ country of origin.
3