NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE TRANSFORMATION OF SELF EMPLOYMENT
Innessa Colaiacovo
Margaret G. Dalton
Sari Pekkala Kerr
William R. Kerr
Working Paper 29725
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29725
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2022
Comments are appreciated and can be sent to wkerr@hbs.edu. We thank Ramana Nanda, Will
Strange, and seminar participants for helpful comments. The research in this paper was conducted
while the authors were Special Sworn Status researchers of the U.S. Census Bureau. Any
opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. This research was performed at a Federal
Statistical Research Data Center under FSRDC Project Number 1731 (CBDRB-FY21-P1731-
R9046, R9048). All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is
disclosed. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Innessa Colaiacovo, Margaret G. Dalton, Sari Pekkala Kerr, and William R. Kerr. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Transformation of Self Employment
Innessa Colaiacovo, Margaret G. Dalton, Sari Pekkala Kerr, and William R. Kerr
NBER Working Paper No. 29725
February 2022
JEL No. D24,G51,J11,J24,J62,L26,M13,R11,R13
ABSTRACT
Over the past half-century, while self-employment has consistently accounted for around one in
ten of the United States workforce, its composition has changed. Since 1970, industries with high
startup capital requirements have declined from 53% of self-employment to 23%. This same time
period also witnessed declines in "hometown" local entrepreneurship and the probability of the
self-employed being among top earners. Using 2016 data, we show that high startup capital
requirements are linked with lower profitability at small scales. The transition away from high
startup capital industries appears most closely linked to changes in small business production
functions and less due to advantageous reallocation to other opportunities, growth in returns-to-
scale among large businesses, or a worsening of financing conditions and debt levels.
Innessa Colaiacovo Sari Pekkala Kerr
Harvard Business School Wellesley College
icolaiac@gmail.com 106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
Margaret G. Dalton skerr3@wellesley.edu
Center for Economic Inclusion
maggie.dalton94@gmail.com William R. Kerr
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 212
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
wkerr@hbs.edu

1 Introduction
Over the past …fty years, about ten percent of the adult U.S. workforce has reported being
self-employed. Self-employment is both a signi…cant part of the economy and a challenging phe-
nomenon to describe comprehensively because it is comprised of varied industries, occupations,
and experiences. The self-employed provide construction and daycare services and run medical
and legal professional practices. They might be independent contractors working from a home
o¢ ce or a repair van, or proprietors of prominent Main Street storefronts passed from parents
to children.
The heterogeneity within the category of self-employment has been illuminated by recent
academicworkexaminingthemotivationsandoutcomesoftheself-employed, aswellastheirrole
in local economic development. Hurst and Pugsley (2011, 2018) brought renewed attention and
new data to the multiple factors that lead people to be self-employed, including the signi…cant
role of non-pecuniary motives like “being your own boss,”…rst suggested by Hamilton (2000).1
Many authors have also grappled with the greater propensity of self-employed individuals to
be in the top and bottom tails of the income distribution (e.g., Asterbo et al. 2011; Levine
and Rubinstein 2017). Michelacci and Silva (2007) showed that self-employed individuals are
disproportionately working in their region of birth in the United States and Italy; moreover,
these local entrepreneurs have higher earnings and perform better than non-local entrepreneurs,
generating a “local bias of entrepreneurship.”
In this paper, we add to the study of self-employment by documenting a signi…cant, broad
transformation of US self-employment from 1970 to 2018. We show a sharp decline in self-
employment in industries which require relatively more startup capital such as agriculture, retail
trade, hotels, and medical o¢ ces. While industries with above-median startup capital intensity
accounted for 53% of self-employment in the 1970 Decennial Census, they have since stagnated
and only account for 23% of self-employment in the 2014-2018 American Community Survey.
(Hereafter, we refer to these samples as 1970 and 2018.) Self-employment has by contrast
‡ourished in low startup capital industries like personal services, construction, childcare, and
health services.
Figure 1 highlights the remarkable relationship between declines in self-employment and
industry-level startup capital requirements. On the vertical axis is the percentage change in
self-employment from 1970 to 2018, measured by the log change in the count of self-employed
1Asterbo et al. (2014) review behavioral factors behind entrepreneurial decisions.
2

individuals. On the horizontal axis is our measure of startup capital intensity: the industry
share of self-employed individuals with 0-2 employees who reported raising $50,000 or more in
startup capital (from themselves or others) according to the 2007 Survey of Business Owners
(SBO). The negative relationship between startup capital needs and the long-run decline in self-
employmentisstriking, andwelatershowthatitisremarkablyrobusttoconsideringothertraits
of industries (e.g., franchising, e-commerce) and other types of …nancing needs (e.g., expansion
capital requirements, investment levels for a 50+ person business).2
Inter-industry di¤erences in levels of startup …nancing are associated with major di¤erences
in industry growth in self-employment. A 10% decline in the share of businesses with 0-2
employees needing this level of initial …nancing (for example, moving from 30% to 20% on the
x-axis of Figure 1), links to a 93% higher (0.66 log points) rate of relative industry growth for
self-employment. This is not easily explained, even by the rise of transformational “superstar”
…rms like Walmart and Amazon in the retail industry, or the contemporaneous contraction
in employment in sectors like agriculture and manufacturing. In Hurst and Pugsley (2018)
framing, the industries with declining self-employment counts, such as agriculture and retail
trade, also show a within-sector shift away from self-employment (see Appendix Figure 1). This
transformation is pervasive, appearing across education levels, demographics, and both urban
and rural settings. While the transformation is strongest among less educated white men in
rural settings, it is also present among highly educated non-white women in urban settings.3
The remainder of this paper documents the decline in self-employment for high startup cap-
ital industries, and we evaluate plausible explanations based on prior literature and theoretical
models of self-employment entry decisions.
Section 2 reviews the theoretical models of startup capital intensity and self-employment en-
trydecisionsofEvansandJovanovic(1989)andHurstandPugsley(2018). Thisreviewidenti…es
four broad factors that could explain the relationship between startup capital requirements and
the self-employment entry decision: reduced pro…tability within a self-employment sector due to
changes in the nature of small business, reallocation across self-employment industries towards
growing industries with better pecuniary and non-pecuniary returns, reallocation towards wage
work that is becoming better compensated, and reallocation due to declines in the …nancial
endowments and lending conditions necessary for startup investments.
2See Appendix Table 1 for industry-level data used in Figure 1.
3Studies of racial di¤erences in self-employment with links to capital access include Fairlie (1999), Fairlie and
Robb (2007), Chatterji and Seamans (2012), Hamilton et al. (2021), and Fairlie et al (2022).
3