NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FISCAL CAPACITY AND COMMERCIAL BANK LENDING UNDER COVID-19
Joshua Aizenman
Yothin Jinjarak
Mark M. Spiegel
Working Paper 29882
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29882
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2022, Revised April 2023
We are grateful for insightful comments provided by an anonymous reviewer and the editor.
Olivia Lofton provided excellent research assistance. Joshua Aizenman is grateful for the support
provided by the Dockson Chair in Economics and International Relations, USC. The views in this
paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the
views of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, the National Bureau of Economic Research, or the Asian Development Bank.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Joshua Aizenman, Yothin Jinjarak, and Mark M. Spiegel. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Fiscal Capacity and Commercial Bank Lending Under COVID-19
Joshua Aizenman, Yothin Jinjarak, and Mark M. Spiegel
NBER Working Paper No. 29882
March 2022, Revised April 2023
JEL No. E62,F34,G21,H30
ABSTRACT
We investigate the implications of government indebtedness for the efficacy of expansionary
government spending in encouraging commercial bank lending growth during the COVID-19
pandemic. Our sample is a large cross-section of over 3000 banks from 71 countries. To address
the likely endogeneity of government assistance, we instrument for extra-normal spending using
disparities in pre-existing national political characteristics. Our results indicate that bank lending
did respond to fiscal capacity, as higher public debt going into the crisis weakened the
expansionary effects of higher spending on bank lending at economically and statistically
significant levels. Moreover, this sensitivity was higher among weaker banks, suggesting
sensitivity to the perceived implications of spending for government assistance going forward.
We also found greater sensitivity in high-income economies and for small and medium-sized
banks. Our results are robust to a variety of robustness tests, including perturbations in
specification, sample, and estimation methodology.
Joshua Aizenman Mark M. Spiegel
Economics and SIR Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
University of Southern California Economic Research
University Park 101 Market Street, MS 1130
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0043 San Francisco, CA 94105
and NBER mark.spiegel@sf.frb.org
aizenman@usc.edu
Yothin Jinjarak
ERCD
Asian Development Bank
Mandaluyong City 1550
Metro Manila, Philippines
yothin.jinjarak@vuw.ac.nz

1. Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic raised the need for elevated government spending to fight the
pandemic and to stabilize national economies. This resulted in sizable increases in fiscal outlays, and
greater liquidly support of households, businesses, and banks. As noted by Gopinath (November 2020),
“The considerable global fiscal support of close to $12 trillion and the extensive rate cuts, liquidity
injections, and asset purchases by central banks helped saved lives and livelihoods and prevented a
financial catastrophe.”
Notably, at the arrival of the pandemic many national government balance sheets were in
challenging positions. As shown in Acharya et al. (2014), the global financial crisis and the euro area
crisis which followed shortly afterwards deteriorated government fiscal positions in a ‘doom loop’
between banks and their sovereigns. As distressed financial sectors necessitated national government
bailouts, the cost of those bailouts raised government sovereign risk and further weakened the financial
sector by eroding the value of both government guarantees and bank bond holdings.2 For the
pandemic, the initial findings provided a mixed picture on the impact of policy interventions adopted in
different countries. As pointed out in a review of Berger et al. (2021), there is still a need for more
evidence from the detailed bank-level data to understand how banks behave during the crisis, and how
the dynamics vary with bank and country characteristics.
Bank profitability and activity has been shown to respond to expected levels of government
support. Correa et al. (2014) demonstrate that changes in sovereign credit ratings impact on local bank
equity returns. They conclude that the link between these exposures based on the credibility of explicit
2 Acharya et al (2014) identify a positive correlation between post-bailout movements in sovereign CDS
spreads and changes in bank CDS spreads, even after controlling for aggregate and bank-level
characteristics.
1

and implicit government guarantees. Similarly, Brandao-Marques et al. (2020) show that bank risk-
taking is responsive to perceived implicit and explicit government guarantees.
In this paper, we investigate the impact of national fiscal positions on the efficacy of
expansionary fiscal policy to maintain bank lending. The lockdowns in economic activity necessitated by
the crisis, as well as disruptions to financial markets during the COVID pandemic, raised concerns that
firms would face difficulty maintaining access to credit. While governments pursued extraordinary fiscal
expansions to forestall credit declines, the responsiveness of the financial sector may have been
sensitive to the perceived capacity of governments to engage in such expansionary policies while
maintaining the credibility of their commitments to assist problematic institutions in the event of
distress, or even failure. As such, the impact of fiscal expansions on bank activity may vary systematically
by national fiscal positions going into the crisis. The COVID-19 crisis provides a useful experience in
which to examine the link between fiscal capacity and the impact of fiscal expansion on credit creation,
due to the exogenous nature of the COVID crisis that triggered the ensuing fiscal response.
We address this question through a large cross-section of approximately 3000 banks from 71
countries. We condition for disparities in individual bank and country characteristics going into the crisis
based on data for 2019Q4. Our banking data includes balance sheet and income statement information
taken from the Fitch Global Banking database. Importantly, we also control for disparities in country
characteristics, including both the severity of the crisis and the government debt position going into the
pandemic. Public debt/GDP has been commonly used as an indicator of fiscal space (e.g. Ostry et al.
(2010)), and in particular may provide information about the willingness or capacity of the government
to provide assistance to the banking system in future periods of distress.3
3 Ostry et al. (2010) estimates of fiscal space depend on the debt/GDP projected, and estimated debt
limit, which depends on the country’s historical track record of primary balance adjustment to rising
debt. In this context, Mian et al. (2014) show that following a financial crisis, voters become more
ideologically extreme and ruling coalition become weaker, raising the difficulty of resolving debt-
2