NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ESTIMATING GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM SPILLOVERS OF LARGE-SCALE SHOCKS
Kilian Huber
Working Paper 29908
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29908
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2022, Revised September 2022
I am grateful to Holger Mueller, Tobias Berg, Steven J. Davis, Sarah Griebel, Peter Hull, Erik
Hurst, Alan Manning, Steve Pischke, Andrés Sarto, Ludwig Straub, Daniel Streitz, Joseph Vavra,
Emil Verner, Iván Werning, and Christian Wolf and numerous seminar audiences for helpful
conversations and comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Kilian Huber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Estimating General Equilibrium Spillovers of Large-Scale Shocks
Kilian Huber
NBER Working Paper No. 29908
April 2022, Revised September 2022
JEL No. C13,C2,D5,E0,E51,G0,G21,G30,L2,R11,R23,R51
ABSTRACT
Large-scale shocks directly affect some firms and households and indirectly affect others through
general equilibrium spillovers. In this paper, I describe how researchers can directly estimate
spillovers using quasi-experimental or experimental variation. I then argue that spillover
estimates suffer from distinct sources of mechanical bias that standard empirical tools cannot
resolve. These biases are particularly relevant in finance and macroeconomics, where multiple
spillover channels and nonlinear effects are common. I offer guidance on how to detect and
overcome mechanical biases. An application and several examples highlight that the suggested
methods are broadly relevant and can inform policy and multiplier calculations.
Kilian Huber
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
kilianhuber@uchicago.edu

Researchers in finance and macroeconomics are often interested in general equilibrium spillover
effects: how shocks to some firms and households affect other parts of the economy. By quantify-
ingspillovers,researcherscanevaluatewhichgeneralequilibriumchannelsneedtobeincludedin
economicmodelsandtowhatextentempiricalestimatesbasedonmicrodataareinformativeabout
other levels of aggregation.1 Spillovers are particularly important when researchers study large-
scalefinancialandmacroeconomicshocksbecausemanyfirmsandhouseholdsaresimultaneously
affectedandspilloversareoftenlarge.
Tounderstandwhyspilloveranalysisishelpful,considertwoconcreteexamplesattheregional
level. An empirical literature estimates how regional house price shocks affect regional employ-
ment(MianandSufi2014;GiroudandMueller2017). Butaparameterrequiredtocalibratemacro-
financemodelsisthedirecteffectofahousepricechangeonanindividualhousehold(Gurenetal.
2020). To convert regional estimates into the direct effect, one needs to know the magnitude of
regional spillovers after a housing shock. Another literature shows that firms with an unhealthy
bank grow more slowly than other firms in the same region with a healthy bank (Bentolila et al.
2018; Berg 2018). A regional policy maker may wonder how subsidizing the unhealthy bank will
affecttheentireregionaleconomyandthereforewillneedtounderstandregionalspilloversaftera
banking shock. In both cases, estimates of regional spillovers would allow one to convert existing
estimatestoanotherlevelofaggregation,evenifdirectestimatesatthedesiredlevelofaggregation
arenotreadilyavailable.
Thetraditionalapproachtomeasuringspilloversinfinanceandmacroeconomicsistocalibrate
a fully specified, general equilibrium model of the economy. Such models can flexibly quantify
spillovers operating among firms and households in the same region, sector, country, or any other
group. A weakness of the model-based approach is that results depend on hard-to-verify assump-
tionsaboutwhichgeneralequilibriumchannelsexist. Inthispaper,Istudyanalternativeempirical
approach: directestimationofspilloversusingquasi-experimentsorexperiments. Thisapproachis
1I use the terms “general equilibrium spillover effects” and “spillovers” interchangeably. Both refer to the same
concept: namely,theeffectsofshocksonprices,technology,andotherfeaturesofthegeneraleconomicenvironment.
Theseeffectsoperatenotonlyatthecountrylevelbutalsoatlowerlevelsofaggregation,suchasregions,sectors,or
networks. Theyimplythatshockspropagatebeyonddirectlyaffectedentities.
1

becoming increasingly popular in finance and macroeconomics. It allows researchers to quantify
spilloversoperatingwithingroupsoffirmsandhouseholdsusingaregressionframework.
This paper offers econometric guidance on how to implement direct estimation of spillovers. I
describe the general approach and then point out two sources of mechanical bias that are likely to
ariseinfinanceandmacroeconomics: theexistenceofmultipletypesofspilloverandmismeasured
treatment status. I suggest practical methods to detect and overcome these biases. I illustrate the
relevance of the proposed methods with an application to a real-world credit shock and describe
further examples in which the methods would be germane. Finally, I argue that direct estimation
ofspilloversallowsresearcherstocalculatetheimpactofpolicyandmultipliereffects.
Themethodofspilloverestimation
The paper begins with an empirical framework for the direct estimation of spillovers. For sim-
plicity, I henceforth use “firms” to describe the unit of direct treatment, but the framework ap-
plies equally when households or other entities are the directly treated units. A researcher studies
whetherashocktoasubsetoffirms(the“treatment”)generatesspilloversontootherfirmsthatare
in the same “group” as treated firms. Firms that belong to the same group are in some way con-
nected, for example, because they are in the same region, production network, technology space,
oranyothertypeofgrouping. Directestimationofspilloversrequiresidentificationofatreatment
that is exogenous both across individuals and across groups. A group can even constitute an en-
tire country, so that the estimated spillovers operate at the country level, as long as a researcher
can identify exogenous variation in treatment at the country level and at least one lower level of
aggregation(e.g.,regions,sectors,firms,orhouseholds).2
Todirectlyestimatespillovers,theresearcherincludestheaveragetreatmentstatusofallother
firms in the same group in the regression (the “leave-out mean”). For example, if the researcher is
interested in regional spillovers, one regressor is the average treatment status of all other firms in
2Recentworkhasattemptedtoidentifyexogenouscountry-levelvariationinfiscalandmonetarypolicyplusvaria-
tionatalowerlevelofaggregation. Examplesincludevariationduetomonetarypolicyabroad(Jiménezetal.2012),
large political upheavals (Fuchs-Schündeln 2008), or geopolitical developments (Conley et al. 2021). Such settings
maybesuitableforaspilloveranalysisatthecountrylevel(seeSection7).
2