NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
US SANCTIONS REINFORCE THE DOLLAR’S DOMINANCE
Michael P. Dooley
David Folkerts-Landau
Peter M. Garber
Working Paper 29943
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29943
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2022
We thank Robert Flood for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Michael P. Dooley, David Folkerts-Landau, and Peter M. Garber. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

US Sanctions Reinforce the Dollar’s Dominance
Michael P. Dooley, David Folkerts-Landau, and Peter M. Garber
NBER Working Paper No. 29943
April 2022
JEL No. F3,F33,F51
ABSTRACT
Recent sanctions on the use of Russia’s international reserve assets seem likely to reduce the
appeal of US dollar reserves as a “shock absorber” for international payments. But international
reserves are also a means to reassure foreign investors that problematic countries will not
confiscate their investments. The “collateral” motive for holding dollar reserves has been
enhanced by the demonstration that the United States is willing and able to sanction misbehavior.
Geopolitically risky countries now more than ever need to reassure foreign investors that their
investments are safe from expropriation. We conclude that recent events will strengthen the role
of the dollar as the key international reserve currency.
Michael P. Dooley Peter M. Garber
Department of Economics 16 Silvermine Woods
Engineering II Wilton, CT 06897
University of California, Santa Cruz vic2eroy@gmail.com
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
MPD@UCSC.EDU
David Folkerts-Landau
Deutsche Bank
Deutsche Bank AG London
1 Great Winchester Street
London EC2 2EQ
United Kingdom
david.folkerts-landau@db.com

US Sanctions Reinforce the Dollar’s Dominance
The freezing of Russia’s dollar foreign exchange reserves has driven warnings that
the dollar may lose its dominant status1. But providing a relatively safe asset is not
the only function of a reserve currency. In a series of papers starting in 2004, we
have argued that the willingness and ability to engage in comprehensive financial
asset seizures is part of the job description for a reserve currency.2 Such potential
seizures were the foundation of the massive expansion of net and gross capital
flows between rich and poor countries over the past thirty years. Moreover, for
good reasons, the US was and is the country most trusted to fulfill this
responsibility. It has had a long track record of seizing foreign assets while
suffering no diminution of its role as the key reserve currency.3
The most important historical example of demand for reserves to reassure foreign
investors is China after 2002. China had to convince foreign industrial capital that
the Chinese government, hitherto a fervent enemy of private capital, would not
ultimately expropriate their investments. China was fortunate because the policy
employed to manage the exchange rate, i.e. sterilized foreign exchange
intervention, also provided the commitment necessary to support the inflow of
private foreign capital.
For direct investors in China reserves provided a safe way to access disciplined
labor at a fraction of the cost of industrial country labor. Safety came from the
“collateral value” of large Chinese foreign reserves. China would sustain a large
loss in any asset seizures driven by domestic politics or a geopolitical break and so
be less likely to engage in such action.
Prior to this accidental innovation, industrial country labor had been “protected”
by the threat of expropriation by governments in risky, low-wage countries. This
threat discouraged capital exports to cheap labor countries not directly under the
center country’s control. When collateral protection was provided in the form of

huge net and gross capital exports from e.g. China, center country capital
responded.
Why are gross international capital flows important?
The key insight is that an accumulated capital account balanced in dollar terms
between a rich and a poor country is unbalanced in terms of risk. To support a
gross private capital inflow, the problematic government must offer an even
greater stock of assets at risk of expropriation by the center country government.
For China, the important gross capital flows were foreign direct investment into
China which provided the most efficient way to acquire the technology,
management technique, product quality, and foreign market access necessary to
industrialize. What could the Chinese government offer to convince foreign
capital that their investments were safe? The Chinese government’s holdings of
dollar reserves and later Chinese private sector investments were the obvious
answer.
So large and permanent was this net export of Chinese capital for collateral that
long-term real interest rates in industrial center countries have been reduced for
the last 20 years. An influential academic theory for persistently depressed real
interest rates in the center is that the US supplies “safe assets” to the rest of the
world.4 This is only part of the story. The US also produces assets that are
unsafe to those who misbehave. The center country must provide safety for
good behavior and punishment for bad behavior.
There is empirical evidence to support the collateral argument. The collateral that
was in fact provided by reserve accumulation was comparable in China to what
would have been required between private investors with comparably different
credit risks. We calculated the collateral requirement for a hypothetical total
return swap of reserves against direct investment. To our surprise, direct
investors in China were getting about what a commercial swap would require.
Over the years, updates in our calculations reconfirmed our findings.5
Private and public collateral
The analogy with private collateral arrangements is useful but should not be
taken literally. Private collateral is a powerful incentive for private lending to risky