NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE ENDOWMENT EFFECT AND COLLATERALIZED LOANS
Kevin Carney
Michael Kremer
Xinyue Lin
Gautam Rao
Working Paper 30073
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30073
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2022
This project received generous funding from the Weiss Family Program Fund for Research in
Development Economics, the Pershing Square Venture Fund for Research on the Foundations of
Human Behavior, and an anonymous donor. This document is an output from the research
initiative ‘Private Enterprise Development in Low-Income Countries’ (PEDL), a programme
funded jointly by the by the Centre for Economic Policy Research (CEPR) and the Department
for International Development (DFID), contract reference PEDL-LOA-4768-Rao. The views
expressed are not necessarily those of CEPR, DFID or the NBER. We thank numerous colleagues
and seminar audiences for helpful suggestions, and James Reisinger and Niharika Singh for
excellent research assistance. We received IRB approval from Harvard University (protocol
number IRB17-0944) and Maseno University (protocol number MUERC-00430-17. The
experiment was pre-registered with a pre-analysis plan on the AEA registry, number
AEARCTR-0002448.
At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w30073.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Kevin Carney, Michael Kremer, Xinyue Lin, and Gautam Rao. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Endowment Effect and Collateralized Loans
Kevin Carney, Michael Kremer, Xinyue Lin, and Gautam Rao
NBER Working Paper No. 30073
May 2022
JEL No. D14,D25,D9,D91,D92,O1,O16
ABSTRACT
Collateral requirements play an important role in credit markets. This paper shows that the
endowment effect—the phenomenon where owing a good increases one's valuation of it—
inhibits demand for loans which use a borrower's existing assets as collateral. Using a field
experiment in Kenya, we show that borrowers instead strongly prefer loans collateralized using
the new durable assets being financed by the loans themselves. They are willing to pay 9% per
month higher interest for such Same-Asset Collateralized Loans (SACLs) despite the endowed
and new assets being randomized, and thus similarly valued before ownership. Our findings
imply that assets which are difficult to use as collateral—which cannot be financed by SACLs—
will be invested in less, even if the borrower has other collateral. We argue that borrowers'
preference for SACLs is driven by naivete: they initially perceive that they have little to lose
when offered a SACL, but subsequently come to develop an attachment to the new asset,
resulting in high repayment effort. Consistent with this, borrowers underestimate their future
attachment to an asset before owning it, and SACLs do not have higher default rates despite
having higher demand. We derive the conditions under which offering consumers SACLs
increases or conversely decreases borrower welfare.
Kevin Carney Xinyue Lin
Harvard University Harvard University
carney@g.harvard.edu xinyue_lin@g.harvard.edu
Michael Kremer Gautam Rao
University of Chicago Department of Economics
Kenneth C. Griffin Department of Economics Harvard University
1126 E. 59th St. Littauer M-30
Chicago, IL 60637 Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER and NBER
kremermr@uchicago.edu grao@fas.harvard.edu

1 Introduction
Some loans are collateralized using the same durable assets whose purchase is financed by the loans
themselves. Home loans, car loans and lease-to-own contracts are examples of such Same-Asset Collat-
eralizedLoans(SACLs). Suchloansmaybeparticularlyhelpfulforborrowerswhodonotpossessother
assets to provide as collateral. Other loans involve the borrower pledging some other, already-owned
asset as collateral. Providing land or jewelry as collateral, common in poor countries, and home-equity
loansorpawn-shoploansinrichcountries,areexamplesofsuchOther-AssetCollateralizedLoans(OA-
CLs). SuchOACLsmaybetheonlyoptiontofinancegoodswhichcannotthemselvesserveascollateral.
In this paper, we study how two psychological mechanisms—the endowment effect and naivete regard-
ingit—affectborrowers’demandforSACLsandOACLs, withimplicationsforrealinvestmentsandfor
borrower welfare.
The endowment effect is the phenomenon—well-studied in the lab—where owning a good increases
one’s valuation of that good, and reduces one’s willingness to lose it.1 We hypothesize that borrowers
subject to the endowment effect will dislike placing assets they already own at risk of loss by pledging
them as collateral. They may be more willing to take up loans collateralized instead by the new asset
being financed, to which they may not (yet) be ‘attached’. If they subsequently do come to develop
an endowment effect over the new asset, repayment incentives may still remain high while paying off
the loan.2 Thus, if borrowers under-estimate their own endowment effect, SACLs can allow lenders to
achieve higher demand than OACLs (since borrowers ex-ante perceive that they will have little to lose)
withoutlowerrepaymenteffort(sinceborrowerswillcometoperceiveasenseoflossincaseofdefault).3
We designed a field experiment (n=701) with borrowers in Kenya to test how the endowment
effect—andnaiveteaboutit—interactswithcollateralrequirementsofloans,whileholdingconstantthe
myriad of other reasons—such as information asymmetries and ownership of pledgeable assets—that
might affect demand for SACLs and OACLs. We began by endowing participants with a randomly
selected durable asset as compensation for their participation and then, one week later, offered them a
loantofinancethepurchaseofadifferentrandomlyselectedasset. Wevariedwhethertheloanofferwas
a SACL which used the asset being financed as collateral, or an OACL which required the randomly
1The endowmenteffect is oftenconsidered an exampleof loss aversion. However, numerous alternativepsychological
models also generate an endowment effect, such as motivated taste change (Beggan 1992), attachment (Carmon et al.,
2003), attention to different aspects of the transaction (Carmon and Ariely, 2000), and salience (Bordalo et al., 2012).
Wedonotdistinguishbetweentheseunderlyingmodels,andinsteadfocusonanimplicationoftheendowmenteffectfor
collateralizedloans.
2Notethatthiswouldrequiredevelopinganendowmenteffectbeforepayingofftheloan,andthusbeforefullyowning
the new item. Some research suggests that physically possessing a good is enough to increase one’s valuation of it and
generateanendowmenteffect(RebandConnolly,2007).
3 Inthelanguageofreferencedependence,thequestionishowquicklythereferencepointupdatestoincludethenew
financedasset,andwhetherborrowersarenaiveandunder-predictthisadjustment.
1

endowed asset to be pledged as collateral. The assets used in the experiment were chosen from a list of
common household and agricultural durable goods, with market prices of around 15 days of per capita
daily income, and loan repayment terms of two months.
Borrowers have a substantial preference for loans that use the item being purchased as collateral
ratherthanthealready-owneditem. Theaveragewillingnesstopayforanewitemis13.3%(s.e. 2.1%;
p=0) higher—equivalent to an 8.8 percentage point higher monthly interest rate—when it is financed
using a SACL rather than an OACL. This is despite borrowers valuing the financed goods and the
collateral identically on average across the two types of loans, as ensured by the randomization and
verified using baseline measures of valuation for each item. We find that realized default rates across
OACLs and SACLs are nearly identical, consistent with the possibility that borrowers come to develop
a similar endowment effect—and therefore repayment incentives—over the financed and already-owned
assets.
We also directly measured whether borrowers are naive about (i.e. underestimate) the endowment
effect. First, we elicited borrowers’ predictions about their future take-up decisions for SACLs and
OACLs before we endowed them with any item. We find that borrowers over-estimate their future
willingness to pay for an OACL before owning the endowed asset by 13.9% (p=0.003), while correctly
predicting on average their future demand for a SACL (p=0.85). Second, we elicited willingness to
accept (WTA) to sell the endowed item after a week of ownership and compared this to predictions
made prior to ownership, following Loewenstein and Adler (1995).4 We find evidence of a strong
endowment effect over the randomly endowed item, with WTA about four times higher than WTP.5
Participants’ predicted WTA lies roughly halfway between their initial WTP and their eventual WTA
for the item and is significantly different from both (p=0 for each). Both sets of results—for loans as
wellasforWTA—indicatethatborrowershaveastrongendowmenteffect,butarepartiallynaiveabout
it: they under-estimate it before owning the item. We randomize incentives for accurate predictions;
naivete about the endowment effect does not diminish with incentives.
All our findings can be explained by a combination of the endowment effect and naivete about
it. However, a number of alternative explanations are worth considering. First, participants may
have learned about the value of the endowed good over the week of ownership. We used common
durablegoodsthatarefamiliartoparticipants,andallowedparticipantstoexaminethembeforemaking
any decisions. Yet 96 percent of participants displayed WTA > WTP, and participants anticipated
4Naivete about the endowment effect has been documented by Loewenstein and Adler (1995) and Van Boven et al.
(2003),andhasbeenconsideredanillustrativeexampleofprojectionbias(Loewensteinetal.,2003).
5At face value, this gap between WTA and WTP is within the range found in the literature, for instance among the
less-experiencedtradersstudiedinList(2003). However,ourestimateofWTAisanunder-estimate,sinceasubstantial
shareofofparticipantsaretop-codedastheyrefusedtoselltheendowedgoodatallthepricesweoffered. Amongthose
whoarenottop-codedWTAisstill2.2timesashighasWTP.ThisisdiscussedinmoredetailinSection3.2.
2