NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
REAL EFFECTS OF SUPPLYING SAFE PRIVATE MONEY
Chenzi Xu
He Yang
Working Paper 30060
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30060
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2022, Revised September 2022
First version: November, 2018. Previously circulated as “National banks and the local economy.”
The authors thank Adrien Matray for numerous discussions. Philip Ager, Rick Hornbeck, and
Martin Rotemberg generously shared data. We also thank Anat Admati, Brian Beach, Asaf
Bernstein, Michael Bordo, John Campbell, Lauren Cohen, William Diamond, James Feigenbaum,
Carola Frydman, Andrew Garin, Michela Giorcelli, Claudia Goldin, Gary Gorton, Walker
Hanlon, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Christopher M. Meissner, Nathan Nunn, Siddharth George,
Robin Greenwood, Alberto Manconi, Santiago Perez, Sarah Quincy, Tzachi Raz, Hugh Rockoff,
Amit Seru, Jann Spiess, Jeremy Stein, Adi Sunderam, as well as participants at Harvard, Yale,
UC Davis, Einaudi Institute, HKUST, NBER DAE, EHA, the AEAs, and Stanford SITE for
helpful comments. Jiayi Cheng, William Halverson, Peilin Yang, and Wenyi Yin provided
excellent research assistance. We are grateful for financial support from The Lab for Economic
Applications and Policy (LEAP) at Harvard, the Harvard Department of Economics Summer
Research Fellowship, and the King Center Junior Faculty Research Grant at the Stanford. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Chenzi Xu and He Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Real Effects of Supplying Safe Private Money
Chenzi Xu and He Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 30060
May 2022, Revised September 2022
JEL No. E42,E44,E51,F14,G21,N11,N21
ABSTRACT
Privately issued money often bears devaluation risk that create monetary transaction frictions. We
evaluate the real effects of supplying a new type of safe money in the historical context of the US
in 1863. We instrument for the change in monetary frictions locally using regulatory capital
requirements and measure the degree safe money access with a market access approach derived
from general equilibrium trade theory. Lowering monetary transaction costs increased traded
goods production and spurred structural transformation with more manufacturing output,
employment, and urban population. The growth in manufacturing was driven by employment and
inputs rather than capital investment.
Chenzi Xu
Graduate of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
chenzixu@stanford.edu
He Yang
Harvard University
1805 Cambridge St
Cambridge, MA 02138
heyang.um@gmail.com

1 Introduction
A predominance of private monies may introduce consumer protection and fi-
nancial stability risks because of their potential volatility and the risk of run-like
behavior. Indeed, the period in the nineteenth century when there was active
competition among issuers of private paper banknotes in the United States is now
notorious for inefficiency, fraud, and instability in the payments system.
–Lael Brainerd, Member of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors (2021)
All forms of money are a liability of the issuer, and their usefulness as mediums of
exchange depends on either the confidence users have in the value of the assets backing the
liability or the willingness of others to accept the liability as payment.1 Privately created
monies often vary in their safety and can be prone to large devaluations when users lose
confidence in (or receive better information about) the value of the underlying assets. In
contrast, “safe” monies have no devaluation risk and maintain their liquidity in all states
of the world. There are no transaction frictions associated with using them, and in fact,
their liquidity can cost users a “convenience” yield (Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen,
2012). While private money can provide liquidity in certain markets and generate significant
seignorage profits for issuers and early adopters, lack of total safety leads to transaction
frictions, and there is little empirical evidence on their real costs to the economy.
In this paper, we study how introducing and supplying a new form of safe money with
notransactionfrictionsaffectedlocaleconomicdevelopmentandstructuraltransformationin
the historical context of the United States from 1870 to 1890. The lack of a sufficiently large
supply of safe monies that could sustain the transactional needs of the economy was a promi-
nent feature of the US prior to the creation of the Federal Reserve system in 1913. For much
of its history, the US, unlike other early industrial nations such as the UK, France, and Ger-
many, operated under a fragmented monetary system without a central bank responsible for
maintaining a common, uniform currency. The qualitative costs of this fragmented monetary
system have been remarked upon by both contemporaries and historians, but quantitatively,
little is known about how this system affected economic growth and development.
The passage of the National Banking Act of 1864 introduced a new safe alternative
source of private money to the economy. While the Act itself was enacted at the federal level,
there was significant geographic variation in the local supply of these safe notes, implying
1Wefocusonthebalancesheetoftheissuerandthereforerefertoanythingthatactsasmoneyasaliabilityof
itsissuer. Moneyisalsoanassetforhouseholdsandfirmsthatholdanduseit,butwewillrefertomonetary
instruments as liabilities.
1

that locations experienced different changes in their transaction frictions. This geographical
variation allows us to estimate the effect of reducing transaction frictions from the intro-
duction of safe money. We measure county-level changes in transaction frictions from 1870
to 1880, and we estimate the impact of those changes on the evolution of real outcomes
from 1880 to 1890. Our empirical analysis focuses on a sample of locations where we can
instrument for these changes to provide causal empirical evidence on these effects.
Prior to the National Banking Act, the money supply consisted of bank notes issued by
thousands of local private banks. These note liabilities were backed by bank asset portfolios
withlittleornoregulatoryoversightandhadlowrecoveryratesfollowingbankfailures. They
werenotlegaltenderandwereonlyconvertibleintospecieattheissuinglocation. Asaresult,
there was significant uncertainty over their value, and transaction frictions manifested in the
way they traded at discounts across town borders (Gorton, 1996, 1999). Their illiquidity
made them particularly costly to use in long-distance trade transactions where information
frictions about banks’ insolvency risks were higher.
The National Banking Act introduced national bank notes that were stable, liquid,
and information-insensitive liabilities like Federal Reserve notes today. These notes were
supplied by federally regulated “national banks” that operated alongside previously existing
“state banks.”2 These notes were different on several dimensions. First, these notes were
completelysafe. TheActseveredthelinkbetweenabank’screditriskandtherealvalueofits
notes, thereby eliminating transaction frictions arising from asymmetric information (Dang,
Gorton, Holmstr¨om and Ordonez, 2017). It did so by mandating that all national bank notes
hadtobebacked110%infederalgovernmentbonds, anditestablishedstructuredprocedures
for insolvency and receivership that were designed to prioritize note holders against any
losses, which eliminated the risk of bank runs on notes.
Second, national bank notes circulated discount-free within the network of national
banks around the country. This was due to a requirement for all national banks to fully
redeem the notes of any other national bank, making national bank notes particularly liquid
for long-distance transactions. Places with a local national bank could transact within the
network without any monetary transaction costs. Transactions outside of the network may
have needed to rely on less liquid alternative payments such as specie that was costly to ship
and insure, unsafe private notes at a discount, or informationally-sensitive checks.
We structure our analysis of the effect of better access to the supply of safe notes by
2Statebankswerecharteredbystategovernments. Somestatesdidnothaveacharteringsystemandtherefore
operated under a “free banking” regime. For simplicity, all types of banks that existed alongside national
banks are called state banks.
2