NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ALIGNED WITH WHOM? DIRECT AND SOCIAL GOALS FOR AI SYSTEMS
Anton Korinek
Avital Balwit
Working Paper 30017
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30017
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2022
This paper was prepared for the Oxford Handbook of AI Governance. We would like to thank
Ondřej Bajgar, Damon Binder, Justin Bullock, Alexis Carlier, Carla Zoe Cremer, Allan Dafoe,
Ben Garfinkel, Lewis Hammond, Fin Moorhouse, Luca Righetti, Toby Shevlane, Joseph Stiglitz,
and participants at the Spring 2021 Handbook of AI Governance conference for helpful
comments and discussions. Any remaining misalignment is our own. Korinek acknowledges
financial support from the David M. Rubenstein Fellowship program at the Brookings Institution.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Brookings Institution or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Anton Korinek and Avital Balwit. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Aligned with Whom? Direct and Social Goals for AI Systems
Anton Korinek and Avital Balwit
NBER Working Paper No. 30017
May 2022
JEL No. D6,O3
ABSTRACT
As artificial intelligence (AI) becomes more powerful and widespread, the AI alignment problem
—how to ensure that AI systems pursue the goals that we want them to pursue—has garnered
growing attention. This article distinguishes two types of alignment problems depending on
whose goals we consider, and analyzes the different solutions necessitated by each. The direct
alignment problem considers whether an AI system accomplishes the goals of the entity operating
it. In contrast, the social alignment problem considers the effects of an AI system on larger
groups or on society more broadly. In particular, it also considers whether the system imposes
externalities on others. Whereas solutions to the direct alignment problem center around more
robust implementation, social alignment problems typically arise because of conflicts
between individual and group-level goals, elevating the importance of AI governance to mediate
such conflicts. Addressing the social alignment problem requires both enforcing existing norms
on their developers and operators and designing new norms that apply directly to AI systems.
Anton Korinek
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
Monroe Hall 246
248 McCormick Rd
Charlottesville, VA 22904
and NBER
anton@korinek.com
Avital Balwit
Oxford University
Future of Humanity Institute
Trajan House
Mill St
Oxford OX2 0DJ
United Kingdom
avital.balwit@gmail.com

I. Introduction
We are building artificially intelligent systems which are increasingly competent and general.
Already, AI systems can have impacts that occur almost instantly and anywhere in the world.1
While speed and reach are factors that AI shares with other technologies like malware or
nuclear weapons, AI systems are also different, becoming increasingly autonomous and
behaving like agents of their own.
When we delegate tasks to AI systems, an important challenge is to endow the systems with
“desirable goals” — this is frequently labeled the AI alignment problem. For a good survey of
recent research on AI alignment see, e.g., Ngo (2020). However, when speaking of alignment, it
is important to be explicit about whose goals an AI system is aligned with. This paper
distinguishes between two types of AI alignment that are both important in AI development but
that require distinct governance approaches:
Direct alignment: when an AI system is pursuing goals consistent with the goals of its operator,
irrespective of whether it imposes externalities on other parties.2
Social alignment: when an AI system is pursuing goals that are consistent with the broader
goals of society, taking into account the welfare of everybody who is impacted by the system.
There are multiple challenges to achieving direct alignment, including identifying the right goal to
give to an AI system, conveying that goal, and getting the AI system to correctly implement the
goal.3 Social alignment adds the challenge of including all of those impacted — not merely the
operator of a system — to the extent that society views this as desirable when determining what
goal to give the system.
What would it entail to consider all those affected? We describe a conceptual benchmark for
social alignment based on welfare economics that we call ideal social alignment and analyze
how social alignment differs from direct alignment in that it considers externalities. We provide
examples of ideal social welfare functions that could, in principle, be employed to formally study
social alignment. Since ideal social alignment is unattainable in practice, we explain how it is
possible to determine a partial ordering of social preferences and that in practice, social
alignment means aligning AI systems with this more limited set of instructions. Social alignment
1 An example are AI-powered financial trading systems (see e.g. Boukherouaa and Shabsigh, 2021).
2 Throughout the paper, we use the convention of referring to the entity that is creating, operating, and
controlling an AI system as the “operator.” In principle, each of these tasks could be performed by
different entities, adding additional complexity to the challenge of AI alignment.
3 There are many alternative ways of defining alignment but with similar flavor. For example, an AI system
could be aligned to the human’s instructions, intentions, revealed preferences, informed preferences,
interests, or values, among other options. See Gabriel (2020) for a fuller discussion.
3

will generally require external interventions and a broader governance framework. We discuss
how regulatory solutions provided by social norms, laws, markets, and architecture could be
used to achieve social alignment, and we highlight the importance of AI governance to achieve
social alignment.
We believe ensuring that AI systems satisfy both direct and social alignment will become ever
more important in the future. Currently, we delegate fairly narrow tasks to AI systems — we ask
them to classify images, rank our search results, recommend movies and music, and
autocomplete bits of our emails. But we are starting to use AI in increasingly higher stakes
environments, like evaluating loan and job applicants, financial trading, utility management, and
national defense. Importantly, the range and complexity of tasks that we turn over to our AI
systems are continuing to grow.
AI Alignment — the challenge of how to endow AI systems with goals that are consistent with
our goals — becomes ever more important as delegation from humans to AI systems (i)
happens more often, creating more opportunities for misalignment to cause harm; (ii) involves
higher stakes situations, where misalignment would be more costly or even catastrophic; and
(iii) occurs in situations where we have less ability to provide oversight, which makes it more
difficult to assess whether the system is aligned and less likely that we catch alignment failures
early.
II. Concepts
We start by clarifying several theoretical concepts that are relevant for our discussion of
alignment. Readers who are most interested in the comparison of direct and social alignment
may wish to skip to the following section.
Agents and goals
Agents: We call entities that interact with their environment “agents” whenever it is useful to
describe them as pursuing goals.4 A goal is a summary description of what an entity is
attempting to achieve. Humans clearly fit our description of agents—we think of ourselves and
each other as pursuing goals, and this is useful because inferring people’s goals makes for a
more efficient description of what to expect from them next. For example, if a driver sees a
person walking straight up to a crosswalk, it is useful to infer that the person’s goal is to cross
the street, and this is more efficient than to ponder how the person’s leg movements will
translate into the person’s physical location over the ensuing seconds.
4 This is a shallow definition of agency that is, however, useful for our purposes here. It is inspired by but
distinct from Dennett’s work on stances (see e.g. Dennett, 1987). In different contexts, other definitions
may be more useful - for example, in ethics, a moral agent is an entity that is morally accountable for its
actions. For an elaboration on alternative concepts of agency, see e.g. Franklin and Graesser (1996) or
Orseau et al. (2018).
4