NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A STRUCTURAL APPROACH TO HIGH-FREQUENCY EVENT STUDIES:
THE FED AND MARKETS AS CASE HISTORY
Francesco Bianchi
Sydney C. Ludvigson
Sai Ma
Working Paper 30072
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30072
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2022, Revised June 2025
This paper superscedes the old paper “Monetary Based Asset Pricing: A Mixed-Frequency
Structural Approach.” We are grateful to Courtney Weigand, Nicholas Zarra, and Steven Zheng
for excellent research assistance. Bianchi and Ludvigson received financial support from the
National Science Foun- dation under Grant 2116641. We thank Adrien Auclert, Michael Bauer,
Anna Cieslak, Andrea Ferrero, Eric Ghysels, Jonas Jensen, Carolin Pflueger, Frank Schorfheide,
and seminar participants at the Spring 2023 NBER Asset Pricing meeting, the 2022 American
Economic Association annual meetings, the May 2022 Bank of England Macro-Finance
Conference, the June 2022 EDHEC PhD Forum, the September 2022 SOFIE webinar, the
September 2022 Bank of Finland and CEPR Joint Conference on Monetary Policy in the Post-
Pandemic Era, the November 2022 NBER Monetary Economics meeting, Harvard Business
School, Notre Dame, HKUST, Bocconi University, McGill, MIT, and the University of Chicago
for helpful comments. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
those of the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2022 by Francesco Bianchi, Sydney C. Ludvigson, and Sai Ma. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Structural Approach to High-Frequency Event Studies: The Fed and Markets as Case History
Francesco Bianchi, Sydney C. Ludvigson, and Sai Ma
NBER Working Paper No. 30072
May 2022, Revised June 2025
JEL No. E52, E58, E7, G12
ABSTRACT
We develop a methodology to integrate a high-frequency event study into a macro-finance model
and structural estimation. The methodology is applied to Federal Reserve announcements in a
model where investor beliefs about the economic state and/or regime change in future policy can
jump in response to monetary news. We find that stock market volatility in narrow windows around
policy announcements is frequently driven by jumps in beliefs about future policy rules that affect
subjective risk premia. Such jumps often generate positive comovement between short rates and the
stock market, erroneously suggesting a role for “Fed information shocks.”
Francesco Bianchi Sai Ma
Johns Hopkins University Federal Reserve Board of Governors
Department of Economics sai.ma@frb.gov
and CEPR
and also NBER
francesco.bianchi@jhu.edu
Sydney C. Ludvigson
New York University
Department of Economics
and NBER
sydney.ludvigson@nyu.edu
A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w30072

1 Introduction
A growing academic literature has o¤ered a myriad of competing explanations for why
…nancial markets react strongly to the announcements of central banks. A classic New-
Keynesian view is that surprise central bank announcements proxy for shocks to a nom-
inal interest rate rule of the type emphasized by Taylor (1993), which in‡uence the real
economy through an intertemporal substitution channel. More recently, other theories
emphasizethee¤ectsofcentralbankannouncementson…nancialmarketriskpremia(the
risk premium channel), the information they impart about the state of the economy (the
“Fed information shock”channel), or the role they play in revising the public’s under-
standing of the central bank’s reaction function and objectives (the perceived policy rule
channel).
As the mushrooming debate over how to interpret this evidence indicates, many
questions about the interplay between central bank news and …nancial markets remain
unanswered. In this paper we consider two of them. First, although extant theories
typically focus on a single channel of monetary transmission, there is no obvious rea-
son why multiple channels might not be operative simultaneously. We therefore con-
sider whether more than one channel might explain why markets react to central bank
news, and quantify their roles. Second, much like other types of news to which markets
are strongly attentive, monetary news typically covers a wide-ranging set of themes.
In the case of announcements by the U.S. Federal Reserve, these themes often range
broadly from interest rate policy, to forward guidance, to quantitative interventions, to
the macroeconomic outlook, a plethora o¤ering little reason to expect that the forces
driving reactions to one announcement should be similar to another. We therefore con-
sider announcement-speci…c reactions that di¤er according to how market participants’
perceptions of primitive economic risks have changed as a result of the news.
Addressing these questions requires a high-frequency event study that can allow for
distinct theoretical channels of varying degrees of importance across event-time. Unfor-
tunately, existing event study approaches are poorly suited to the task, both because
they provide little to no announcement-speci…c evidence or conceptual framework, and
because they o¤er limited insight into why market participants react to speci…c an-
nouncements. When beliefs react to news causing equilibrium prices to change, which
primitive shocks did investors perceive and what was their quantitative relation to the
resulting price change?
Our contribution to addressing these questions is to integrate a high-frequency event
study into a mixed-frequency macro-…nance model and structural estimation. The re-
sulting ‘mixed-frequency structural approach’to event study analysis allows us to ad-
dress the question of why–as seen through the lens of a theoretical framework–…nancial
markets reacted to a given piece of news the way they did, e¤ectively identifying state-
1

dependent reaction functions to real-world events. The general approach can be applied
in a wide variety of structural and semi-structural settings whenever the research ob-
jective calls for a conceptual understanding of …nancial market responses to any type of
news or event.1
In this article, we apply the approach to undertake a case study of the stock market’s
reactions to Federal Reserve (Fed) communications. Our structural estimation uses
dozensofforward-lookingseriesrangingfromminutely…nancialmarketdatatobiannual
survey forecast data. These data, along with the model and structural estimation,
allow us to infer jumps in investor beliefs about the latent state of the economy, the
perceived sources of primitive economic risk driving that state, and the future conduct
of monetary policy, all in response to Fed news. In turn, movements in these beliefs
generate endogenous movements in subjective risk premia.
We study a two-agent asset pricing model with New Keynesian style macroeconomic
dynamics in which the two agents have heterogeneous beliefs, as in Bianchi, Lettau,
and Ludvigson (2022). One agent is a representative “investor”who is forward-looking,
reacts swiftly to news, and earns income solely from investments in the stock market
and a one-period nominal bond. Macroeconomic dynamics are speci…ed by a set of
equations similar to those in New Keynesian models, and can be thought of as driven
by a representative “household/worker”that supplies labor, has access to the nominal
bond, but holds no stock market wealth. Unlike investors, the household/worker forms
expectations in a backward-looking manner using adaptive learning rules, consistent
with survey evidence on how households actually arrive at their beliefs (Malmendier
and Nagel (2016), Coibion, Gorodnichenko, Kumar, and Pedemonte (2020)).
An important feature of our model is that the conduct of monetary policy is allowed
to undergo possible nonrecurrent regime shifts, or “structural breaks,”that take the
form of shifts in the parameters of a nominal interest rate rule. Such regime changes
in what we refer to as the conduct of monetary policy give rise to endogenously long-
lasting changes in real interest rates that are conceptually distinct from those generated
by the monetary policy shock, an innovation in the nominal rate that is uncorrelated
with in‡ation, economic growth, and shifts in the policy rule parameters.
With this feature at hand, we explicitly model investor beliefs about future regime
change in the conduct of monetary policy. Investors in the model closely monitor central
bank communications for information that would lead them to revise their perceived
probabilityoftransitioningoutofthecurrentpolicyregimeintoaperceived“Alternative
regime”thattheybelievewillcomenext. Investorsareawarethattheymaychangetheir
minds about the likelihoodof near-termmonetary regime change givennewinformation,
1Bianchi, Ludvigson, and Ma (2024) apply the approach to study over- and under-reaction in the
stock market to macroeconomic data announcements, corporate earnings announcements, as well as
Fed news.
2