NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SANCTIONS AND THE EXCHANGE RATE
Oleg Itskhoki
Dmitry Mukhin
Working Paper 30009
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30009
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2022
We thank the seminar participants at UCLA, Stanford and Maryland for very helpful suggestions.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Oleg Itskhoki and Dmitry Mukhin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Sanctions and the Exchange Rate
Oleg Itskhoki and Dmitry Mukhin
NBER Working Paper No. 30009
April 2022
JEL No. E50,F31,F32,F41,F51
ABSTRACT
We show that the exchange rate may appreciate or depreciate depending on the specific mix of
sanctions imposed, even if the underlying equilibrium allocation is the same. Sanctions that limit
a country's imports tend to appreciate the country’s exchange rate, while sanctions that limit
exports and/or freeze net foreign assets tend to depreciate it. Increased precautionary household
demand for foreign currency is another force that depreciates the exchange rate, and it can be
offset with domestic financial repression of foreign currency savings. The overall effect depends
on the balance of currency demand and currency supply forces, where exports and official
reserves contribute to currency supply and imports and foreign currency precautionary savings
contribute to currency demand. Domestic economic downturn and government fiscal deficits are
additional forces that affect the equilibrium exchange rate. The dynamic behavior of the ruble
exchange rate following Russia's military invasion of Ukraine in February 2022 and the resulting
sanctions is entirely consistent with the combined effects of these mechanisms.
Oleg Itskhoki
Department of Economics
University of California, Los Angeles
Bunche Hall, 315 Portola Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
itskhoki@econ.ucla.edu
Dmitry Mukhin
32 Lincolns Inn Fields, Room 1.24
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
D.Mukhin@lse.ac.uk

1 Introduction
What is the effect of sanctions on the value of the exchange rate of a country under sanctions? This
paper is motivated by the recent events in which the West imposed stiff sanctions on Russia after its
militaryinvasionofUkraineonFebruary24,2022. Intheimmediateaftermathoftheinvasionandthe
impositionofsanctions, theRussianrublequickly lostnearlyhalfofits value. However, a fewweeks
later,thevalueoftherublestartedtoappreciatetowardsitspre-warlevel(seeFigure1),posingapuzzle
forcommentators.
Figure1: Dailyrubleexchangerate(peroneUSD)in2022
BuildingontheequilibriumexchangeratemodelinItskhokiandMukhin(2021,2022),weshowthat
theexchangeratecanmoveinoppositedirectionsdependingonthespecificmixofsanctionsused,even
iftheunderlyingequilibriumallocationandtheresultingwelfarearethesame. Inparticular,sanctions
that limit imports of a country tend to appreciate the country’s exchange rate, while sanctions that
limitexportand/orfreezenetforeignassetstendtodepreciateit,eveniftheyhavethesameeffecton
realallocations.1 Furthermore,anincreaseinprecautionaryhouseholddemandforforeigncurrencyin
response to the uncertainty associated with the war and sanctions is another force for exchange rate
depreciation,whichcanbeoffsetwithdomesticfinancialrepressionofforeigncurrencysavings.2
The overall intuition comes from the balance of currency demand and supply. Exports and gov-
ernmentreservesarethemainsourceofcurrencysupply. Importsandforeigncurrencyprecautionary
savingsarethemainsourceofcurrencydemand. Sanctionsthatreducethesupplyofcurrencytendto
depreciatetheexchangerate,whilesanctionsandpolicyresponsesthatreducethedemandforcurrency
1ThisequivalenceisanothermanifestationofLerner(1936)symmetrystudiedinBarbiero,Farhi,Gopinath,andItskhoki
(2019)inthecontextoftariffsandborderadjustmenttaxes.
2Thispaperfocusontheimpactofvariousformsofsanctionsontheexchangerate,leavingasidetheissueofoptimal
sanctionsdesign(seee.g.BianchiandSosa-Padilla2022,Sturm2022).Korhonen(2019)providesarecentsurveyoftheearlier
workontheeconomicimpactofsanctions,inparticularinthecontextoftheRussianeconomy.
1

tendtoappreciatetheexchangerate. Inthecounterfactuallimitingcasewithnoimportsandfullfinan-
cialrepression,thereisnouseforcurrencyandtheexchangeratebecomesanirrelevantvariable,even
if it appreciates without bound from the currency proceeds from commodity exports. When imports
andforeigncurrencysavingsarenotfullyconstrained,theexchangeratestillplaysanallocativerole.
In particular, we show that financial repression that partially limits foreign currency savings, results
in exchange rate appreciation, allows the country to increase imports, and in a heterogeneous-agent
economyshiftswelfarefromsaverstowardshand-to-mouthconsumers.
Amongadditionalmechanisms,wepointoutthatsanctionsthatcausedisruptionindomesticpro-
duction(e.g., duetoexitofforeignmultinationalsandwithdrawalofintermediateinputs)tendtoap-
preciatetheexchangeratebymakingdomesticgoodsscarcerelativetoimports. Finally,expectedfiscal
deficitsofthegovernmentassociatedwitheconomicdownturninducedbyvariousformsofsanctions
create a Sargent and Wallace (1981)-style “unpleasant monetary arithmetics” pressure on monetary
policy,andthusmaytriggeramonetary-drivendevaluation. Surprisingly,however,importandexport
sanctions have the same effect on the fiscal balance of the government, even when fiscal revenues of
thegovernmentrelyheavilyonexportrevenuesofthecountry.
Insummary,thedynamicbehavioroftheRussianrubleexchangerateisentirelyconsistentwiththe
followingtimingofevents. Theinitialdepreciationwascausedbythefreezeofnetforeignassetsand
a sharp increase in uncertainty and precautionary demand for foreign currency by households. This
effectwasmoderatedbytheassociatedglobalincreaseinenergyprices,sinceenergyisthemainRussian
export. Financial repression that followed further stabilized the value of the exchange rate. The fact
thattheWestchosetoconcentratesanctionsonRussianimportsandnotcutexportsofRussiaenergy
wasanadditionalforcetowardstheappreciationoftheruble. Finally,thecombinationofsanctionsso
far has not triggered problems for the fiscal balance of the government, and thus combined with an
aggressiveincreaseintheinterestrate,hasnotresultedinmonetaryinflationanddevaluation.
2 Modeling Environment
Consideranendowmentsmallopeneconomywithconsumptionofnon-tradablesandimportedtrad-
ables,andexportsofcommodities.
Households choosetheconsumptionofthehomeandimportgoodsC andC :
Ht Ft
(cid:88)
∞ (cid:20) (cid:18)B∗ (cid:19)(cid:21)
maxE βt u(C ,C )+v t+1;ψ , (1)
0 Ht Ft P∗ t
t=0 t+1
subjectto:
B E B∗
P C +E P∗C + t+1 + t t+1 ≤ B +E B∗+W , (2)
t Ht t t Ft R R∗ t t t t
t Ht
where P and P∗ are prices of home and imported goods in home and foreign currency, respectively,
t t
and W is the nominal wage bill of home households. E is the nominal exchange rate defined as
t t
unitsofhomecurrencyforoneunitofforeign,andanincreaseinE correspondstoahomecurrency
t
2