NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO SELL-SIDE ANALYSTS SAY “BUY” WHILE WHISPERING “SELL”?
David Hirshleifer
Yushui Shi
Weili Wu
Working Paper 30032
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30032
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2022, Revised February 2024
We thank Jeffrey Busse (discussant), Chong Huang, Paul Irvine, Frank Weikai Li, Xi Li, Brandon
Lock (discussant), Ben Lourie, Haoyi Luo (discussant), Lin Peng, Christopher Schwarz, Jinfei
Sheng, Nan Xu, Yuhai Xuan, David Yang, Zheng Sun, Russ Wermers, Lu Zheng, and
participants of the Northern Financial Association Annual Meeting, the Financial Management
Association Annual Meeting, the Australasian Finance and Banking Conference, and seminars at
University of California, Irvine, Peking University, and Monash University for valuable
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by David Hirshleifer, Yushui Shi, and Weili Wu. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Sell-Side Analysts Say “Buy” While Whispering “Sell”?
David Hirshleifer, Yushui Shi, and Weili Wu
NBER Working Paper No. 30032
May 2022, Revised February 2024
JEL No. G12,G14,G2,G23,G24,G3,M41
ABSTRACT
We study here say-buy/whisper-sell behavior wherein analysts issue optimistic recommendations
to attract retail investors while providing more accurate information to fund managers in private,
sometimes resulting in fund managers selling the recommended stocks. We test whether fund
managers return the favor using their votes for analysts in a Chinese “star analyst” competition.
Managers are more likely to vote for analysts who exhibit greater “say-buy/whisper-sell”
behavior toward these managers. This suggests that analysts reduce the accuracy of their public
recommendations, thereby maintaining the value of their private advice to funds. Our findings
help explain several empirical puzzles about analyst public recommendations.
David Hirshleifer Weili Wu
Marshall School of Business Central University of Finance
University of Southern California and Economics,
3670 Trousdale Pkwy School of Finance
Los Angeles, CA 90089 Beijing
and NBER China
hirshlei@marshall.usc.edu wlwu@cufe.edu.cn
Yushui Shi
Monash University
6 Oxford
Irvine, CA 92617
yushuis@uci.edu

1. Introduction
Past research highlights a tension between analysts’ jobs delivering public information to
the market versus delivering private information to their clients. On the one hand, analysts
often issue overly optimistic stock recommendations to generate trades from a large audience
of retail investors, because naïve small investors take analysts’ public recommendations at their
face value (e.g., Malmendier and Shanthikumar 2007; Kong et al. 2021). On the other hand,
the literature has found that sell-side analysts provide useful information to a relatively small
audience of fund managers via social networks (e.g., Gu et al. 2019; Li, Mukherjee, and Sen
2021).
The dual roles of analysts suggest that to preserve the value of analysts’ private information
to institutional investors, analysts may choose to provide less-accurate information to the
public.1 This idea is consistent with the model of García and Sangiorgi (2011), who find that it
is optimal for a provider to sell either relatively precise information to a small group of
investors or relatively imprecise information to a large group of investors. In this paper, we
provide tests of this idea in the context of analyst recommendations.
We propose the following analyst recommendation strategy as a function of the analyst’s
private information. The analyst pools by issuing a favorable public recommendation about
both high and relatively low-value firm types and privately tells the fund client these separate
values. (We allow for the possibility of even lower value-types that are not recommended.) So,
the information received by the fund is strictly more accurate than the recommendation. Such
a pooling strategy (between these two value types) conceals from retail investors some of the
analyst’s private information about firm value. In consequence, the connected fund manager
who receives information from the analyst profits by buying when the value of the stock is high,
1 More accurate public recommendations make stock prices more efficient, which tends to reduce the expected profit to
investors with private information. So accurate public disclosure can come at the expense of profits to analysts’ private clients.
1

and by selling when the value of the stock is low. This is profitable as the market price has not
fully incorporated the analyst’s private information. In sum, there is say-buy/whisper-sell
behavior (or more briefly, whisper-sell behavior).2 A famous example of say-buy/whisper-sell
behavior from the U.S. occurred during the millennial Dot-com bubble, when Merrill Lynch’s
tech analyst Henry Blodget touted tech stocks publicly to investors while disparaging the same
stocks privately, calling them “dogs” and worse in private e-mails (Tharp 2002).3
A challenge to testing for whisper-sell behavior is that private communications between
analysts and fund managers are unobservable. A starting point for our empirical strategy is to
identify cases in which analysts’ public positive recommendations are accompanied by selling
by connected fund managers. However, this is a very noisy proxy for whisper-sell behavior as
it is possible that even without any communication, fund managers for their own reasons sell
even stocks that are positively recommended by analysts.
To refine our testing strategy, we exploit unique proprietary data on managers’ voting to
analysts in a “star analyst” competition in China. In this analyst competition, fund managers
privately vote for analysts, and their votes determine star analysts.4 Being a star analyst
increases an analyst’s reputation and leads to higher bonuses and greater chances of promotion
(Stickel 1992). We argue that if the analyst provides useful information to a fund manager, the
fund manager will reciprocate by giving a vote to the analyst. Therefore, we hypothesize that
whisper-sell behavior by the analyst makes fund trading more profitable, making a fund
manager more likely to vote for the analyst who exhibits more whisper-sell behavior with that
manager. To the extent that our whisper-sell measure captures whisper-sell behavior, we would
2 In principle, say-sell/whisper-buy behavior would also be plausible (recommending negatively while privately conveying
favorable information to fund managers). However, Chinese analysts rarely issue negative public recommendations. So, in
this paper, we focus on analyst’s positive recommendations and say-buy/whisper-sell behaviors.
3 A similar insight can apply in other contexts in which information providers produce both public recommendations and
private signals, as in the model of Malenko, Malenko, and Spatt (2021) on the proxy voting recommendations made by
advisory firms.
4 This ranking procedure is very similar to the U.S. counterpart of Institutional Investor analyst ranking in which the ranking
institution sends ballots to money management institutions. Moreover, the votes are not released publicly, which spares the
quid pro quo and the underlying social connections from public scrutiny.
2