NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
STEERING A SHIP IN ILLIQUID WATERS:
ACTIVE MANAGEMENT OF PASSIVE FUNDS
Naz Koont
Yiming Ma
Lubos Pastor
Yao Zeng
Working Paper 30039
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30039
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2022
The views in this paper are the responsibility of the authors, not the institutions they are affiliated
with, nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research. We are grateful for comments from
Livia Amato, Itzhak Ben-David, Alex Chinco, Zhi Da, Caitlin Dannhauser, Davidson Heath, Wei
Jiang, Xu Lu, Thomas Marta, Stefan Nagel, Anna Pavlova, Adam Reed, Christopher Reilly, John
Shim, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, Laura Veldkamp, and Russ Wermers, Liyan Yang, conference
participants at the 2023 AFA, 2023 FIRS, 2023 Workshop on Non-Bank Financial Institutions,
2023 Spring Q Group, 2022 Conference on Financial Economics and Accounting, 2022 Fixed
Income and Financial Institution Conference, 2022 Four Corners Index Investing Jamboree, 2022
Minnesota Corporate Finance Conference, 2022 Toronto Junior Finance/Macro Conference, 2022
MIT Sloan Junior Finance Conference, and seminar participants at Chicago, Columbia, Florida,
HKUST, Indiana, LSU, New York Fed, Notre Dame, SAIF, TMX Market Forum, UNC, USC,
UT Dallas, and Wharton. We thank market participants at Barclays, BlackRock, State Street, and
Vanguard—Shreya Adiraju, Joshua Barrickman, Matthew Bartolini, Stephen Laipply, Ananth
Madhavan, Jay Mauro, Jeff Meli—for many helpful conversations. We thank Livia Amato for
excellent research assistance. This research was funded in part by the Fama-Miller Center for
Research in Finance at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Naz Koont, Yiming Ma, Lubos Pastor, and Yao Zeng. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Steering a Ship in Illiquid Waters: Active Management of Passive Funds
Naz Koont, Yiming Ma, Lubos Pastor, and Yao Zeng
NBER Working Paper No. 30039
May 2022
JEL No. G12,G23
ABSTRACT
Exchange-traded funds (ETFs) are typically viewed as passive index trackers. In contrast, we
show that corporate bond ETFs actively manage their portfolios, trading off index tracking
against liquidity transformation. In our model, ETFs optimally choose creation and redemption
baskets that include cash and only a subset of index assets, especially if those assets are illiquid.
Our evidence supports the model. We find that ETFs dynamically adjust their baskets to correct
portfolio imbalances while facilitating ETF arbitrage. Basket inclusion improves bond liquidity in
general, but worsens it in periods of large imbalance between creations and redemptions, such as
the COVID-19 crisis.
Naz Koont Lubos Pastor
Columbia Business School University of Chicago
nazkoont@gmail.com Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Ave
Yiming Ma Chicago, IL 60637
Columbia University and NBER
Columbia Business School lubos.pastor@chicagobooth.edu
ym2701@columbia.edu
Yao Zeng
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
2322 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
yaozeng@wharton.upenn.edu
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w30039

1 Introduction
Exchange-tradedfunds(ETFs)areamongthemostimportantfinancialintermediaries. Their
assets under management have grown quickly since their first appearance in 1993, reaching
$7.2 trillion by the end of 2021 in the U.S. alone. This amount is about half of total assets
of U.S. equity mutual funds, and it exceeds total assets of U.S. fixed income mutual funds.
Given their large and growing footprint, ETFs seem relatively understudied.
The vast majority of ETFs track passive indexes. To manage index deviations, ETFs
rely on authorized participants (APs) to conduct arbitrage trades, in which APs create and
redeem ETF shares in exchange for baskets of securities called the “creation basket” and the
“redemption basket,” respectively. These baskets are chosen by the ETF.
We study how ETFs use creation and redemption baskets to manage their portfolios.
We find that, despite their passive image, ETFs are remarkably active in their portfolio
management. They often use baskets that deviate substantially from the underlying index,
and they adjust those baskets dynamically. By analyzing ETF baskets and their dynamics,
we gain new insights into the economics of ETFs and their impact on asset markets.
The main insight is that ETFs are active to facilitate liquidity transformation. ETF
shares tend to be more liquid than the underlying securities, in part because APs’ arbitrage
trades tend to absorb shocks to investors’ demand for ETF shares. When investors sell ETF
shares, APs can buy and redeem them; when investors buy ETF shares, APs can create and
sell them. By absorbing the trades of ETF investors, APs reduce the price impact of those
trades. APs’ arbitrage trading thus provides liquidity to investors who must trade ETFs
at short notice. This liquidity provision requires APs to trade basket securities and thus
incur transaction costs. To help reduce those costs, ETFs adjust their baskets to make them
cheaper to trade. While these basket adjustments facilitate liquidity transformation, they
also constrain the ETF’s index-tracking capacity. We argue that ETFs are active because
they care not only about index tracking but also about liquidity transformation, and because
only active basket management allows them to balance both objectives. As a result of ETFs’
active basket management, there are spillover effects from basket inclusion to the liquidity
of the underlying securities.
Another key insight, specific to bond ETFs, is that their active basket management has
significant consequences for bond market liquidity. In normal times, a bond’s inclusion in
an ETF basket makes the bond more liquid because shocks to investors’ demand for ETF
shares are largely idiosyncratic. A random mix of creations and redemptions across ETFs
1

increases the trading activity in basket bonds, improving their liquidity. That is not the case,
however, in periods when investors’ liquidity shocks are systematic, resulting in imbalances
betweencreationsandredemptions. Forexample, largeredemptionsmovemanyredemption-
basket bonds to APs’ balance sheets. The APs, who also tend to act as market makers in
these bonds, may then become reluctant to purchase more of the same bonds, reducing their
liquidity. The effect of basket inclusion on bond liquidity is thus state-dependent: positive in
normal times but negative when there is large imbalance between creations and redemptions.
Our empirical analysis focuses on U.S. corporate bond ETFs. We choose this category to
emphasize the role of liquidity transformation, which is enhanced by the relative illiquidity of
corporate bonds. Corporate bond ETFs have been growing fast, with assets tripling over the
past six years before reaching over $342 billion at the end of 2021. We analyze the baskets,
portfolios, and indexes of bond ETFs, along with the characteristics of the underlying bonds.
Our analysis uses both proprietary and non-proprietary data from 2017 to 2020.
We begin by establishing two simple facts about bond ETF baskets. First, these baskets
include a surprisingly large amount of cash. The average creation (redemption) basket
contains 4.6% (7.8%) of its assets in cash, based on the baskets pre-announced by the ETF
at the start of a trading day. The cash proportions are even larger, 11.6% (8.2%) for creation
(redemption) baskets, based on realized baskets imputed from ETF holdings. Second, ETF
baskets are concentrated—they include only a small subset of the bonds that appear in the
underlying index. Both facts are costly to the ETF in terms of index tracking.
To rationalize these facts, we build a model that highlights ETFs’ dual role of index
tracking and liquidity transformation. The model features two types of investors, patient
and impatient, and an AP. The impatient investors face a liquidity shock that forces them
to either consume or save at short notice. Investors who need to consume sell ETF shares;
those who need to save buy them. Any imbalance between the buys and sells is exploited
by the AP via an arbitrage trade. When there are more sells than buys, the AP buys ETF
shares in the market and redeems them in exchange for the redemption basket. When there
are more buys than sells, the AP sells ETF shares after creating them in exchange for the
creation basket. Either way, the AP improves the ETF’s liquidity by mitigating the price
impact of impatient investors. This liquidity improvement comes at a cost to the AP, who
incurs transaction costs by trading basket securities. To reduce those costs, the ETF finds
it optimal to use baskets that include some cash and only a subset of index securities, as we
observe in the data. However, such baskets deviate from the index, which is generally costly
to patient investors. Therefore, when designing its basket, the ETF balances the benefits of
liquidity transformation against the costs of imperfect index-tracking.
2