NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE IMPACT OF MINORITY REPRESENTATION AT MORTGAGE LENDERS
W.Scott Frame
Ruidi Huang
Erik J. Mayer
Adi Sunderam
Working Paper 30125
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30125
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2022
This paper was previously circulated under the title “Minority Loan Officers and Minorities’
Access to Mortgage Credit.” For helpful comments we thank Sam Antill, Francesco D’Acunto,
Will Dobbie, Mark Egan, Kristopher Gerardi, Paige Ouimet, James Vickery, and seminar
participants at Brigham Young University, the University of Wisconsin–Madison, Southern
Methodist University, and the Mortgage Bankers Association. We also thank conference
participants at the Mid-Atlantic Research Conference in Finance and the SFS Cavalcade. The
views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Dallas or any other entity within the Federal Reserve System. We are grateful to the Conference
of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS) for granting us access to data from NMLS Consumer
AccessSM, please see https://nmlsconsumeraccess.org/. The results and opinions are those of the
authors and do not reflect the position of the CSBS. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by W. Scott Frame, Ruidi Huang, Erik J. Mayer, and Adi Sunderam. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Impact of Minority Representation at Mortgage Lenders
W.Scott Frame, Ruidi Huang, Erik J. Mayer, and Adi Sunderam
NBER Working Paper No. 30125
June 2022
JEL No. G21,G51,J15
ABSTRACT
We study links between the labor market for loan officers and access to mortgage credit. Using
novel data matching the (near) universe of mortgage applications to loan officers, we find that
minorities are significantly underrepresented among loan officers. Minority borrowers are less
likely to complete mortgage applications, have completed applications approved, and to
ultimately take-up a loan. These disparities are significantly reduced when minority borrowers
work with minority loan officers. Minority borrowers working with minority loan officers also
have lower default rates. Our results suggest that minority underrepresentation among loan
officers has adverse effects on minority borrowers’ access to credit.
W.Scott Frame Erik J. Mayer
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Southern Methodist University
scott.frame@dal.frb.org 6212 Bishop Blvd
Dallas, TX 75275
Ruidi Huang emayer@smu.edu
Southern Methodist University
6212 Bishop Blvd Adi Sunderam
Dallas, TX 75275 Harvard Business School
ruidih@smu.edu Baker Library 359
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
asunderam@hbs.edu

Better understanding the sources of racial disparities in economic outcomes is a
focus of research and policy (Lang and Spitzer 2020; Small and Pager 2020). An emerging
literature finds that racial disparities in the labor market may beget disparities in the
provision of critical services. For instance, minority students tend to achieve better
outcomes when taught by minority teachers (Dee 2004, 2005; Fairlie, Hoffmann, and
Oreopoulos 2014) and minority patients achieve better outcomes when treated by minority
doctors (Alsan, Garrick, and Graziani 2019), yet minorities are underrepresented among
teachers and doctors. Much of the work in this literature studies contexts with significant
regulatory and competitive frictions, such as education and health care. A key question is
whether the underrepresentation of minorities in the labor force and its adverse effect on
minority consumers persist even in settings with fewer frictions and greater competition.
In this paper, we study the relationship between racial disparities in the labor market
for loan officers and economic outcomes in the highly competitive market for originating
U.S. home mortgages. We find that working with minority loan officers improves credit
access for minority mortgage applicants along several dimensions. These results suggest
that underrepresentation of minorities among loan officers may have an adverse effect on
minority access to credit in the aggregate. Home equity is an important source of household
wealth and exhibits large racial disparities (e.g., Bhutta, Chang, Dettling, Hsu, and Hewitt
2020; Gupta, Hansman, and Mabille 2021; Kermani and Wong 2021). Given the
importance of access to credit for home purchases, frictions between borrowers and lenders
related to race and ethnicity may contribute to these wealth disparities.
Our analysis leverages a novel dataset linking the confidential version of the
recently expanded Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data to information on loan
officers from the Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System (NMLS). We start our analysis
by providing a description of the racial/ethnic composition of mortgage loan officers. As
with other white-collar professions, we find that minorities are underrepresented. In 2019,
minorities accounted for 39% of the U.S. labor force, but only an estimated 15% of
mortgage loan officers.
1

We next explore whether the race/ethnicity of loan officers and applicants matters
for mortgage application completion, approval, and origination. We find that minority
applications are about 2 percentage points less likely to be completed than white
applications handled by the same white loan officer. For minority loan officers, however,
the gap in completion rates between minority and white applicants is 1-2 percentage points
smaller. We find similar effects for loan approval conditional on application completion.
We focus on “high-discretion” loan applications, those for which automated underwriting
systems do not make definitive recommendations. For these applications, we find that
minority applicants are about 3 percentage points less likely to be approved than white
applicants working with the same white loan officer. For minority officers however, the
difference in approval rates between minority and white applicants is 1-2 percentage points
smaller.
The effects we find on overall loan origination rates are economically meaningful.
Loan applications from minority borrowers are about 5 percentage points less likely to
result in an origination than applications from white borrowers handled by the same white
loan officer, but this difference is 2-4 percentage points smaller for minority officers. In
other words, minority loan officers close much of the gap in credit access between white
and minority borrowers.
We then examine whether the expanded credit access that results when minority
officers handle minority applications leads to higher default rates using loan-level data
from the Federal Housing Administration (FHA). Conditional on standard underwriting
risk factors, minority borrowers are 1.7 percentage points more likely to default than white
borrowers working with the same white loan officer. Despite the fact that minority
applications handled by minority officers are more likely to result in loan originations, the
same loans are less likely to default. Indeed, the full difference in default rates between
minority and white borrowers (i.e., the full 1.7 percentage points) disappears when the loan
officer is a minority. Our evidence on defaults cuts against simple taste-based
discrimination explanations. Under taste-based discrimination, we would expect loan
2