NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
NATURAL DISASTERS AND MUNICIPAL BONDS
Jun Kyung Auh
Jaewon Choi
Tatyana Deryugina
Tim Park
Working Paper 30280
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30280
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2022
We thank Sudheer Chava, Ana-Maria Tenekedjieva, Sumudu Watugala, participants at the
University of Oklahoma Energy and Climate Finance Research Conference, the Financial
Intermediation Research Society Meetings 2022, and the Commodity and Energy Markets
Association Meetings 2022 for insightful comments. All errors are our own. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Jun Kyung Auh, Jaewon Choi, Tatyana Deryugina, and Tim Park. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Natural Disasters and Municipal Bonds
Jun Kyung Auh, Jaewon Choi, Tatyana Deryugina, and Tim Park
NBER Working Paper No. 30280
July 2022
JEL No. G10,G14,Q54
ABSTRACT
Climate change is increasing the frequency of natural disasters, which could make municipal
bonds a riskier asset class. We study the effects of natural disasters on municipal bond returns,
exploiting the repeat sales approach to overcome the challenge that municipal bonds trade
extremely infrequently. We find substantial price effects that materialize gradually: returns of
uninsured bonds fall slowly in the weeks following a disaster, by 0.31% on average, translating
into investor losses of almost $10 billion. Source of bond revenue, bond insurance, disaster
severity, federal disaster aid, and local financial conditions all affect the magnitude of the price
effects.
Jun Kyung Auh Tatyana Deryugina
School of Business Department of Finance
Yonsei University University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
50 Yonsei-ro School of Business 504 515 East Gregory Drive, MC-520
Seodaemun-gu, Seoul Champaign, IL 61820
Korea and NBER
junkyung.auh@yonsei.ac.kr deryugin@illinois.edu
Jaewon Choi Tim Park
Department of Finance 1900 16th Street, Suite 1100
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Denver, CO 80202
jaewchoi@illinois.edu United States
Tim.Park@analysisgroup.com

Extreme weather events are becoming more frequent and more severe (Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change, 2021). In 1990–2020, the number of disaster and emergency declarations in
the United States grew by almost 7% per year on average, and estimated physical damage from
natural disasters caused by extreme weather events averaged over $11 million per affected county.1
This trend is expected to intensify with climate change. A recent survey of academics, finance
professionals, and regulators revealed that, over the next 30 years, physical risk ranks as the top
climate-relatedriskforfirmsandinvestors(StroebelandWurgler,2021). Thereisalsoawidespread
belief that asset prices underestimate climate risks. Yet studies of how physical risk is priced in
asset markets have focused largely on slow-moving risks like sea level rise or on the stock prices
of companies whose operations are geographically scattered, in which case the effects of regional
shocks may be muted and statistical power to detect such effects will be low.
We study the US municipal bond market—valued at $4 trillion in 2021 and growing rapidly—to
provide comprehensive evidence regarding when and how natural disasters affect municipal bond
returns. Given the crucial role that municipal bonds play in public financing and investment,
understanding this relationship is of paramount importance for investors, municipal bond issuers,
and fiscal policymakers. It is ex-ante unclear how natural disasters affect municipal bond markets,
for four key reasons. First, despite inflicting an evident negative economic shock in the short run,
thelonger-runeconomicimpactsofanaturaldisastermaybenegligibleorevenpositive(e.g.,Strobl,
2011; Deryugina, Kawano, and Levitt, 2018). Second, economic impacts may not correspond to
changes in outcomes that are relevant to municipal bonds (e.g., tax revenue). Third, post-disaster
aid may counteract the economic shock of the disaster, while municipal bond insurance may make
the economic consequences of the disaster irrelevant to outstanding bonds. Finally, the unique
nature of the municipal bond market—extreme illiquidity and a retail-heavy investor base—makes
the speed and extent of bond price reactions following disasters an interesting open empirical
question.
Combining county-level weekly bond returns with data on over 2,000 extreme weather events that
occurred in 2005–2018, we use event-study and difference-in-differences methodologies to estimate
how natural disasters affect bond prices. We implement the repeat sales approach, originally
1Sources: The Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Spatial Hazards Events and Losses Database for
the US. Damage includes both crop and property damage and is reported in 2018 dollars.
1

designedtocircumventthesparse-tradingprobleminreal-estatemarkets,toovercomethechallenge
thatthetypicalmunicipalbondtradesfewerthanthreetimesperyear. Ournoveluseofthismethod
in the municipal bond market yields more than a ten-fold increase in the number of counties for
which we observe weekly bond prices. Crucially, it also enables us to examine ex-post returns
immediately following disasters, which is crucial for understanding how physical climate risk—as
opposed to regulatory and transitional climate risks—is priced ex-ante in financial markets.
We find that, with uninsured municipal bonds, natural disasters substantially reduce returns for
at least 20 weeks following an event. The average decline in returns is 31 basis points over the
post-event period. The overall price decline is driven almost solely by uninsured revenue (REV)
bonds, which are backed by revenue from specific public projects: on average, 20-week cumulative
returns of such bonds are 51 basis points lower following a natural disaster. In contrast, price
impacts are economically negligible and statistically insignificant for uninsured general-obligation
(GO) bonds, which are backed by overall municipal tax revenue, suggesting that the stability of
bond returns depends heavily on revenue diversification.2 We also show that the conventional
approach to measuring bond returns results in fewer than 30 county-disaster pairs and does not
provide sufficient statistical power to detect post-disaster price impacts.
The repeat sales approach also enables us to examine the speed with which investors react to
natural disasters. Our results show that bond returns fall gradually rather than immediately in
the post-disaster period, while the return response tends to peak after around ten weeks. These
results are consistent with the occurrence of an under-reaction or a sluggish response by municipal
bond investors.
The magnitude of the average effect implies investor losses of $9.25 million per disaster-affected
county or $9.6 billion across all disaster-affected counties in our bond sample.3 The per-county
investorlossisalmosthalfoftheestimatedphysicaldamage,whichaverages$18.8millionpercounty
in our sample. Although the latter figure does not include indirect damage to the economy (e.g.,
through reduced economic activity) or account for post-disaster aid, the comparison underscores
the fact that estimated investor losses are not small.
2Monthly-level estimates yield very similar insights.
3The dollar value estimation is based on the par value of uninsured revenue bonds.
2