NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RESTORING CONFIDENCE IN TROUBLED FINANCIAL
INSTITUTIONS AFTER A FINANCIAL CRISIS
Charles W. Calomiris
Mark Carlson
Working Paper 30226
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30226
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2022
There are no funding sources to disclose and no conflicts. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research or of the Federal Reserve System.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Charles W. Calomiris and Mark Carlson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Restoring Confidence in Troubled Financial Institutions After a Financial Crisis
Charles W. Calomiris and Mark Carlson
NBER Working Paper No. 30226
July 2022
JEL No. G21,G28,N21,N41
ABSTRACT
After an unprecedented number of banks suspended operations during the Panic of 1893, the
head regulator of banks chartered by the United States government allowed about 100 banks to
reopen after certifying their solvency. We evaluate whether actions by bank owners to change
management, contract with depositors to extend liability maturity structure, write off bad assets,
and/or inject capital affected bank survival and deposit retention. This historical episode is
particularly informative because there was no expectation of government intervention. We find
that contracting with depositors provided short-term benefits while dealing with bad assets was
key for long-run viability.
Charles W. Calomiris
Columbia Business School
Kravis 1101
665 W 130th St.
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
cc374@columbia.edu
Mark Carlson
Federal Reserve Board
20th and Constitution Ave., NW
Washington, DC 20551
mark.a.carlson@frb.gov

Since 2010, considerable effort has been devoted to planning for the orderly resolution of failing
banks and similar financial institutions by both financial regulators and bankers themselves amid reforms to
the banking industry in the wake of the disruptive collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008. These efforts have
included requirements for, and development of, living wills for banks, bolstering the loss-absorbing capacity
of banks, and other prudential measures (see, for instance, Financial Stability Board 2014). A key component
for ensuring an orderly resolution of these levered institutions is maintaining the confidence of the banks’
depositors and other liability holders. However, one aspect of such plans remains particularly hard to
evaluate: gauging ex-ante which measures banks and regulators might undertake during a crisis would be
most useful for promoting confidence in a resolution plan.
This paper sheds historical light on that question by using a prior crisis to identify actions that might
be effective in maintaining market confidence. During the banking crisis of 1893 a large number of national
banks were forced to suspend operations but were allowed to reopen after the management and equity
holders presented regulators with a credible plan for continued operation. The actions that the banks could
take included agreements with depositors to extend the maturity of their deposits, equity injections, write-
downs of bad assets, and replacing the management. We analyze which of these actions are most closely
linked with the continued existence of the banks during the years following the panic and with the retention
of deposits. We separately consider both the short- and long-run effects of the various actions.
The Panic of 1893 was one of the most severe panics of the National Banking Era, and indeed of US
financial history. The panic featured both real economic challenges, as business bankruptcies rose and the
economy started to tip into a severe recession, and notable financial frictions, as the New York
Clearinghouse suspended operations in the midst of the panic and the interbank correspondent network froze.
Loss of confidence in the banks by depositors resulted in heavy deposit withdrawals and widespread bank
closures. To promote the recovery of the banking sector, the Comptroller of the Currency, the chief regulator
for national banks (the banks chartered and examined by the national government), allowed national banks to
reopen so long as their examiners determined that the banks were solvent and so long as they had a plan to
maintain viability. Of the 113 national banks that closed in the panic, nearly 100 were allowed to reopen.
1

This episode is particularly illuminating about the effectiveness of various actions taken to promote
confidence in banks being resolved because of the clear absence of any possibility of government protection
or bailouts.1 There was no deposit insurance, no government capital support, and no lender of last resort (the
Federal Reserve System was founded in 1913). In our case, confidence in the reorganization of the banks was
due almost exclusively to actions taken by the management and equity holders of the banks. The role of the
government was largely limited to bank examiners (or their superiors at the Office of the Comptroller of the
Currency) expressing confidence that banks were solvent, reviewing action plans by bank owners, and in a
limited number of cases requiring changes to the Board of Directors of the bank. In recent times, some argue
that perceptions about public sector intervention policies not only affect bank failure risk at the time of the
intervention, but also that these policies might encourage banks to take excessive risks during normal times.
Furthermore, intervention policies, if perceived as unwarranted or unfair, may sour public opinion on actions
that may be needed to avoid costly disruptions to the financial sector. By examining restructurings in a world
without government interventions, all of those confounding influences are avoided, thereby helping one to
more clearly identify which actions to support confidence during a resolution will be most consistent with the
ex-ante expectation and ex-post realization of minimal government support.
Restoring depositor confidence in the 1890s required more than convincing depositors that their bank
was solvent (i.e., that the value of its assets exceeded the value of its liabilities). As several studies have
shown (Calomiris and Wilson 2004, Calomiris and Carlson 2016A, Calomiris and Jaremski 2019), depositors
required that banks maintain very low risks of default on deposits, and would withdraw funds from banks
that failed to do so, even if those banks were solvent. For a reopening bank to succeed in reestablishing
depositor confidence, it had to meet a high hurdle of credibly signaling its resiliency. While, in today’s world
of deposit insurance, failing banks are resolved without loss or even inconvenience to retail depositors
1 It may also be a unique situation for an analysis of this question. There are three aspects that exist simultaneously here
that, to our knowledge, did not coincide at any other point in U.S., and possibly world, history. First, the episode
involves a large enough number of banks to be able to conduct statistical analysis. Second, only some banks suspended
in towns or states while other did not; thus the reopening banks had to compete with banks that never closed. Three,
there was no government liquidity or solvency support; confidence needed to be restored through private actions alone.
2