NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SCREENING ADAPTIVE CARTELS
Juan M. Ortner
Sylvain Chassang
Kei Kawai
Jun Nakabayashi
Working Paper 30219
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30219
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2022
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2022 by Juan M. Ortner, Sylvain Chassang, Kei Kawai, and Jun Nakabayashi. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Screening Adaptive Cartels
Juan M. Ortner, Sylvain Chassang, Kei Kawai, and Jun Nakabayashi
NBER Working Paper No. 30219
July 2022
JEL No. C57,C72,D44,H57,L4
ABSTRACT
We propose an equilibrium theory of data-driven antitrust oversight in which regulators launch
investigations on the basis of suspicious bidding patterns and cartels can adapt to the statistical
screens used by regulators. We emphasize the use of asymptotically safe tests, i.e. tests that are
passed with probability approaching one by competitive firms, regardless of the underlying
economic environment. Our main result establishes that screening for collusion with safe tests is a
robust improvement over laissez-faire. Safe tests do not create new collusive equilibria, and do
not hurt competitive industries. In addition, safe tests can have strict bite, including unraveling all
collusive equilibria in some settings. We provide evidence that cartel adaptation to regulatory
oversight is a real concern.
Juan M. Ortner Kei Kawai
Boston University Department of Economics
270 Bay State Rd. University of California, Berkeley
Boston, MA 02215 530 Evans Hall #3880
jortner@bu.edu Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
Sylvain Chassang kei@berkeley.edu
Department of Economics
Princeton University Jun Nakabayashi
Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building Kindai University
Princeton, NJ 08544 3-4-1 Kowakae
and NBER Higashiosaka City
chassang@princeton.edu Osaka 577-8502
Japan
nakabayashi.1@eco.kindai.ac.jp

1 Introduction
Competition authorities commonly rely on statistical screens to detect and investigate col-
lusion between firms.1 Even if formal prosecution cannot rely on statistical evidence alone,
detection tools can greatly facilitate the work of competition authorities. Such evidence can
be used in court to obtain warrants or authorization for a more intrusive investigation, ulti-
mately leading to actionable evidence and convictions (see Imhof et al., 2018, for a concrete
example).2 Statistical evidence may be helpful in convincing cartel members to apply to
leniency programs. Stakeholders other than antitrust authorities may also find statistical
screens useful. For example, plaintiffs in civil antitrust complaints can use the results of
statistical screens to provide sufficient grounds to state a claim under the Sherman Act.3 4
However, this growth in the use of statistical screens raises numerous questions: Do firms
adapt to the statistical tests implemented by competition authorities? If so, what is the im-
pact of such screens in equilibrium? Can the tests backfire and either strengthen cartels, or
hurt competitive firms? Can we find tests that cause no harm, and yet reduce the incentives
to form cartels? We provide theory and evidence addressing these questions.
We propose a model of collusion in the shadow of an antitrust authority. A group of
firms repeatedly participates in a first-price procurement auction. We allow firms to observe
arbitrarysignalsaboutoneanother, andallowbidders’coststobecorrelatedwithinperiods.5
1Competition authorities that use statistical analysis or algorithms to screen for collusion include those
in Brazil, South Korea, Switzerland and United Kingdom. A report by the OECD (2018) gives a brief
description of the screening programs used in Brazil, Switzerland and the U.K. A document titled “Cartel
Enforcement Regime of Korea and Its Recent Development” maintained by the Fair Trade Commission of
Korea describes South Korea’s bid screening program.
2Baker and Rubinfeld (1999) give an overview of the use of statistical evidence in court for antitrust
litigation. In some jurisdictions, statistical evidence from screens have been used successfully to build a
collusion case in court. See Mena-Labarthe (2015) for a case-study from Mexico.
3Federal rules of civil procedure in the U.S. requires a statement showing that the plaintiff is entitled to
relief. Failure to provide grounds of entitlement to relief can result in dismissal of the complaint.
4Screensforcartelshaveawiderangeofotherusesaswell. Forexample,screeningcanhelpprocurement
offices counter suspected bidding rings by more aggressively soliciting new bidders or adopting auction
mechanisms that are less susceptible to collusion. Screening may also be helpful for internal auditors and
compliance officers of complicit firms to identify collusion and help contain potential legal risks arising from
compliance failures.
5Our results extend as is if costs are correlated across periods via a publicly observed exogenous time-
2

At a finite date T, the antitrust authority observes the history of bids placed by firms, and
performs a screening test to determine whether or not they acted competitively. Firms that
don’t pass the test are further investigated, and may incur penalties if found guilty of bid-
rigging. Investigation may also be costly to non-cartel members. We say that the tests
used by the antitrust authority are asymptotically safe if and only if competitive bidders
pass with probability approaching one as data size becomes large under all environments
in the support of beliefs. Our companion papers Chassang et al. (2022) and Kawai et al.
(2022b) develop asymptotically safe tests and illustrate their relevance by applying them to
procurement data from Japan and the US.
Our main set of results shows that antitrust oversight based on asymptotically safe tests
is a robust improvement over laissez-faire. First, we show that regulation based on firm-
level asymptotically safe tests does not significantly expand the set of enforceable collusive
schemes available to cartels. Hence, asymptotically safe tests don’t increase firms’ incentives
to form a cartel. This addresses a concern raised by Cyrenne (1999) and Harrington (2004)
that some natural screens against collusion may backfire and enhance the ability of cartels
to collude. Second, we establish by example that asymptotically safe tests can have strict
bite. In complete information settings, optimally colluding bidders submit nearly tied bids.
Testing for an excessive mass of close bids yields an asymptotically safe test whenever firms
facestrictlypositivebidpreparationcosts. Thissafetestcausescollusiveequilibriatounravel
for an open range of discount factors.
Additionally, consistentwiththeworkofWollmann(2019)andCunninghametal.(2021),
we provide suggestive evidence that cartels do in fact adapt to regulatory screens. Tests of
frequent close bids turn out to be similar to variance screens frequently used by regulators
(Abrantes-Metz et al., 2005, Imhof et al., 2016) that flag auctions with low bid dispersion,
i.e. auctions whose bids are unusually close together. If regulators scrutinize auctions with
close bids, a cartel seeking to avoid scrutiny may adapt by instructing its members to refrain
varying state.
3