NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INTERMEDIARY BALANCE SHEETS AND THE TREASURY YIELD CURVE
Wenxin Du
Benjamin M. Hébert
Wenhao Li
Working Paper 30222
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30222
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2022, Revised May 2023
A portion of this research was conducted at the Becker-Friedman Institute, whose hospitality B.
Hébert gratefully acknowledges. We would like to thank Adrien Auclert, Patrick Augustin, Bruno
Biais, Rohan Kekre, Darrell Duffie, Michael Fleming, Thierry Foucault, Valentin Haddad,
Terrence Hendershott, Sebastian Infante, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Ralph Koijen, Toomas Laarits,
Tim Landvoigt, Stefan Nagel, Vania Stavrakeva, Dominik Supera, and Fabrice Tourre for
insightful comments, as well as seminar and conference participants at Bank of England, BIS,
Boston College, Chicago Fed, Cleveland Fed, CTFC, Cornell, CUHK, Fixed Income and
Financial Institutions Conference, Florida International University, Washington University in St.
Louis, NBER LTAP, HEC Paris, HKU, Duke, Michigan, Treasury Office for Financial Research,
University of British Columbia, UC Berkeley, USC, and UT Austin Junior Macro. We in
particular would like to thank Ken Singleton for both his insightful feedback and for sharing his
term structure estimation code. We thank Filippo Cavaleri for excellent research assistance. The
views in this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as
reflecting the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or
the National Bureau of Economic Research. All remaining errors are our own.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Wenxin Du, Benjamin M. Hébert, and Wenhao Li. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Intermediary Balance Sheets and the Treasury Yield Curve
Wenxin Du, Benjamin M. Hébert, and Wenhao Li
NBER Working Paper No. 30222
July 2022, Revised May 2023
JEL No. F3,G12,G15,G2
ABSTRACT
We document a regime change in the Treasury market post-Global Financial Crisis (GFC):
dealers switched from net short to net long Treasury bonds. We construct “net-long” and
“netshort” curves that account for balance sheet and financing costs, and show that actual yields
moved from the net short curve pre-GFC to the net long curve post-GFC. Our theory shows the
regime shift caused negative swap spreads and co-movement among swap spreads, dealer
positions, and covered-interest-parity violations. Furthermore, the effects of various monetary and
regulatory policies are regime-dependent. We highlight Treasury supply as a plausible driver of
this regime shift.
Wenxin Du Wenhao Li
Booth School of Business University of Southern California
University of Chicago Marshall School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue Los Angeles, CA
Chicago, IL 60637 liwenhao@marshall.usc.edu
and NBER
Wenxin.Du@chicagobooth.edu
Benjamin M. Hébert
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
bhebert@stanford.edu
A internet appendix is available at https://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w30222

Introduction
Prior to the GFC, yields on Treasury bonds were below the fixed rates on interest rate swaps
(specifically, overnight index swaps (OIS)) of the same maturity. This positive swap-Treasury
spread (“swap spread,” for short) pre-GFC was in part due to the “convenience yield” of the Trea-
sury bonds (à la Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012)). However, post-GFC, yields on
U.S. Treasury bonds have been consistently above the corresponding swap rates, suggesting that
Treasurybondsarenowinsomesense“inconvenient.” Likewise,priortotheGFC,CIPdeviations
were almost non-existent, but have emerged as significant and persistent following the crisis. The
emergenceofCIPdeviationsandthechangeinthesignofswapspreadsarebothwell-documented
intheliterature.1
We provide new empirical evidence to link swap spreads and CIP deviations with regimes in
whichprimarydealersarenetlongornetshortwithrespecttoTreasurybonds. Figure1illustrates
a significant change in the Treasury market over the past twenty years. Pre-GFC, primary dealers
onnetmaintainedashortpositioninTreasurybonds,andtheswapspreadwaspositive. Post-GFC,
primary dealers switched to a net long position in Treasury bonds, and the swap spread became
negative. Thatis,dealerswereshortTreasurybondswhenthosebondshadyieldslowerthanswap
rates, and became long Treasury bonds once those bonds had higher yields than swap rates. The
signswitchintheswapspreadexactlycoincidedwiththesignswitchindealers’netposition.
We explain the collection of evidence in Figure 1 via a unified framework that incorporates
the convenience (or lack thereof) of Treasury bonds, covered interest rate parity (CIP) deviations,
and primary dealers’ net Treasury positions. Our framework emphasizes the role of balance-sheet
constrained dealers in the Treasury market. This framework naturally leads to regimes in which
dealersarenetlong,netshort,orflatwithrespecttoTreasurybonds. Intuitively,inthelongregime,
Treasuryyieldshouldbeabovetheswaprateofthesamematuritytocompensateforbalancesheet
costs, while in the short regime, both balance sheet costs and financing spreads lower Treasury
yieldsrelativetoswaprates.
Our paper shows that the Treasury market regime is central to understanding pricing dynam-
1On the sign switch for long-maturity LIBOR swap spreads, see Klingler and Sundaresan (2019) and Jermann
(2020). On the sign switch at all maturities for OIS swaps, which are swaps based on the effective federal funds
rate, see Augustin et al. (2021) and Fleckenstein and Longstaff (2021). On the CIP deviations, see Du, Tepper, and
Verdelhan(2018b).
1

ics and the effects of policy implications. Specifically, relative to the existing literature on swap
spreads and CIP deviations, our main contributions are four-fold. First, we quantitatively demon-
strate that the same balance sheet costs that rationalize CIP violations can also rationalize swap
spreads, both before and after the GFC (i.e. across regimes), after properly accounting for the
differences between the financing rates of long and short positions. Second, we show that deal-
ers’actualnetTreasurybondpositionsco-movewiththeirincentivetoactasarbitrageursbetween
Treasury bonds and swaps. That is, dealers’ net Treasury demand curves are motivated by arbi-
trage. Third, we propose a framework to endogenize dealers’ position, and suggest that Treasury
supplyisasignificantdriveroftheregimeshiftandhenceofnegativeOISswapspreadsatallma-
turities (complementing the pension demand channel of Klingler and Sundaresan (2019), which
is relevant primarily at the 30yr maturity). Lastly, we show that effects of a wide range of mone-
tary policies and regulatory policies are regime-dependent, and use our framework to explain why
Treasury yields fell relative to other interest rates during the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) but
roseduringtheMarch2020COVID-19crisis(He,Nagel,andSong(2022)andDuffie(2020)).
Ourformalanalysisproceedsinthefollowingsteps. Wefirstderivewhatwecallthe“net-long”
and“net-short”curves. ThenetlongcurvedescribesaTreasuryyieldabovewhichadealerwould
always want to be net long Treasury bonds, regardless of its beliefs about future Treasury yields.
Similarly,thenetshortcurveprovidesayieldbelowwhichadealerwouldalwaysbewillingtobe
net short the bond. We construct these curves taking the interest rate swap curve and the structure
ofCIPviolationsasgiven. Ourconstructionusesinterest-rateswapstomeasurediscountratesfree
from balance sheet costs, CIP violations to measure balance sheet costs,2 and takes into account
thespreadsbetweenfinancingratesanddiscountrates.
TheuseofswapratesandCIPviolationsismotivatedbyasingleassumption: thatallzero-cost,
zero-balance-sheet trading strategies are at least weakly unprofitable under a common stochastic
discount factor (SDF).3 This assumption allows us to compare the strategy of financing the pur-
chase of a Treasury bond with the strategy of borrowing unsecured and engaging in CIP arbitrage
(the difference between these is a zero-cost, zero-balance-sheet strategy). We use this comparison
toderiveournetlongcurve,andconstructournetshortcurveinasimilarmanner.
2TheinterpretationofthesecostsisconsistentwiththeviewofJermann(2020)thatswapspreadsareaffectedby
“bondholdingcosts,”butmorespecificinthatthesecostsaffectbothswapspreadandCIPdeviations.
3This assumption is implicit in the models of Jermann (2020) and Du et al. (2022). Under this assumption, the
SDFpriceszero-costandzero-balance-sheetstrategies(e.g. derivativesincludingswapswithnegligiblebalancesheet
costandzeroinitialcost),butdoesnotdirectlydeterminethepriceofcashsecuritiessuchasTreasuries.
2