NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANK LIQUID ASSETS, THE PORTFOLIO MOTIVE, AND CAPITAL REQUIREMENTS
René M. Stulz
Alvaro G. Taboada
Mathijs A. van Dijk
Working Paper 30340
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30340
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2022, Revised December 2024
We are grateful for excellent research assistance from Jonas Elenskis, Byungwook Kim, and
Leandro Sanz. We thank Mike Wittry for useful discussions. We are grateful to Viral Acharya,
Allen Berger, Mark Carey, Darrell Duffie, Gene Fama, Mark Flannery, Stefan Lewellen, Steven
Ongena, Raluca Roman, Til Schuermann, Jeremy Stein, Kairong Xiao, Andrew Winton, and
participants at the Virtual Corporate Finance seminar, the 2023 Financial Intermediation Research
Society conference, the 2024 Carnegie-Penn State-Pitt Conference, and seminars at Columbia
University, De Nederlandsche Bank, Erasmus University Rotterdam, Ohio State University,
Tilburg University, University of Amsterdam, University of Chicago, University of Texas at San
Antonio, and University of Zurich for comments. Stulz is at times retained by financial institutions
or their attorneys as a consultant or as an expert. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by René M. Stulz, Alvaro G. Taboada, and Mathijs A. van Dijk. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Bank Liquid Assets, the Portfolio Motive, and Capital Requirements
René M. Stulz, Alvaro G. Taboada, and Mathijs A. van Dijk
NBER Working Paper No. 30340
August 2022, Revised December 2024
JEL No. G21, G28
ABSTRACT
Banks hold large amounts of liquid assets. These amounts grow sharply for the largest banks after
the global financial crisis (GFC). The standard transaction and precautionary motives for holding
liquid assets cannot explain the size and evolution of bank liquid asset holdings. Motivated by the
deposit view of banks, we introduce a portfolio motive such that banks hold more liquid assets
when they have poorer lending opportunities, making loans and liquid assets substitutes. We find
support for the portfolio motive and for its prediction that capital requirement increases help
explain the post-GFC growth in the largest banks’ liquid asset holdings.
René M. Stulz Mathijs A. van Dijk
The Ohio State University Rotterdam School of Management
Fisher College of Business Erasmus University
806A Fisher Hall P.O. Box 1738
Columbus, OH 43210-1144 3000 DR Rotterdam
and NBER The Netherlands
stulz@cob.osu.edu madijk@rsm.nl
Alvaro G. Taboada
Mississippi State University
College of Business
310-H McCool Hall, P.O. Box 9580
Mississippi State, MS 39762
ataboada@business.msstate.edu

1. Introduction
Banks hold large amounts of liquid assets. At the end of 2019, banks, in aggregate, held 25.4% of their
balance sheet in liquid assets (defined as assets with minimal credit risk that can be sold rapidly with little
price pressure), compared to roughly 10% for non-financial firms. The importance of liquid assets for banks
changes sharply over time. In particular, the growth of liquid assets of the banking system was roughly fifty
percentage points lower than the growth of deposits in the eleven years before the global financial crisis
(GFC), so that during those years liquid assets fell as a percentage of bank assets. In contrast, the growth
of liquid assets was roughly fifty percentage points higher than the growth of deposits in the eleven years
after the GFC. As a result, liquid assets increased sharply from just before the GFC to just before the COVID
crisis, but mostly for large banks (those with assets greater than $50 billion in 2018 dollars) as their liquid
assets increased on average from roughly 13% to 26% of bank assets over that period while they increased
from roughly 17% to 18% of bank assets for other banks. A large literature explains empirically the liquid
asset holdings of non-financial firms using the transaction and precautionary motives for holding liquid
assets (Keynes, 1936). There is no equivalent literature for liquid asset holdings of banks, even though these
holdings are generally higher than bank holdings of loans to businesses, are important for financial stability,
and impact the effectiveness of monetary policy. Consequently, despite their importance for banks and for
the financial system, we have little understanding of why bank liquid assets are so high, vary so much across
banks and across time, and increase so much after the GFC. In this paper, we address this gap in the
literature.
We find that the transaction and precautionary motives for holding liquid assets cannot explain the
time-series and cross-sectional patterns in liquid asset holdings of banks. We introduce a portfolio motive
for holding liquid assets for banks and show that it helps make sense of these patterns. With this motive,
banks are profitable because they can invest deposits at a higher rate than the rate they pay on deposits.
When a bank runs out of profitable lending opportunities, investing deposits in liquid assets can be the most
advantageous use of these deposits. Our empirical work provides support for the portfolio motive. It also
demonstrates that post-GFC increases in capital requirements that reduce the profitability of holding loans
1

relative to holding liquid assets help explain why bank liquid assets are much higher after the GFC for the
largest banks.
The traditional view of banks is that they make loans funded with deposits (Diamond and Dybvig,
1983). We call this view the lending view of banks. From this perspective, banks have transaction and
precautionary motives to hold liquid assets. Specifically, banks require a buffer of liquid assets to cope with
unexpected cash outflows since the other assets of a bank are largely illiquid. A bank can fail if it does not
have enough liquid assets to pay off depositors because it may be unable to sell illiquid loans in time or at
prices near their fundamental value (Diamond and Kashyap, 2016).
An alternative view is that banks gather deposits and find ways to earn an income on the funds raised
through deposits. These deposits provide liquidity services that are valuable, so that banks can create value
on the liability side of their balance sheet even if they do not create value on the asset side (DeAngelo and
Stulz, 2015; Hanson, Shleifer, Stein, and Vishny, 2015). We call this view the deposit view. Supporting the
deposit view is evidence showing that deposit-taking is a more important source of value creation for banks
than lending (Egan, Lewellen, and Sunderam, 2022). With the deposit view, banks have transaction and
precautionary motives to hold liquid assets as with the lending view. However, in addition, banks may
choose to hold more liquid assets than required for the transaction and precautionary motives because
investing in liquid assets is the best use of the funds raised through deposits after they have made all the
positive net present value (NPV) loans available to them.
In Hanson et al. (2015), traditional banks “create money-like claims by holding illiquid fixed-income
assets to maturity.” These illiquid fixed-income assets can be loans or securities. To understand holdings
of liquid assets, we take a broader view of bank balance sheets than Hanson et al. (2015) in that we explicitly
consider that banks also invest in liquid assets. Unless liquid assets are strictly dominated by illiquid assets,
banks will hold both liquid and illiquid assets. This broader portfolio view dates at least from Klein (1971).
In Klein (1971), banks invest in different asset classes such that, at the margin, they earn the same risk-
adjusted expected return from each asset class. In such a model, if loans become less profitable, banks hold
more other assets, including liquid assets, so that loans and liquid assets are substitutes. We call this the
2