NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
UNCONVENTIONAL MONETARY POLICY ACCORDING TO HANK
Eric R. Sims
Jing Cynthia Wu
Ji Zhang
Working Paper 30329
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30329
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2022
We are grateful to Drew Creal, Soroush Ghazi, Jasmine Xiao, as well as seminar and conference
participants at NBER Summer Institute Monetary Economics Meeting, Penn State University,
Tsinghua University, the University of Alabama, 2022 Renmin University of China School of
Finance Workshop, and Marquette University for helpful comments. Sims and Wu acknowledge
support from the National Science Foundation under Grant No. SES-1949107. Ji acknowledges
support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.72003102). Correspondence:
esims1@nd.edu, cynthia.wu@nd.edu, zhangji@pbcsf.tsinghua.edu.cn. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Eric R. Sims, Jing Cynthia Wu, and Ji Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Unconventional Monetary Policy According to HANK
Eric R. Sims, Jing Cynthia Wu, and Ji Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 30329
August 2022
JEL No. E12,E52
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the implications of household heterogeneity for the effectiveness of
quantitative easing (QE). We consider a heterogeneous agent New Keynesian (HANK) model
with uninsurable household income risk. Financial intermediaries are subject to an endogenous
leverage constraint that allows QE to matter. We find that macro aggregates react very similarly
to a QE shock in the HANK model compared to a representative agent (RANK) version of the
model. This finding is robust across different micro- and macro- distributions of wealth.
Eric R. Sims Ji Zhang
Department of Economics Tsinghua University
University of Notre Dame 43 Chengfu Road
3060 Jenkins Nanovic Hall PBC School of Finance
Notre Dame, IN 46556 Haidian District, Beijing, 100083
and NBER China
esims1@nd.edu zhangji@pbcsf.tsinghua.edu.cn
Jing Cynthia Wu
Department of Economics
3060 Jenkins Nanovic Hall
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556
and NBER
cynthia.wu@nd.edu

1 Introduction
In response to the Great Recession, the Federal Reserve (Fed) lowered its short-term pol-
icy rate to zero. With its conventional stabilization tool unavailable, the Fed resorted to
unconventional policy to provide support to the US economy. The most prominent of its
unconventional policy tools was quantitative easing (QE, also referred to as large scale as-
set purchases, or LSAPs). Purchasing longer-term Treasuries and agency mortgage-backed
securities (MBSs), the Fed more than doubled its balance sheet within the span of a few
months in late 2008. By the time it halted active asset purchases in the middle part of the
2010s, the Fed’s balance sheet had quintupled in size relative to its pre-Great Recession level.
The Fed resumed active asset purchases in 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic,
doubling the size of its balance sheet in less than two years.
There is a large and still growing literature on the effectiveness of QE. Most theoretical
work in this literature is based on representative agent New Keynesian (RANK) models –
see, for example, Gertler and Karadi (2013), Sims and Wu (2020, 2021a), and Sims, Wu
and Zhang (forthcoming). At the same time, there has been significant interest in the
implications of micro-level heterogeneity for macroeconomic fluctuations in general, and in
particular with respect to the transmission of monetary policy; i.e., the heterogeneous agent
New Keynesian (HANK) literature (e.g. Kaplan, Moll and Violante 2018, McKay et al.
2016, Auclert 2019, Acharya and Dogra 2020, Alves, Kaplan, Moll and Violante 2020, Ravn
and Sterk 2020, and others). To date, however, this literature has mainly considered the
implications of heterogeneity for conventional monetary policy in the form of movements in
short-terminterestrates. Thegoalofourpaperistomarrythesetwoliteraturestoinvestigate
whether, and to what extent, household heterogeneity matters for the effectiveness of QE.1
1The one exception of which we are aware is Cui and Sterk (2021). However, the underlying frictions for
QEtomatterdifferinthetwopapers. OurpaperfollowstheQEliteratureandfeaturesfrictionsonfinancial
intermediaries. QE transmits through intermediaries and impacts the real economy via investment. In
contrast,CuiandSterk(2021)followmorecloselytheHANKliterature,withtwotypesofassetshouseholds
can hold. The main mechanism through which QE works in their model is through household marginal
propensities to consume out of two types of assets, not via intermediaries or through firm investment.
2

We develop a quantitative general equilibrium model with household heterogeneity and
scope for QE to matter. Households face uninsurable idiosyncratic unemployment ris and
endogenously supply labor. They may save via short-term deposits with financial interme-
diaries, subject to a borrowing constraint, and receive dividends from their ownership in
production firms and financial intermediaries. Financial intermediaries engage in maturity
transformation, standing between households who save via short-term deposits, and produc-
tion firms who float long-term debt to finance investment. Financial intermediaries face an
endogenous leverage constraint, and production firms are required to finance a fraction of
their investment by issuing long-term bonds. Prices and nominal wages are sticky. Central
bank purchases of long-term assets can ease the leverage constraint facing intermediaries,
resulting in lower interest rate spreads and more investment. We refer to an exogenous
increase in central bank long-term asset holdings as a QE shock.
In our benchmark specification, we assume that all households receive the same dividend
payouteachperiod. TheresponsesofaggregatevariablestoaQEshockarenearlyidenticalto
arepresentativeagent(RANK)versionofthemodel, eventhoughtheHANKversionfeatures
substantialwealthinequalityduetouninsurableemploymentriskandaborrowingconstraint.
The only noticeable difference is the consumption response of the very poorest households
in the HANK version, which increases sharply after a QE shock. But this distributional
difference has little impact on aggregate variables.
We consider robustness of our results with respect to both the micro- and macro- distri-
butions of wealth. First, regarding the micro distribution, we allow a more general dividend
distribution rule, in which dividends vary, potentially non-linearly, with household wealth.
We explore the implications of this distribution rule for popular inequality metrics, such
as the Lorenz Curve and the Gini Coefficient. With a significant gap between dividends
received by the richest and poorest households, and sufficient non-linearity in the relation-
ship between dividend receipt and wealth, our model can generate more wealth inequality
compared to our benchmark specification. However, different degrees of micro-level wealth
3