NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
STRESS, ETHNICITY, AND PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOR
Johannes Haushofer
Sara Lowes
Abednego Musau
David M. Ndetei
Nathan Nunn
Moritz Poll
Nancy Qian
Working Paper 30363
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30363
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2022
We thank the participants for their time; the Busara Center for Behavioral Economics, Nairobi for
implementing the study; and Clemens Kirschbaum, Ph.D., Technische Universität Dresden,
Germany, for analyzing the salivary cortisol samples. This study was approved by the Princeton
IRB (Protocol #7200), as well as the Kenya Medical Research Institute (Protocol #494) and the
Kenyan Pharmacy and Poisons Board (PPB/ECCT/15/12/04/2016(37)). Harvard, Northwestern,
and Bocconi University IRBs and the NBER IRB ceded review to Princeton after initial approval.
It was pre-registered at https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/3937/. We are grateful for
funding provided by the NSF. We thank Joris Mueller for stellar research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Johannes Haushofer, Sara Lowes, Abednego Musau, David M. Ndetei, Nathan Nunn,
Moritz Poll, and Nancy Qian. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Stress, Ethnicity, and Prosocial Behavior
Johannes Haushofer, Sara Lowes, Abednego Musau, David M. Ndetei, Nathan Nunn, Moritz
Poll, and Nancy Qian
NBER Working Paper No. 30363
August 2022
JEL No. O12,Z10
ABSTRACT
While observational evidence suggests that people behave more prosocially towards members of
their own ethnic group, many laboratory studies fail to find this effect. One possible explanation
is that coethnic preference only emerges during times of stress. To test this hypothesis, we
pharmacologically increase levels of the stress hormone cortisol, after which participants
complete laboratory experiments with coethnics and noncoethnics. We find mixed evidence that
increased cortisol decreases prosocial behavior. Coethnic preferences do not vary with cortisol.
However, in contrast to previous studies, we find strong and robust evidence of coethnic
preference.
Johannes Haushofer Nathan Nunn
Department of Economics Vancouver School of Economics
Stockholm University University of British Columbia
Universitetsvägen 10 A 6000 Iona Drive
Stockholm 106 91 Sweden Vancouver, BC V6T 2E8
and Busara Center for Behavioral Economics, Canada
Nairobi, Kenya and NBER
and also NBER nathan.nunn@ubc.ca
johannes.haushofer@ne.su.se
Moritz Poll
Sara Lowes Brown University
Department of Economics Department of Economics
University of California at San Diego 64 Waterman Street
9500 Gilman Drive Providence, RI 02912
La Jolla, CA 92093 moritz.poll@brown.edu
and NBER
slowes@ucsd.edu Nancy Qian
Kellogg School of Management
Abednego Musau Northwestern University
University Medical Centre Groningen 2001 Sheridan Road
a.m.musau@umcg.nl Evanston, Il 60208
and NBER
David M. Ndetei nancy.qian@kellogg.northwestern.edu
University of Nairobi
and Africa Mental Health Research and
Training Foundation
P.O. Box 48423
Nairobi, 00100, Kenya
dmndetei@amhf.or.ke

1. Introduction
Observational studies have documented a relationship between ethnic identity and a wide range
of social, economic, and political outcomes in many settings, including sub-Saharan Africa (e.g.,
Easterly and Levine, 1997, Franck and Rainer, 2012, Hjort, 2014, Rasul and Rogger, 2015, Alesina,
Michalopoulos and Papaioannou, 2016, Marx, Stoker and Suri, 2019). To test for a causal role of
ethnicity, laboratory experiments in sub-Saharan Africa have randomly paired participants with
coethnic or non-coethnic partners and studied behavior in economic exchange games. Surpris-
ingly, these studies often fail to find evidence of a coethnic preference in behavior (Habyarimana,
Humphreys, Posner and Weinstein, 2007, 2009, Berge, Bjorvatn, Galle, Miguel, Posner, Tungodden
and Zhang, 2020, Blum, Hazlett and Posner, 2021). The difference between observational findings
and lab-based findings presents an important puzzle in our understanding of how ethnicity affects
social outcomes and how we interpret and address ethnic tensions.
This study attempts to make progress on this issue by examining a potential explanation for
the incongruence between experimental and observational studies. We consider the possibility that
stress may strengthen coethnic preference. In contrast to laboratory studies, which occur in a
relatively low-stress environment, observational studies are more likely to reflect decisions made
when individuals are under stress. Under peaceful and low-stress conditions, coethnicity may be
lesssalient;individualsmayfollownormsthatdictatetreatingnon-coethnicindividualsandcoethnic
individuals similarly. However, when stress is high, coethnic preferences may rise to the surface.
In this study, we examine the effects of stress on coethnic preference. Our study includes 1,784
participants who, in a laboratory setting in Nairobi, Kenya, play behavioral games with other
players. Nairobi is a natural setting for studying coethnic preferences. Neighborhoods are often
organized along ethnic lines and political competition takes place mainly along ethnic lines with
recent elections experiencing prolonged post-election violence (Ndegwa, 1997, Waki, 2008, Hjort,
2014, Macchiavello and Morjaria, 2015, Jakiela and Ozier, 2019).
As in previous studies, we randomly manipulate whether the other player belongs to the same
or a different ethnic group. The games are a standard one-shot dictator game, choose your dictator
game, and both stages of the trust game. These measure altruism, how altruistic the participant
perceives another player to be and their altruism toward that player, trust, and trustworthiness,
respectively. We also administer a social proximity survey in which respondents are presented with
1

different player profiles and asked how close the respondent feels to them, how much they trust
them, and how likely it is that they would be friends with them.
Our experiment makes an important departure from existing studies. To study the effects of
stress, we experimentally manipulate the cortisol levels of half of the participants before they
play the games. Real-world stressors induce several types of physiological responses such as an
increase in the hormones cortisol and adrenaline and an increase in heart rate. Thus, stress is
generally characterized by the presence of these markers (Kirschbaum and Hellhammer, 1989, de
Kloet, Joëls and Holsboer, 2005, de Kloet, 2004). The most common strategy used to study stress
is to expose subjects to stressful situations to induce physiological responses and then examine
subsequent behavior. This strategy faces several important challenges. First, the treatment can
trigger responses other than stress. Second, the subject is aware of the treatment, which causes
concern about experimenter demand effects. Finally, the experimenter must identify a treatment
that is unpleasant enough to elevate stress levels, but still be ethical.
In this study, we implement an alternative strategy that has been implemented in the neuro-
biological stress literature, but is less common in the economics literature (Schwabe, Tegenthoff,
Höffken and Wolf, 2010, Henckens, van Wingen, Joëls and Fernández, 2011, Kandasamy, Hardy,
Page, Schaffner, Graggaber, Powlson, Fletcher, Gurnell and Coates, 2014). Rather than exposing
subjects to a stressful activity to induce the physiological responses of stress, we manipulate the
physiological response itself and ask how this physiological response affects coethnic preference.
We manipulate participants’ cortisol levels by orally administering hydrocortisone pills, the phar-
macological precursor of cortisol, which is converted to cortisol upon ingestion. The other half of
participants receive an identical-looking placebo pill.
Thereareseveraladvantagesoffocusingoncortisolinthelaboratorysetting. Thefirstadvantage
is that cortisol can be cleanly manipulated – i.e. we can isolate the effects of the manipulation of
cortisol. This allows us to infer that any observed behavioral effects are due to this particular
marker of stress. In contrast, other stress induction methods, such as social or physical stressors,
generate additional physiological responses, including increases in heart rate and levels of other
hormones such as adrenaline and noradrenaline. The second advantage is that the hydrocortisone
treatment reliably elevates cortisol levels throughout the study session, which mitigates concerns
that treatment intensity will fluctuate over the course of the experiment.
Participants were randomly paired with another participant for each round of the behavioral
2