NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MONETARY POLICY AND THE SHORT-RATE DISCONNECT
IN EMERGING ECONOMIES
Pierre De Leo
Gita Gopinath
Ṣebnem Kalemli-Özcan
Working Paper 30458
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30458
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2022, Revised March 2024
This paper previously circulated under the title “Monetary Policy Cyclicality in Emerging
Economies.” We thank Mark Aguiar, Anusha Chari, Louphou Coulibaly, Linda Goldberg, Pierre-
Olivier Gourinchas, and Maurice Obstfeld for useful comments. We also thank Giuliano
Simoncelli for excellent research assistance. The views expressed in this paper are those of the
authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF, its Executive Board, IMF
management, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Pierre De Leo, Gita Gopinath, and Ṣebnem Kalemli-Özcan. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Monetary Policy and the Short-Rate Disconnect in Emerging Economies
Pierre De Leo, Gita Gopinath, and Ṣebnem Kalemli-Özcan
NBER Working Paper No. 30458
September 2022, Revised March 2024
JEL No. E0,F0,F3
ABSTRACT
We document that emerging market central banks adhere to Taylor-type rules and lower their
policy rates when economic activity slows down, including as a response to U.S. monetary policy
tightening. This suggests a countercyclical monetary policy stance. However, in contrast to
advanced economies, short-term market rates do not move in tandem with policy rates. Market
rates, if anything, tend to increase during recessions. We present evidence that this disconnect
between policy rates and market rates can be significantly explained by fluctuations in dollar
funding premia that get transmitted into local market rates through the banking sector that relies
on foreign funding. Our findings shed light on the challenges to transmission and effectiveness of
monetary policy in emerging economies.
Pierre De Leo Ṣebnem Kalemli-Özcan
4118E Tydings Hall Department of Economics
University of Maryland University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742 Tydings Hall 4118D
United States College Park, MD 20742-7211
deleop@umd.edu and CEPR
and also NBER
Gita Gopinath kalemli@econ.umd.edu
International Monetary Fund
700 19th St. NW
Washington, DC 20431
ggopinath@imf.org

1 Introduction
We show that central banks in emerging economies with flexible exchange rates follow a
countercyclical monetary policy, that is they reduce their policy rates when local economic
activity decelerates. However, the transmission of these policy rates to short-term market
rates, the typical channel through which monetary policy transmission works, is significantly
hindered due to fluctuating conditions in domestic financial intermediaries’ international
funding markets.
We begin by studying the typical behavior of emerging economies’ policy rates vis-`a-vis
local inflation and economic activity, since 1990s. To do so, we first estimate policy rules a` la
Taylor (1993, 1999) and find that central banks adjust the policy rate in response to changes
in both inflation and economic conditions (as measured by the output gap or GDP growth).
In this regard, we observe that central banks in emerging economies operate similarly to
their counterparts in advanced economies. We then study the correlation of local interest
rates with local economic activity (as measured by real GDP growth). Similarly, we find that
policy rates are lowered when local economic activity decelerates. However, we uncover that
short-term market rates, including 3-month treasury or money market rates, tend to increase
during economic recessions. This stands in contrast to advanced economies where policy rates
and short-term market rates decrease in tandem when economic activity slows down. This
evidence indicates that local monetary policy in both emerging and advanced economies has
displayed a countercyclical stance over the past three decades. However, emerging economies’
market rates exhibit a disconnect from local policy rates.
We document that this disconnect between policy and market rates emerges following a
U.S. monetary policy tightening, identified using the high-frequency identification approach
of Gertler and Karadi (2015), which notably causes a tightening of global financial conditions
(Miranda-Agrippino and Rey, 2020; Kalemli-Ozcan, 2019).1 In response to such a tightening,
some emerging market central banks face a trade off between lowering rates to lean against a
recessionorraisingratestopreventdisruptivecurrencydepreciations. Wefindthatonaverage,
emerging economies lower policy rates in response to a U.S. monetary policy tightening.
Despite this, market rates increase on average. We observe a similar disconnect between
policy rates and market rates during the so-called Taper Tantrum episode, an unexpected
1See also Dedola et al. (2017), and Degasperi et al. (2023).
1

exogenous U.S. monetary policy tightening.
We hypothesize that movements in the local short-term differential, the difference between
local market rates and policy rates, originate from emerging economies’ reliance on capital
flows that make them subject to fluctuating global funding conditions. We present a simple
model that focuses on the role of domestic banks in transmitting fluctuations in external
financial conditions domestically, influencing the dynamics of local short-term market rates.
Within our model, domestic banks rely both on domestic deposits and on international
markets for dollar funding (in line with the evidence in Baskaya et al., 2017, and Hahm
et al., 2013). According to our model, fluctuations in dollar funding conditions and banks
exposure to external funding directly impact the marginal funding costs of domestic banks,
and,consequently,influence the equilibrium localmarketrates. The pass-throughofmonetary
policy to short-term rates thus becomes incomplete and dependent on external financing
costs.
We verify that the short-rate disconnect,that is the differential between the policy rate and
market rate, in emerging economies is significantly related to both dollar funding premia and
banks exposure to external funding. Empirically, the short-term differential is higher when
the dollar premium, the premium a country pays on its dollar-denominated bonds compared
to U.S. bonds, proxied by the EMBI spread, is higher. A 10 p.p. increase in the EMBI spread
is associated with a 1.5-2 p.p. higher short-term differential. We also find that a country’s
short-term differential is larger in periods where its banks’ exposure to external funding is
larger. We use data from Avdjiev et al. (2022) to measure a country’s domestic banking
sector share of external liabilities, and find that a 10 p.p. larger share of external liabilities
is associated with a 1-1.5 p.p. higher short-term differential. Our model rationalizes these
co-movements between quantities, prices and the short-rate disconnect wedge: when dollar
funding costs rise or the banks’ exposure to these costs rises via their external borrowing,
domesticbanks require a domesticmarketrate thatexceeds the policyrate to holdthe market
bond. We emphasize that changes in external financing conditions can reflect both shocks
originating in foreign markets (such as Taper Tantrum) as well as foreign investors’ reactions
to changing domestic conditions (increased credit or recession risk) reflected in their pricing
captured by dollar premia. Our evidence shows that both global and local shocks contribute
to fluctuations in the short-term differential.
Our paper contributes to a well-established literature in international monetary economics
2