NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
REAL-TIME FORWARD-LOOKING SKEWNESS OVER THE BUSINESS CYCLE
Ian Dew-Becker
Working Paper 30478
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30478
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2022
I appreciate helpful comments from Stefano Giglio, Simon Oh, Laura Veldkamp, Matthias
Kehrig, Hugues Langlois, Thiago Ferreira, Niels Gormsen, and participants at the NBER Summer
Institute, Canadian Derivatives Institute, and Copenhagen Busines School. The Berkeley Options
Database was saved by Stewart Mayhew, without whom this research would not be possible. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Ian Dew-Becker. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Real-Time Forward-Looking Skewness over the Business Cycle
Ian Dew-Becker
NBER Working Paper No. 30478
September 2022
JEL No. E0,E22,E27,E3,G13
ABSTRACT
This paper measures option-implied skewness for individual firms and the overall stock market
between 1980 and 2021, giving real-time measures of conditional micro and macro skewness.
There are three key results: 1. Micro skewness is significantly procyclical, while macro skewness
is acyclical; 2. Micro skewness leads the business cycle and is strongly linked to credit spreads,
suggesting one potential causal channel; 3. Micro skewness is significantly, and not
mechanically, correlated with macro volatility, implying that there is a common shock driving
them both, which is also linked to the business cycle.
Ian Dew-Becker
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
ian.dewbecker@gmail.com

Real-time forward-looking skewness over the business
cycle
*
Ian Dew-Becker
August 16, 2022
Abstract
This paper measures option-implied skewness for individual firms and the overall
stock market between 1980 and 2021, giving real-time measures of conditional micro
and macro skewness. There are three key results: 1. Micro skewness is significantly
procyclical, while macro skewness is acyclical; 2. Micro skewness leads the business
cycleandisstronglylinkedtocreditspreads,suggestingonepotentialcausalchannel;3.
Micro skewness is significantly, and not mechanically, correlated with macro volatility,
implying that there is a common shock driving them both, which is also linked to the
business cycle.
1 Introduction
Background
A growing literature has developed evidence that the conditional distributions of eco-
nomic variables, at both the aggregate and micro levels, varies over time. There is work on
shocks to volatility and uncertainty at the aggregate level, including time-varying disaster
risk, along with estimates of cross-sectional variance and skewness of outcomes at the micro
level.1 The evidence on micro outcomes has come from analyses of the distribution of realized
outcomes, often (though not exclusively) at just an annual frequency. For example, research
has measured the skewness of the distribution of annual firm-level employment growth and
*Northwestern University and NBER. I appreciate helpful comments from Stefano Giglio, Simon Oh,
Laura Veldkamp, Matthias Kehrig, Hugues Langlois, Thiago Ferreira, Niels Gormsen, and participants at
theNBERSummerInstitute,CanadianDerivativesInstitute,andCopenhagenBusinesSchool. TheBerkeley
Options Database was saved by Stewart Mayhew, without whom this research would not be possible.
1On uncertainty, see, among many others, Bloom et al. (2018), Adrian, Boyarchenko, and Giannone
(2019), and Berger, Dew-Becker, and Giglio (2020). On disasters and skewness, see Barro (2006), Gabaix
(2012), Gourio (2012, 2013), and Wachter (2013). At the micro level, see also Storesletten, Telmer, and
Yaron (2004), Guvenen, Ozkan, and Song (2014), and Kehrig (2015).
1

annual individual income growth. There is also a literature on realized skewness of firm
stock returns at the monthly level.2
But in models in which time-varying risk – whether through volatility or skewness – is
a driving force (e.g. Salgado, Guvenen, and Bloom (2020)), it is typically agents’ ex ante
beliefs about future skewness that matter. Forward-looking decisions, such as firm- and
household-level investment, depend (by definition) on beliefs about the moments of future
shocks, rather than the moments of the shocks that were already realized.3 And realizations
are always equal to expectations plus an error, meaning that they are noisy relative to the
true conditional expectation. The transitory or “measurement error” component of cross-
sectional stock return skewness in fact accounts for over half of its variance.
Beyond that, the use of annual data makes estimation and measurement difficult, since
there are so few observations and they come at a low frequency relative to, for example, the
length of the typical recession.4 Policymakers also benefit from having measures available in
real time that can be used for decision-making, which explains the wide use of the VIX for
measuring real-time uncertainty, even though it is suboptimal from a theoretical perspective
since it does not measure fundamental economic uncertainty.
Estimation and testing of models based on time-varying risk, whether volatility or skew-
ness, and also using measures of risk as inputs to policy, therefore significantly benefits from
high-frequency, real-time measures of conditional moments.
Finally, past work has not distinguished the importance of the skewness of idiosyncratic
versus aggregate shocks. There are independent analyses of both aggregate (macro) and
firm- and household-level (micro) skewness, but nothing that analyzes them jointly. To see
the macro/micro distinction, consider a simple specification,
x = µ +ε (1)
i,t+1 t+1 i,t+1
where x is some firm-level outcome, µ is an aggregate shock, and ε is an idiosyn-
i,t+1 t+1 i,t+1
2For variance, Campbell et al. (2001), Bloom (2009), Herskovic et al. (2016), and Bloom et al. (2018)
all examine measures of realized dispersion rather than conditional variances. Guvenen, Ozkan, and Song
(2014), Ferreira (2018), Jondeau, Zhang, and Zhu (2019), Oh and Wachter (2019), Salgado, Guvenen, and
Bloom (2020), Gomez, Haddad, and Loualiche (2020), and Stockl and Kaiser (2021) study skewness. The
evidence on stock returns in those papers is the exception to the general pattern that research has typically
looked at low frequencies. However, the work on stock returns is on skewness in the cross-section of realized
returns, not conditional skewness at either the aggregate or firm level.
3This is not to say that realized moments cannot matter – they will, for example, any time reallocation
has real effects, for example if firms or households face borrowing constraints so that the cross-sectional
distributions of firm equity and household wealth become relevant.
4See Guvenen, Ozkan, and Song (2014), Harmenberg and Sieversten (2017), Busch et al. (2018), Ilut,
Kehrig, and Schneider (2018), and Salgado, Guvenen, and Bloom (2020).
2