NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INVESTING IN LENDING TECHNOLOGY:
IT SPENDING IN BANKING
Zhiguo He
Sheila Jiang
Douglas Xu
Xiao Yin
Working Paper 30403
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30403
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2022, Revised October 2023
For helpful comments, we thank Doug Diamond, Francesco D’Acunto (discussant), Isil Erel
(discussant), Mark Flannery, Yueran Ma, Jun Pan (discussant), Nitzan Tzur-Ilan (discussant),
João Granja, Nicola Pierri, Manju Puri, and Raghu Rajan. We are thankful for valuable comments
from seminar and conference participants at the Richmond Fed, University of Connecticut,
University of Florida, University of Chicago, City University of New York, 5th IMF Annual
Macro-Financial Conference, EFA, SFS Calvacade, and the 22nd Annual Conference in Digital
Economics, and AFA 2023 in New Orleans. Zhiguo He acknowledges financial support from the
John E. Jeuck Endowment at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. All errors are
our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Zhiguo He, Sheila Jiang, Douglas Xu, and Xiao Yin. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Investing in Lending Technology: IT Spending in Banking
Zhiguo He, Sheila Jiang, Douglas Xu, and Xiao Yin
NBER Working Paper No. 30403
August 2022, Revised October 2023
JEL No. G21,G51,O12,O32
ABSTRACT
Banks’ lending technology hinges on their handling of soft and hard information in dealing with
different types of credit demand. Through assembling a novel dataset on banks’ investment in
information technologies (IT), this paper provides concrete empirical evidence on how banks
adapt their lending technologies. We find investment in communication IT is associated with
improving banks’ ability to produce and transmit soft information, while investment in software
IT helps enhance banks’ hard information processing capacity. We exploit policies that affect
geographic regions differentially to show causally that banks respond to an increased demand for
small business credit (mortgage refinance) by increasing their spending on communication
(software) IT spending. We also find that the entry of fintech induces commercial banks to
increase their investment in IT—more so in the software IT category.
Zhiguo He Douglas Xu
University of Chicago University of Florida
Booth School of Business Warrington College of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue 1454 Union Rd
Chicago, IL 60637 Stuzin Hall 315
and NBER Gainesville, FL 32611
zhiguo.he@chicagobooth.edu douglas.xu@warrington.ufl.edu
Sheila Jiang Xiao Yin
Department of Finance and Real Estate University College London
Warrington College of Business 30 Gordon St, London
University of Florida Drayton House
P.O. Box 117168 London WC1H 0AX
Gainesville, FL 32611 United Kingdom
Sheila.Jiang@warrington.ufl.edu xiao.yin@ucl.ac.uk

1 Introduction
Commercial banks have long relied on cutting-edge technology to deliver innovative prod-
ucts such as ATMs and online banking, streamline loan making processes, and improve back-
office efficiency. According to a 2012 Mckinsey Report, across the globe commercial banks
spendabout4.7%to9.4%oftheiroperatingincomeoninformationtechnology(IT);forcom-
parison, insurance companies and airlines only spend 3.3 percent and 2.6 percent of their
income on IT, respectively. Recently, the impact of information technology on the banking
sector and on financial stability has been a headline topic in policy discussions (Banna and
Alam, 2021; Pierri and Timmer, 2020).
Althoughthefinancialservicesindustry—especiallythebankingindustry—isincreasingly
becoming a tech-like industry, the academic literature lags behind in understanding the
economics of IT spending in banking. Which banks, large or small, have invested more in
IT? Do banks adapt their information technologies in response to different credit demand
shocks? How do traditional banks react to the entry of fintech in recent years? We take
the first step toward understanding the key empirical patterns on these issues, and further
explore the mechanism that underlies the connection between these expenditures and the
core functioning of banking.
To place our research in the literature, think about the information transmission between
aloanofficerandaborrower, orbetweenlayersofloanofficerswithinabankorganization. As
highlightedbyStein(2002), alesshierarchicalstructurewithinabankfacilitatestheeffective
transmission of “soft” information. At the same time, fast-developing technologies in recent
decades provide more options for the banking sector to cope with such problems.1 So, can
information technologies reduce frictions in communicating soft information and potentially
improve banks’ credit approval decisions? Likewise, with the explosive development of big
data analytics which combine “hard” information such as credit scores with other alternative
1For instance, First Citizens National Bank implemented its employee intranet to strengthen internal
communications in February 2019. For details, see this article.
2

data, have traditional banks started adopting these technologies?
Our study relies on a comprehensive dataset, the Harte Hanks Market Intelligence Com-
puterIntelligenceTechnologydatabase,whichhasbeenusedintheliteratureontheeconomic
implications of technology in non-financial sectors (e.g., Bloom et al., 2014; Forman et al.,
2012). This dataset, which aligns well with the regulatory Y-9C dataset in measuring total
IT spending, provides detailed branch-level information on specific spending categories. We
focus on two major categories in banks’ IT spending:2 software and communication. Soft-
ware IT products mainly aim to improve information processing accuracy and speed through
automation, specialized programming and AI technologies, etc. Communication IT products
facilitate smoother exchanges of information within bank branching networks, across banks,
and with borrowers.
In Section 3 we start by documenting that IT expenditure in the U.S. banking sector has
been growing rapidly over the last decade. Growth in IT spending varies by bank size: large
banks’ IT spending increased steadily, while there was almost no growth in IT spending for
the smallest banks. Another noticeable distinction between large and small banks is that
the latter, who presumably engage in more small business lending, consistently allocate a
higher share of their IT budget towards communication technology than the former. As we
will elaborate, this pattern points to the role communication IT plays in conducting small
business lending.
We then examine the relationship between banks’ IT spending and their lending activi-
ties. Among the three main categories of loan types in Call Reports, the share in commercial
and industrial (C&I) loans is positively associated with the lenders’ communication spend-
ing, but uncorrelated with their software spending. In contrast, the share of personal loans
is positively associated with the lenders’ software spending, but not with communication
2Section 2.2 explains in detail the four major categories of IT expenditure in the Harte Hanks data
set—hardware, software, communication, services—in the context of the banking industry. Representative
examplesofsoftwareincludedesktopapplications(e.g.,MicrosoftOffice),informationmanagementsoftware,
and risk and payment management software. Examples of communication technology include radio and TV
transmitters, private branch exchanges, video conferencing, etc.
3