NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW CAN ASSET PRICES VALUE EXCHANGE RATE WEDGES?
Karen K. Lewis
Edith Liu
Working Paper 30422
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30422
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2022
We gratefully acknowledge useful discussions with Mikhail Chernov, Hanno Lustig and Andrea
Vedolin and comments from seminar participants at the American Economic Association, the
Federal Reserve Board, INSEAD, the National Bureau of Economic Research, the Society of
Economic Dynamics, the Swiss Finance Institute, the Western Finance Association, and the
Wharton School. We also thank Max Yang for excellent research assistance. Any errors and
omissions are our own responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Karen K. Lewis and Edith Liu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

How Can Asset Prices Value Exchange Rate Wedges?
Karen K. Lewis and Edith Liu
NBER Working Paper No. 30422
September 2022
JEL No. F30,F31,F41,G10,G15
ABSTRACT
When available financial securities allow investors to optimally diversify risk across countries,
standard theory implies that exchange rates should reflect this behavior. However, exchange rates
observed in the data deviate from these predictions. In this paper, we develop a framework to
value the welfare costs of these exchange rate wedges, as disciplined by asset returns. This
framework applies to a general class of asset pricing and exchange rate models. We further
decompose the value of these wedges into components, showing that the ability of goods markets
to respond to financial markets through exchange rate adjustment has significant implications for
welfare.
Karen K. Lewis
Department of Finance, Wharton School
2300 SHDH
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
lewisk@wharton.upenn.edu
Edith Liu
Federal Reserve Board of Governors
20st & Constitution Ave NW
Washington, DC 20551
edith.x.liu@frb.gov
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w30422

Resource dislocations across countries generated by recent events ranging from the Covid
pandemic to increasing inflation rates raise important concerns about how individuals have
been impacted. In principle, financial markets can mitigate these concerns by allowing for
efficient sharing of risks. However, a long line of research has demonstrated that investors
are not sufficiently diversified across countries.1 Furthermore, disparities in inflation rates
across countries point to the importance of exchange rates adjustment as a mechanism to
reallocate resources. Thus, whether financial markets provide channels to minimize potential
losses due to adverse exchange rate movements is a significant and enduring economic issue.
In this paper, we confront this important issue by asking: can asset prices be used to
value the differences between observed real exchange rates and those implied by optimally
diversified financial markets? If so, how? To answer these questions, we develop a general
frameworkthatconvenientlynestsakeybuildingblockinmanymacroeconomicandfinancial
models. Thus, the framework provides an approach for using asset pricing data to value the
potential under-diversified risk due to exchange rate misalignment.
The essential insight combines two well-known features. First, for a general class of
preferences, welfare can be uniquely measured from the value of currrent wealth and con-
sumption. Moreover, this value is implied by the budget constraint on lifetime consumption
disciplined by asset return observations. Second, marginal utilities of consumption across
individuals are equalized when available financial market securities span all of the economi-
cally important sources of risk; that is, when asset markets are complete. By contrast, when
financial markets are incomplete, individuals value returns according to their own distinct
intertemporal marginal utilities, or ”stochastic discount factors.” Combining these two fea-
tures implies that the welfare differentials perceived by individuals across countries may be
valued using asset returns together with standard techniques.
These two features have roots in two research traditions, in turn. The first tradition
uses asset markets to uncover the implied ”costs” of aggregate risk. This tradition has a
long history including Lucas (1987), Alvarez and Jermann (2004), and others. The second
tradition focuses upon international investor asset price deviations, or ”wedges,” in the
presence of incomplete financial markets. This wedge was identified by D. Backus, Foresi,
1WediscussthesepapersintheRelatedLiteraturebelow.
1

and Telmer (2001) as the difference between the exchange rate in the data and the exchange
rate implied by the ratio of stochastic discount factors across countries.2
To motivate our analysis, we briefly summarize here this measure of the international
valuation wedge from the second literature as a starting point. For simplicity, assume there
are two representative investors; a home investor with stochastic discount factor at state-
time t defined as M and a foreign investor with counterpart M(cid:102). Further, denote S as the
t t t
real exchange rate given by the relative price of foreign goods in units of domestic goods.
Then, denoting with asterisk ∗ the complete markets counterparts to the variables above,
the relationship between stochastic discount factors and prices can be written:3
(cid:0) (cid:1)
M∗ S∗ /S∗ = M(cid:102) ∗ . (1)
t+1 t+1 t t+1
Analyzing this relationship requires data counterparts for these variables. While exchange
rates are observed directly in the data, counterparts for stochastic discount factors are typ-
ically inferred indirectly using Euler equations disciplined with asset return data. It will be
useful to distinguish these data-inferred variables from their complete markets counterparts
with a ”D” superscript. Using this notation, the complete markets relationship above may
be rewritten as a deviation or ”wedge” from the unique complete markets equation as:
SD MD S∗ M∗
t+1 t+1 = t+1 t+1 exp(η ) = exp(η ), (2)
S
t
D M(cid:102)
t
D
+1
S
t
∗ M(cid:102)
t
∗
+1
t+1 t+1
where the last equality follows from the identity in equation (1). Note that the variable η
captures the difference between incomplete markets valuations across investors.
This paper combines these insights from the literature to consider asset market-implied
costs of the deviation from a counterfactual equilibrium of complete markets. We begin by
consideringthevalueoftheη wedge. Forthispurpose,wecomparethetwoinvestorstochastic
discount factors as in equation (2) to compare the valuations of a return implied by the data.
Given that wealth is a sufficient statistic for welfare, we choose the return on wealth, defined
2The positive implications of these wedges have been examined by Sandulescu, Trojani, and Vedolin (2021), Lustig and
Verdelhan(2019)andBakshi,Cerrato,andCrosby(2018),asdescribedinRelatedLiteraturebelow.
3Onthisequivalencebetweenprice-adjustedmarginalutilitiesundercompletemarkets,seeDebreu(1959).
2