NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SECRECY RULES AND EXPLORATORY INVESTMENT:
THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM THE SHALE BOOM
Thomas R. Covert
Richard L. Sweeney
Working Paper 30548
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30548
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2022
Funding provided in part by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth
School of Business. Both authors declare they have no interests, financial or otherwise, that
relate to the research described in this paper, nor do they have any current ties, directly or
indirectly to the energy industry. We thank Mehmet Ekmekci, Alex Frankel, Michael Grubb,
Ryan Kellogg, Jacob Leshno, and Pete Maniloff for comments. Yixin Sun, Eric Karsten, and
Christoph Schlom provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Thomas R. Covert and Richard L. Sweeney. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Secrecy Rules and Exploratory Investment: Theory and Evidence from the Shale Boom
Thomas R. Covert and Richard L. Sweeney
NBER Working Paper No. 30548
October 2022
JEL No. D82,L51,L71
ABSTRACT
We analyze how information disclosure policy affects investment efficiency in non-cooperative
settings with information externalities. In a two-firm, two-period model, we characterize
equilibrium behavior under policies which disclose whether investment returns exceed a
predefined level. These policies include complete secrecy, in which players only observe rival
actions, as well as full disclosure, in which players also perfectly observe rival returns. With less
disclosure (higher disclosure thresholds), there is less free riding, but additional losses from
incomplete information aggregation. We characterize the surplus maximizing disclosure
threshold in this environment, and show how it depends on firms' patience. We then apply the
model to the early years of the shale boom in Pennsylvania and West Virginia, which at the time
were governed by complete secrecy and full disclosure, respectively. We find that full disclosure
would have maximized surplus in both states, generating 49% and 160% more value than
complete secrecy.
Thomas R. Covert
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
thomas.covert@chicagobooth.edu
Richard L. Sweeney
Economics Department
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
sweeneri@bc.edu

1 Introduction
In non-cooperative environments, correlated outcomes from risky investment opportuni-
ties generate information externalities: one player’s investment choice can change another
player’s beliefs about the returns to investment. Oil and gas exploration with decentral-
ized landownership is a classic example of this phenomenon. Once one firm drills its land,
neighboring firms can learn that this investment happened, possibly learn the returns to it,
and, armed with this knowledge, make a less risky investment decision. The potential for
firms to “free ride” on other’s exploratory effort has been shown to generate costly delay,
suboptimal information acquisition and inefficient sequencing of investment choices (Hen-
dricks and Kovenock, 1989). Although this paper is about oil and gas exploration, the
underlying economic forces we study generalize to other innovative settings, like uncertain
demand (Chamley and Gale, 1994; Rob, 1991), real estate investment (Grenadier, 1999),
and pharmaceutical development (Krieger, 2021).
A common response to the prospect of free riding on innovative efforts is to allow firms
to keep secrets (Friedman et al., 1991). For example, in oil and gas exploration, many
governments keep the production information of newly drilled wells that they collect for tax
purposes confidential. By delaying or eliminating the possibility of observing rival outcomes,
strict secrecy reduces free riding. However, secrecy can exacerbate losses from incomplete
information aggregation. During a secrecy period, some wells which shouldn’t be drilled
(based on all available information) will be, while other opportunities which are profitable
will go unexploited.
In this paper, we study the net effect of these forces, and ask whether confidentiality laws
improve investment efficiency. In the first part of the paper, we theoretically analyze invest-
ment behavior under two extreme information disclosure policies: complete secrecy, under
which firms who wait learn only whether or not their rival invested, and full disclosure, un-
der which firms whose rivals invest also learn the outcome of that investment. Our analysis
generates predictions about the level and timing of investment across these two regimes, and
allows us to characterize the conditions under which each regime generates more efficient
investment than the other. We then generalize our theoretical analysis to consider interme-
diate information disclosure policies. In the second part of the paper, we apply this model
to rich oil and gas exploration data in the Appalachian shale basin where, at the start of
the recent shale boom, Pennsylvania had a policy of complete secrecy, while neighboring
West Virginia had a policy of full disclosure. We fit our theoretical model of each regime to
the data, estimate the underlying primitives for this setting, and simulate outcomes under
2

counterfactual disclosure policies to identity the optimum.1
To model strategic responses to secrecy policy, we build on the social learning model of
Hendricks and Kovenock (1989) (henceforth HK), who study the behavior of competing oil
firms under a full disclosure policy.2 The HK model features two firms, each endowed with a
noisy signal of the common return to drilling, as well as a two period investment opportunity.
The environment they study has a full disclosure (FD) information policy because a firm
who waits will learn whether its rival waited, as well as the true return to drilling if its
rival drilled first. HK show that the unique symmetric Bayes-Nash equilibrium of this game
involves cutoff strategies: firms with high signals drill in the first period, while firms with
lower signals wait. If one firm drills early, and the other waits, the waiting firm learns the
returns to drilling and makes an efficient investment decision.
We modify the HK model to understand strategic responses to a policy of complete
secrecy (CS). In this environment, a firm that waits learns no information about the outcome
of investment if its rival invests in period one, but it does learn that investment happened.3
This induces some free riding, as firms who wait learn something about their rival’s signal.
We show that this game also has a symmetric equilibrium in cutoff strategies, in which firms
with high signals drill early, while firms with lower signals wait. Consistent with the fact
that the information revealed to those who wait is less valuable in CS, we show that there is
less free riding, compared to FD. Whether this reduction in free riding generates a welfare
gain depends on the value of the informational spillovers that do not occur in CS but will in
FD. While the net effect depends on the primitives of the problem, we provide a sufficient
1In this paper, we only consider the private benefits and costs associated with investment. In the case of
oil and gas extraction however, investment also generates significant external costs. Truly “optimal,” social
welfare maximizing, disclosure policy in this context would incorporate these social costs. Nevertheless, for
ease of exposition, throughout the text we refer the policy that maximizes private payoffs as “optimal,” and
private surplus as “welfare.”
2The economic theory on bandit games has also explored the equilibrium effects of investment disclosure
in games with information spillovers. Rosenberg et al. (2013) studies an irreversible exit version of the
exponential bandit setting pioneered by Keller et al. (2005), finding that games with publicly disclosed
outcomes deliver higher equilibrium payoffs than similar games with no outcome disclosure. Heidhues et
al. (2015) studies a traditional discrete time multi-armed bandit game, allowing for communication between
players, and comes to the opposite conclusion, that equilibrium payoffs can actually be higher in a game
without publicly disclosed outcomes. Both papers assume that players face an infinite investment horizon.
In contrast, our motivating policy example and empirical application is oil and gas exploration, which is
inherently finite horizon. Furthermore, both papers envision an intensive margin of investment, whereas
mineral exploration (and clinical trials) are inherently binary decisions.
3In the motivating examples of mineral exploration, clinical trials and real estate development, the act
of investment is essentially unhideable. However, in other settings this may not be the case. Bonatti and
H¨orner (2017) studies the role of disclosure of investment actions in games with information spillovers,
assuming outcomes are always observable. Using a Keller et al. (2005) style model they conclude that
equilibriumpayoffscanincreaseordecreaseinresponsetomakingactionsobservable,dependingonwhether
the information that actions convey reflects “good” or “bad” news about the unobserved state of the world.
3