NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DEPOSIT AND CREDIT REALLOCATION IN A BANKING PANIC:
THE ROLE OF STATE-OWNED BANKS
Viral V. Acharya
Abhiman Das
Nirupama Kulkarni
Prachi Mishra
Nagpurnanand R. Prabhala
Working Paper 30557
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30557
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2022, Revised February 2025
This version: February 9, 2025. This paper combines and supersedes earlier papers titled
“Government Guarantees and Bank Vulnerability during the Financial Crisis of 2007-09: Evidence
from an Emerging Market" and “The Anatomy of a Banking Panic.” We thank Siddhant Bharti,
Kavya Ravindranath, and Akshat Vikram Singh for research assistance and Itai Agur, Vadim
Elenev, Dasol Kim, Manju Puri, Amiyatosh Purnanandam, Raghuram Rajan, David Sraer, Phil
Strahan, Krishnamurthy Subramanian, Prasanna Tantri, David Thesmar, Emil Verner, Vikrant Vig,
and the participants and discussants at the European Finance Association, Financial Intermediation
Research Society, the International Finance Corporation, Northeast Universities Development
Consortium, the NYUNSE conference, and the Western Finance Association. The views expressed
are those of the authors and not of any institutions that they were or are affiliated with. In particular,
the views do not necessarily represent those of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the
IMF, its Management and Executive Board, or IMF policy.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Viral V. Acharya, Abhiman Das, Nirupama Kulkarni, Prachi Mishra, and Nagpurnanand
R. Prabhala. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Deposit and Credit Reallocation in a Banking Panic: The Role of State-Owned Banks
Viral V. Acharya, Abhiman Das, Nirupama Kulkarni, Prachi Mishra, and Nagpurnanand R.
Prabhala
NBER Working Paper No. 30557
October 2022, Revised February 2025
JEL No. G23, G28, G33, O43
ABSTRACT
We study a bank run in India in which private bank branches experience sudden and considerable
loss of deposits, which migrate to state-owned public sector banks (PSBs) that serve as safe havens.
We trace the consequences of the deposit reallocation using bank branch-level balance sheet and
firm-bank lending data. The flight to safety is not a flight to quality. Lending shrinks and credit
quality improves in run banks, but worsens in PSBs receiving the flight-to-safety flows. The
reallocation of resources is not efficient in the aggregate.
Viral V. Acharya Prachi Mishra
Stern School of Business IMF Research Department
New York University 700 19th Street NW
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-65 Washington, DC 20431
New York, NY 10012 pmishra@imf.org
and CEPR
and also NBER Nagpurnanand R. Prabhala
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu The Johns Hopkins Carey Business School
100 International Drive
Abhiman Das Baltimore, MD 21202
Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad prabhala@jhu.edu
Vastrapur
Ahmedabad
India
abhiman@iima.ac.in
Nirupama Kulkarni
Research Director
CAFRAL, Research Department
Reserve Bank of India
Main Building, Mezzanine Floor,
Shahid Bhagat Singh Road,
Fort, Mumbai 400 001
nirupama.kulkarni@gmail.com

A bank run occurs when many depositors suddenly withdraw their deposits in a
short period of time. As runs can cause bank failures and trigger domino effects across
banks that threaten financial stability, a major focus of bank regulations and policies is to
avoid runs (Calomiris and Mason, 1997; Saunders and Wilson, 1996). Moreover, if runs
do occur, policies have included aggressive measures to stop them and ensure financial
stability. For example, the 2023 runs at Silicon Valley Bank (Acharya et al., 2023) were
met with an unprecedented policy response that guaranteed all deposits, even above the
$250,000insurancethreshold.
Although stability has appropriately been a key focus of research and policy on bank
runs, we study a different issue, viz., the resource reallocation resulting from runs. As mo-
tivation, consider the March 2023 failure of three major banks – Silicon Valley Bank, First
Republic Bank, and Signature Bank – due to depositor runs. The result was a flight to
safety of deposits from regional banks to larger banks perceived as safe havens (Caglio,
Dlugosz and Rezende, 2023). The central question in our study is the onward conse-
quencesofsuchadepositmigration–forbanks,bankborrowers,andtherealeconomy.
Wedevelopinsightsontheserunconsequencesfroma2008-2009bankrunepisodein
India during the 2008 global financial crisis. Private banks experienced runs and related
deposit flights, which migrated to state-owned public sector banks (PSBs) that served as
safe havens. We characterize the consequences for the banks experiencing runs and the
PSBsreceivingrun-relatedflows,theensuingcreditreallocation,andtheefficiencyofthe
reallocationintherealeconomy. usingproprietarybankbranchdataaswellasbank-firm
lendingdatafromstatutoryfilings.
A key lesson that emerges from our analysis is that the resource reconfiguration to-
wards the PSBs from the run private banks is not necessarily neutral. The credit reallo-
1

cationis not necessarily a one-for-one gap-filling exercise by the recipients of run flows.
We find that lending discipline improves at the run banks but credit quality worsens at
thePSBsreceivingrunsurpluses. Estimatesbasedonthetechniquerecentlyproposedby
Sraer and Thesmar (2023) indicate that the aggregate effects are negative as productivity
growth is impaired. In other words, the run does not just reallocate – but misallocates re-
sources so a flight to safety need not be a flight to quality. The nature and the quality of
thereintermediationofthewindfallsurplusesmatter.
The run we study occurs after the 2008 global financial crisis when some branches of
private banks in India experience a sudden and rather extreme loss of deposits. State-
owned “public sector” banks (PSBs), the safe-haven destination for the run outflows,
see a surge in deposits. A proprietary branch-level dataset, the annual “Basic Statistical
Returns” (BSR), which India’s central bank shared with us, lets us identify run branches,
the related deposit flows, the PSBs gaining flows, and the credit quantity and quality. A
seconddatasetonbank-firmrelationships,whichweobtainfromstatutoryfilings,letsus
analyzelendingafterruns.
Two features help frame our analysis. One, the formal protection for Indian bank
depositorsislimitedandofferslittlecomforttopanickeddepositors(IyerandPuri,2012).
Asecondfeatureisthepresenceofstate-ownedpublicsectorbanks(PSBs)inIndia,which
serve as credible safe havens. The Indian government holds large direct stakes in PSBs—
70%onaverage. Inaddition,thestateexercisessignificantcontroloverallaspectsofPSBs,
includingdirectorappointment,strategicandoperationalplanning,aswellashiring,pay,
retention,rotation,andpromotionofemployeesatalllevels. Finally,India’s1949Banking
Regulation Act obliges the government to fulfill the obligations of PSBs in the event of
bank failure. This clause adds comfort to the perceived safety of PSBs. Thus, depositors
2