NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE COST OF REGULATORY COMPLIANCE IN THE UNITED STATES
Francesco Trebbi
Miao Ben Zhang
Working Paper 30691
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30691
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2022
We would like to thank Matt Backus, Matilde Bombardini, Bård Harstad, John Matsusaka, Amit
Seru, Reed Walker, seminar participants at the Berkeley Political Economy Research Lab and
other institutions for their comments. Niranjan Navaneethan provided excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Francesco Trebbi and Miao Ben Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Cost of Regulatory Compliance in the United States
Francesco Trebbi and Miao Ben Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 30691
November 2022
JEL No. P0,P48
ABSTRACT
We quantify firms’ compliance costs of regulation from 2002 to 2014 in terms of their labor input
expenditure to comply with government rules, a primary component of regulatory compliance
spending for large portions of the U.S. economy. Detailed establishment-level occupation data, in
combination with occupation-specific task information, allow us to recover the share of an
establishment’s wage bill owing to employees engaged in regulatory compliance. Regulatory costs
account on average for 1.34 percent of the total wage bill of a firm, but vary substantially across and
within industries, and have increased over time. We investigate the returns to scale in regulatory
compliance and find an inverted-U shape, with the percentage regulatory spending peaking for an
establishment size of around 500 employees. Finally, we develop an instrumental variable
methodology for decoupling the role of regulatory requirements from that of enforcement in driving
firms’ compliance costs.
Francesco Trebbi
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
2220 Piedmont Ave
Berkeley, CA 94720
and CIFAR
and also NBER
ftrebbi@berkeley.edu
Miao Ben Zhang
701 Exposition Blvd
HOH-722
Los Angeles, CA 90089
United States
miao.zhang@marshall.usc.edu

1 Introduction
Cost-benefit analysis is a key tool for the study and practice of federal and state regulation (Arrow
et al., 1996). In particular, assessing the costs and the unintended consequences of government
rules is key to provisions of the 1946 U.S. Administrative Procedure Act aimed at avoiding “capri-
ciousorarbitrary”federalagencybehavior(AdlerandPosner,1999;Sunstein,2002,2017).1 Policy
makers and economists alike, however, have struggled to obtain systematic measures of regulatory
costs.2 For example, the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA) 2020 reports that
only 9.1 percent of all “significant” regulations in 2019 had clearly quantified costs and benefits.3
Thelackingassessmentofregulatorycostsmaybeunsurprisingtoeconomists, giventhehetero-
geneity and the complex technical requirements of industry regulations (Davis, 2017). It is indeed
an area impervious to systematization, as government rules range from limiting the composition of
agricultural herbicides in wheat production to COVID-19 vaccine approvals, from setting capital
adequacy ratios for bank holding companies to safety standards in iron ore mining, to name a few
examples, and are therefore very hard to compare. To complicate things further, identical rules
may be enforced with different levels of stringency (Stiglitz, 2009), exceptions may be carved out
to shield specific producers, or the true extent of rules may be hard to trace when enacted via
various forms of “regulatory guidance” (see Davis (2017) for regulatory “dark matter”).
While these difficulties should prompt caution, political debate over the costs of government
red tape often offers none of the nuance. In most cases, deliberation evolves as if regulatory costs
have been unambiguously quantified and assessed against the benefits (Sunstein, 2017).
This paper aims at systematically measuring the labor costs of regulation for establishments
and firms in the United States. Our measure is made possible by merging occupational task data
fromO*NET(V23.0)totheOccupationalEmploymentandWageStatistics(OEWS)establishment-
occupationlevelmicrodatafromtheU.S.BureauofLaborStatistics(BLS),alargestratifiedsurvey
coveringabout1,200,000establishmentsfromallindustriesoftheUnitedStatesfrom2002to2014.
We start by measuring the regulation relatedness of a labor task. Using a combination of
keyword matching, manual assignment, and natural language processing methods, we assess the
regulation relatedness of each of the 19,636 tasks in O*NET. O*NET also provides an importance
ratingofeachtaskforeachoccupation,whichinturnweusetoaggregatetheregulation-relatedness
1Forexamplesofregulatoryrulemakingwherethisargumentwasapplied,seeBusinessRoundtablev. SEC(647
F3d 1144, DC Cir. 2011) and Corrosion Proof Fittings v. EPA (947 F2d 1201, 5th Cir. 1991).
2For a discussion centered on financial regulation, see Posner and Weyl (2013, 2017).
3When looking at the sample of all “significant” regulations (i.e. rules deemed likely to have an annual impact
on the economy of $100 million or more), the OIRA states that “During FY 2019, executive agencies promulgated
55majorrules, overhalfofwhichweretransferrules”(p.3),butonly“forfiverules, wereporttheissuingagencies’
quantification and monetization of both benefits and costs” (p.4). 9.1 percent of all significant rules in 2019 had
clearly quantified costs and benefits.
1

of tasks at the occupation level.4 We then obtain our key measure of regulation intensity for each
establishment by aggregating occupations’ regulation-relatedness weighted by the establishment’s
labor spending on each occupation. We label this establishment-level measure RegIndex, a variable
that indicates the percentage of an establishment’s total labor spending ascribed to performing
regulation-related tasks. Sections 2 and 3 contain details about data and the construction of our
measure, respectively.
Our establishment RegIndex measure allows us to measure regulatory compliance costs at any
broader level.5 In particular, we aggregate establishment RegIndex at the firm level, where a firm
is defined by the establishment’s employer identification number (EIN) (Song et al., 2018). An
average firm spends 1.34 percent of its total labor costs on performing regulation-related tasks.
When aggregating RegIndex to the national level, we observe that real regulatory compliance costs
of U.S. businesses have grown by about 1 percent each year from 2002 to 2014.
As for any new measure, validation is necessary. Section 3 presents a battery of test results
assessing the informativeness of this approach. We start with several difference-in-differences esti-
mations to demonstrate RegIndex’s ability to correctly reflect major industry-specific regulatory
changes during our sample period. These case studies are selected to cover diverse industries
and include the 2009 Card Act on credit card issuers, the 2005 Energy Policy Act and the 2011
President executive order on the oil and gas industry, the 2010 Affordable Care Act on hospitals,
and directives from the Department of Education on sexual assault investigations for U.S. colleges.
Through these case studies, we also highlight our new approach’s advantages in distinguishing reg-
ulation from deregulation, picking up regulations from outside formal codification, and measuring
businesses’ regulatory costs at a granular level.
For further validation of RegIndex, we also show that the aggregate RegIndex correlates with
the aggregate projected compliance hours that agencies reported to the OIRA at the national
level. When looking at cross-state differences, we find that, conditional on the industry of analysis,
Republican-leaning states have lower levels of regulatory compliance costs.
Thepaperthenproceedstoaddressakeyquestionpertinenttothestudyofregulation. Section
4 asks how regulatory costs change with respect to establishments’ (or firms’) size and investigates
the presence of increasing or decreasing returns to scale in regulatory compliance. Intuitively,
a regulatory compliance cost schedule that is non-neutral to scale – as approximated by total
employment – may distort incentives for producers and induce factor misallocation.
This is a key question, because extant literature offers no consensus on the shape of returns
to scale in regulation for the entire U.S. economy overall. On the one hand, regulatory costs
4Examples of occupations that are at the top of our list of regulation relatedness include compliance officers,
construction and building inspectors, financial examiners, agricultural inspectors, and industrial engineering tech-
nicians.
5See also Simkovic and Zhang (2020) for an early attempt to measure regulation at the broad industry level
using partial, publicly available BLS data.
2