NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SEA LEVEL RISE EXPOSURE AND MUNICIPAL BOND YIELDS
Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham
Matthew T. Gustafson
Ryan C. Lewis
Michael Schwert
Working Paper 30660
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30660
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2022
We thank Markus Baldauf, Asaf Bernstein, Sudheer Chava, Tony Cookson, Jess Cornaggia,
Kimberly Cornaggia, Chitru Fernando, Dan Garrett, Stefano Giglio, Erik Gilje, Sara Holland,
Yann Koby, James McCown, Rob Ready, Bill Schwert, Ilya Strebulaev, Luke Taylor, and
seminar participants at the University of Delaware, Wharton, the 2019 University of Oklahoma
Energy and Commodities Finance Research Conference, and the 2021 American Finance
Association meeting for helpful suggestions. We also thank Elaine Yao for excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, Matthew T. Gustafson, Ryan C. Lewis, and Michael
Schwert. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Sea Level Rise Exposure and Municipal Bond Yields
Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, Matthew T. Gustafson, Ryan C. Lewis, and Michael Schwert
NBER Working Paper No. 30660
November 2022
JEL No. G1
ABSTRACT
Municipal bond markets begin pricing sea level rise (SLR) exposure risk in 2013, coinciding with
upward revisions to worst-case SLR projections and accompanying uncertainty around these
projections. The effect is larger for long-maturity bonds and is not solely driven by near-term
flood risk. We use a structural model of credit risk to quantify the implied economic impact and
distinguish the effects of underlying asset values and uncertainty. The SLR exposure premium
exhibits a different trend from house prices and is unaffected by house price controls. Taken
together, our results highlight the importance of climate uncertainty in driving municipal bond
prices.
Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham Ryan C. Lewis
Yale School of Management Leeds School of Business
165 Whitney Avenue 995 Regent Street
New Haven, CT 06511 Leeds School of Business
and NBER Boulder, CO 80302
paulgp@gmail.com ryan.c.lewis@colorado.edu
Matthew T. Gustafson Michael Schwert
Smeal College of Business Assistant Professor of Finance
Pennsylvania State University The Wharton School
335 Business Building 3620 Locust Walk-SHDH 2451
University Park, PA 16802 University of Pennsylvania
mtg15@psu.edu Philadelphia, PA 19104
schwert@wharton.upenn.edu

Over the past two decades, popular interest in climate change has increased dramatically as
scientificforecastshavebecomemoredire. Oneconsequenceofawarmingclimateissealevelrise
(SLR).SincetheIntergovernmentalPanelonClimateChange(IPCC)reportin2007,improvements
in scientific methods for forecasting SLR have led to larger and more variable projections, with
currentupper-boundprojectionsof2.5meters(8.2feet)by2100(e.g.,Stockeretal.(2013),DeConto
and Pollard (2016), Sweet et al. (2017), Garner et al. (2018)). In addition, scientific reports (e.g.,
Webster et al. (2005), Holland and Bruyère (2014), Hayhoe et al. (2018)) have drawn attention to
moreimmediaterisksforcoastalcommunities,suchasincreasinglyseveretropicalstormsandthe
potentialforSLRtoamplifystorm-relatedflooding. Inlightofthesehazards,policymakersinthe
U.S.andabroadhavebeguntoinvestinrelocationprograms,raisingquestionsaboutwhetherat-
risk coastal communities should continue to be redeveloped. Estimating the economic impact of
SLRexposureandwhenitwillmanifestisimportantforassessingthepotentialbenefitsofclimate
remediation,whichcanbeweighedagainstthecostsofinterventions.
In this paper, we examine how exposure to SLR risk is priced in the municipal bond mar-
ket and quantify the real economic impact implied by the pricing of SLR risk. Municipal bonds
provideausefulsettingforassessinginvestors’expectationsofthelocalimpactofclimateriskbe-
causethesourcesofrepaymentaretiedtolocaleconomicconditions. Thisisespeciallysoforthe
school district bonds that comprise our sample, which are commonly backed by local real estate
taxes. Sincethepricesofmunicipalbondsreflectthelikelihoodthatlocalgovernmentcashflows
willbesufficienttomakedebtpayments,thismarketprovidesanopportunitytotranslateeffects
onassetpricesintomoregeneraleconomiceffectsofSLRexposureoncoastalcommunities.
However, estimating the effect of SLR exposure on the value of municipal bonds and their
underlying cash flows is challenging for two reasons. The first challenge is an econometric one:
factors correlated with SLR exposure (e.g., proximity to the coast, current flood risks) are also
correlated with time-invariant and time-varying economic risks. Solving this issue requires an
empiricalapproachsuchthatthesefactorscanbeheldfixedwhilevaryingSLRrisk. Ourapproach
uses detailed local variation in school districts’ SLR exposure to compare bonds from issuers in
the same U.S. county that trade in the same time period, but vary in their exposure to SLR risk,
while holding fixed things like current flood risk. The second challenge is theoretical: how to
translate estimated changes in credit spreads into changes in the local government’s cash flow
1

stream backing the bonds. We tackle this problem by adapting a structural model of credit risk
fromthecorporatefinanceliteraturetothemunicipalbondmarketandusingittodistinguishthe
effectsofSLRriskonunderlyingassetvaluesanduncertainty.
WedocumentatrendtowardpricingSLRexposureinthemunicipalbondmarketthatbegins
around2011. By2013,thereisastatisticallysignificantSLRexposurepremiuminmunicipalbond
yields. The emergence of this premium closely tracks the evolution of worst-case scientific SLR
projections as well as uncertainty in these SLR projections and popular interest in SLR. We esti-
mate that a one standard deviation (approximately ten percentage point) increase in the fraction
ofpropertiesexposedtosixfeetofsealevelriseisaccompaniedbya5.3basispoint(bp)increase
in municipal bond credit spreads in 2015, equivalent to 9% of the average spread in our sample.
The95%confidenceintervalassociatedwiththisestimatecanruleouteffectssmallerthan2.7bp
orlargerthan7.9bp,andtheestimatesfrom2014to2017allfallwithinthesebounds. Toprovide
some context, this effect is similar in magnitude to the difference in municipal bond yields be-
tweenstatesthatallowmunicipalbankruptcyrelativetostatesthatdonot(Gao,Lee,andMurphy
(2019)).
To the extent that climate change is a salient risk to bondholders, the effect should be largest
in longer-maturity bonds. This is true regardless of the precise nature of the risk (e.g., migration
due to expected inundation, worsening storm intensity). Consistent with this, the within-district
effectofSLRoncreditspreadsissignificantlylargerforlong-maturitybonds. However,atthedis-
trictlevel,long-runSLRexposureisalsohighlycorrelatedwithstormsurgerisk. IfSLRexposure
proxies for hurricane risk, then our results are also consistent with investors pricing a near-term
increaseinstormfrequencyandintensityinsteadofexposuretolong-runsealevelriseandinun-
dation. Controllingforstormsurgeriskhelpstodisentangletheseexplanations. Wefindthatthe
creditspreadpremiumafter2012isprimarilyattributabletoSLRexposure, andnotourmeasure
ofstormsurgerisk.
To interpret the economic magnitude of our findings, we adapt the Merton (1974) model of
credit risk to the municipal bond market. We use the model to translate the estimated effects of
SLRexposureonbondyieldsintoimpliedchangesinthefuturedistributionoflocalgovernment
cash flows. After calibrating the model to match the average yield of municipal bonds in our
sample, we find that the estimated 5.3 bp SLR exposure premium (and the confidence interval
2