NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
(UN)CONVENTIONAL MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICY
Jing Cynthia Wu
Yinxi Xie
Working Paper 30706
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30706
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2022
We are grateful to Sushant Acharya, Zach Bethune, Francesco Bianchi, Yoon Joo Jo, Serdar
Kabaca, as well as seminar and conference participants at RISE Inflation Conference at Rice
University, Johns Hopkins University, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Indiana University,
the Bank of Canada, Sveriges Riksbank, and Carleton University for helpful comments. Wu
acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation under Grant No. SES-1949107. The
views in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of
Canada. Correspondence: cynthia.wu@nd.edu, yinxi.xie.econ@gmail.com. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Jing Cynthia Wu and Yinxi Xie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

(Un)Conventional Monetary and Fiscal Policy
Jing Cynthia Wu and Yinxi Xie
NBER Working Paper No. 30706
December 2022
JEL No. E5,E62,E63
ABSTRACT
We build a tractable New Keynesian model to jointly study four types of monetary and fiscal
policy. We find quantitative easing (QE), lump-sum fiscal transfers, and government spending
have the same effects on the aggregate economy when fiscal policy is fully tax financed.
Compared with these three policies, conventional monetary policy is more inflationary for the
same amount of stimulus. QE and transfers have redistribution consequences, whereas
government spending and conventional monetary policy do not. Ricardian equivalence breaks:
tax-financed fiscal policy is more stimulative than debt-financed policy. Finally, we study
optimal policy coordination and find that adjusting two types of policy instruments, the policy
rate together with QE or fiscal transfers, can stabilize three targets simultaneously: inflation, the
aggregate output gap, and cross-sectional consumption dispersion.
Jing Cynthia Wu
Department of Economics
3060 Jenkins Nanovic Hall
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556
and NBER
cynthia.wu@nd.edu
Yinxi Xie
Bank of Canada
234 Wellington Street West
Ottawa, ON K1A 0G9
Canada
yinxi.xie.econ@gmail.com

1 Introduction
In response to the Great Recession and COVID-19 pandemic, the Federal Reserve (Fed) has
conducted massive quantitative easing (QE) by expanding its balance sheet from $900 billion
in August 2008 to $9 trillion by early 2022. Meanwhile, the Treasury has implemented a
sequence of fiscal stimuli, including $800 billion of the Paycheck Protection Program and
$800 billion of the Economic Impact Payments. How do we compare all the emergency
monetary and fiscal policy? Moreover, in light of the recent surge in inflation, which jumped
from close to zero in May 2020 to about 9% in June 2022, the Fed has raised the policy
rate aggressively in 2022.1 Around the same time, many state governments have provided
another round of fiscal stimulus to help households navigate the increased cost of living.
Understanding how an expansionary fiscal policy could potentially interact with monetary
tightening is critical.
We propose a tractable New Keynesian model that features four policy instruments (the
policy rate, QE, fiscal transfers, and government expenditures) to contribute to this discus-
sion. Our model can be reduced to an IS equation, a Phillips curve, and four policy rules.
We compare individual policies and have four findings. First, when fiscal policy is fully
tax financed, lump-sum fiscal transfers and government spending have the same aggregate
implications as QE, because the three policy tools enter both the demand side (IS curve)
and the supply side (Phillips curve) in the same fashion.
Second, to provide the same amount of stimulus, conventional monetary policy is more
inflationary than QE or tax-financed fiscal policy. That is because the policy rate only enters
the IS curve, whereas QE and tax-financed fiscal policy enter both the IS and Phillips curve.
This result speaks directly to the 2021-2022 inflation surge caused by pandemic-induced
global supply chain disruption and the Russian invasion of Ukraine. In 2022, the Fed raised
its policy rate sharply without unwinding its balance sheet, while 17 states sent out inflation-
1We calculate inflation using the percentage change from a year ago of “Consumer Price Index for All
UrbanConsumers: AllItemsinU.S.CityAverage(CPIAUCSL)”fromtheFederalReserveEconomicData.
1

relief checks to residents to alleviate the higher cost of living. Our model implies the mix of
tightening conventional monetary policy and stimulative fiscal policy can potentially lower
inflation without putting additional pressure on economic activities.
Third, although the four types of policy can provide similar stimulus to the economy,
they have different redistribution consequences. QE and tax-financed lump-sum transfers
make a transfer from the unconstrained household to the constrained household, whereas
government expenditures and the policy rate do not have a similar redistribution channel.
The fourth result is that the Ricardian equivalence breaks. Our model implies fiscal
policy is more stimulative when it is taxed financed than when it is debt financed. In partic-
ular, when they are fully debt financed, fiscal transfers or government expenditures become
neutral, because the expansionary effect of the fiscal policy cancels out the contractionary
effect of issuing debt.
Our model reconciles three discrepancies between empirical and theoretical literature.
First, empirical work has focused mostly on the central bank’s balance sheet and used it to
argue for an expansionary effect of QE since the Great Recession. On the other hand, theory
suggests the total outstanding debt held by the public should be used to capture the overall
government balance sheet policy and the empirical literature’s focus on the Fed’s balance
sheet is one-sided, especially monetary operations are much smaller than fiscal actions in
practice. However,ourmodelagreeswiththepracticeintheempiricalliteratureandprovides
a rationale for it: the contractionary effect of the fiscal authority’s debt issuance is wiped
out by the expansionary effect the fiscal policy provides, and thus, only the central bank’s
balance sheet is relevant to summarize the joint effort made by the monetary and fiscal
authorities.
Second, a standard model implies a constant fiscal multiplier.2 But empirical studies
present a wide range of estimates, and show that the multiplier decreases with the debt-to-
GDP ratio. Consistent with the empirical finding, our model produces a state-dependent
2Our discussion abstracts from the fact that the same model implies a larger fiscal multiplier at the zero
lower bound.
2