NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW ABUNDANT ARE RESERVES?
EVIDENCE FROM THE WHOLESALE PAYMENT SYSTEM
Gara Afonso
Darrell Duffie
Lorenzo Rigon
Hyun Song Shin
Working Paper 30736
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30736
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2022
This paper presents preliminary findings and is being distributed to economists and other
interested readers solely to stimulate discussion and elicit comments. The views expressed in this
paper are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the position of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, the Bank for International Settlements, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research. Any errors or omissions are the responsibility of the
author(s).
At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w30736.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Gara Afonso, Darrell Duffie, Lorenzo Rigon, and Hyun Song Shin. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How Abundant Are Reserves? Evidence from the Wholesale Payment System
Gara Afonso, Darrell Duffie, Lorenzo Rigon, and Hyun Song Shin
NBER Working Paper No. 30736
December 2022
JEL No. E42,E44,E52,E58,G22
ABSTRACT
Before the era of large central bank balance sheets, banks relied on incoming payments to fund
outgoing payments in order to conserve scarce liquidity. Even in the era of large central bank
balance sheets, rather than funding payments with abundant reserve balances, we show that
outgoing payments remain highly sensitive to incoming payments. By providing a window on
liquidity constraints revealed by payment behavior, our results shed light on thresholds for the
adequacy of reserve balances. Our findings are timely, given the ongoing shrinking of central
bank balance sheets around the world in response to inflation.
Gara Afonso Lorenzo Rigon
Federal Reserve Bank of NY Stanford Department of Economics
33 Liberty Street 579 Jane Stanford Way
New York, NY 10045 Stanford, CA 94305
Gara.Afonso@ny.frb.org U.S.
lrigon@stanford.edu
Darrell Duffie
Graduate School of Business Hyun Song Shin
Stanford University Bank for International Settlements
Stanford, CA 94305-7298 Centralbahnplatz 2
and NBER ˘4051 Basel
duffie@stanford.edu Switzerland
Hyunsong.shin@bis.org

1 Introduction
Asmajorcentralbanksrespondtoheightenedinflationbyremovingpolicyaccommodation,
includingthroughlargereductionsoftheirbalancesheets,acriticalissueistheadequacyof
reserves for the smooth functioning of money markets and the financial system as a whole.
We approach this issue from the perspective of the payment system. Before the era
of large central bank balance sheets, banks relied to a large extent on incoming payments
to fund outgoing payments. This was forced by the small aggregate quantity of reserve
balances supplied by central banks. Because outgoing payments deplete a bank’s reserve
balances,banksreliedheavilyonincomingpaymentstofundoutgoingpayments,conserving
scarce liquidity. The sensitivity of outgoing payments to incoming payments has served as
a window on the shadow price of liquidity.
In the era of large central bank balance sheets, it has been conventional wisdom that
the reliance of banks on their incoming payments to make outgoing payments would no
longer apply because banks hold abundant reserves at their central banks. However, we
findthat,evenintheeraof“ample”reserves,theamountofpaymentsthatabankmakesin
a given minute depends significantly on the amount of payments that it has received over
preceding minutes, indicating a high degree of dependence between incoming payments
and outgoing payments. In the terminology of game theory, this is evidence of “strategic
complementarity,” in that payments are increasing in the payments made by others.
Theclosecouplingofinterbankpaymentsthatwefindsuggeststhatbanksactasthough
theirintradayreservebalancesareascarceresource,evenwhentotalreservebalancesinthe
USbankingsystemarewellover$1trillion,farinexcessofaggregatereservebalancesbefore
the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) of 2008-2009. This in turn suggests that there is still
a potential for strategic cash hoarding when reserve balances get sufficiently low. Indeed,
this happened in mid-September 2019 and mid-March 2020, when large banks suddenly
negotiated very high interest rates for providing overnight liquidity in the Treasury repo
market.
In this paper, we study the coupling of interbank payments in the Fedwire Funds
Service(Fedwire)system–theprimarylarge-valuepaymentsystemoperatedbytheFederal
Reserve– as a lens into the key question of the adequacy of reserve balances in the era of
large central bank balance sheets. In 2020, the Fedwire Service handled a daily payment
value of over $3.3 trillion dollars, meaning that payments on the scale of annual US GDP
weremaderoughlyevery7days. Inspiteofthescaleandspeedofpaymentsthatgothrough
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4282909

large-value payment systems, the principles underpinning account-based payment systems
haveremainedlargelyunchangedforcenturies. Apaymentismadebydebitingtheaccount
of the payer and crediting the account of the receiver. In the case of a wholesale payment
systemsuchasFedwire,thesystem’sparticipantsholdbalancesattheFederalReserve,but
the ledger operations are common among most bank-railed payment systems. The sender
of a payment must have sufficient deposit balances to initiate a payment. Failing that, the
payer must first borrow the needed amount (and then receive the loaned funds) or must
wait until other incoming payments replenish its deposit balance sufficiently to send the
payment.
Before the GFC, banks in most jurisdictions maintained small reserve balances at the
centralbankcomparedtotheiroutgoingpaymentvolumes. Theyreliedheavilyonincoming
payments to accumulate sufficient balances to make outgoing payments. The reliance on
incoming payments implied a high velocity of payments and a high degree of strategic
complementarity among system participants, whereby the willingness to make payments
promptly was greater when other system participants did so. Strategic complementarity
gives rise to potential gridlock scenarios whenever a cautious stance by banks that wait for
sufficientincomingpaymentsbeforemakingoutgoingpaymentsslowsdownthesystemasa
whole. McAndrewsandPotter(2002)studiedthegridlockthatfollowedthe9/11attacksin
2001. Afonso and Shin (2011) and Yang (2022) provide models calibrated for the Fedwire
systemtostudytheimpactofliquidityhoardingonthefunctioningofthepaymentsystem.
In order to avoid potential gridlocks, the Federal Reserve provides daylight overdrafts,
intraday loans to banks that they can use to make outgoing payments in the expectation
that positions would be positive before the end of the day.1
DiscussionofstrategicpaymenttimingcomplementariesfadedfromviewaftertheGFC,
with the large expansion of reserve balances at the central bank in many jurisdictions
caused by central bank asset purchase programs. The conventional wisdom has been that
large reserve balances maintained by banks reduced or eliminated the reliance on incoming
payments to make outgoing payments.
This conventional wisdom turns out to be false. In an empirical investigation of the
Fedwire system in the United States, we find that strategic complementarity of payments
is alive and well. A 1-percent increment received in incoming payments by a bank in a 15-
minute window predicts an additional 0.4 percent of outgoing payments in the subsequent
1Further modeling of strategic payment timing games is provided by Bech (2008), Bech and Garratt
(2003), and Nellen (2019).
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4282909