NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ADVERSE SELECTION AND NETWORK DESIGN UNDER REGULATED PLAN PRICES:
EVIDENCE FROM MEDICAID
Amanda R. Kreider
Timothy J. Layton
Mark Shepard
Jacob Wallace
Working Paper 30719
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30719
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2022
We are grateful to Amanda Starc, Joel Segel, Emilie Jackson, and participants at the Conference
of the American Society of Health Economists and the National Tax Association conference for
their helpful comments and suggestions. We gratefully acknowledge funding from the Laura and
John Arnold Foundation, the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (K01-HS25786-01),
the National Institute of Mental Health (T32-MH019733), and the National Institute on Aging
(T32-AG000186, P01AG032952). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does
not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health or any other
organization. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w30719.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Amanda R. Kreider, Timothy J. Layton, Mark Shepard, and Jacob Wallace. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Adverse Selection and Network Design Under Regulated Plan Prices: Evidence from Medicaid
Amanda R. Kreider, Timothy J. Layton, Mark Shepard, and Jacob Wallace
NBER Working Paper No. 30719
December 2022
JEL No. H51,I11,I13
ABSTRACT
Health plans for the poor increasingly limit access to specialty hospitals. We investigate the role
of adverse selection in generating this equilibrium among private plans in Medicaid. Studying a
network change, we find that covering a top cancer hospital causes severe adverse selection,
increasing demand for a plan by 50% among enrollees with cancer versus no impact for others.
Medicaid’s fixed insurer payments make offsetting this selection, and the contract distortions it
induces, challenging, requiring either infeasibly high payment rates or near-perfect risk
adjustment. By contrast, a small explicit bonus for covering the hospital is sufficient to make
coverage profitable.
Amanda R. Kreider Mark Shepard
University of Pennsylvania Harvard Kennedy School
Colonial Penn Center #308 Mailbox 114
3641 Locust Walk 79 JFK Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104 Cambridge, MA 02138
akreid@wharton.upenn.edu and NBER
mark_shepard@hks.harvard.edu
Timothy J. Layton
Harvard Medical School Jacob Wallace
Department of Health Care Policy Yale School of Public Health
180 Longwood Avenue Department of Health Policy and Management
Boston, MA 02115 60 College Street
and NBER New Haven, CT 06520
layton@hcp.med.harvard.edu jacob.wallace@yale.edu

1 Introduction
Adverseselection,thetendencyofhigh-costconsumerstodemandmoregenerousinsurance,isa
commonconcernininsurancemarkets. Itiswell-establishedthatselectioncan, anddoes, distort
pricesandcauseconsumerstosortinefficientlybetweeninsuredanduninsuredstatesorbetween
moreorlessgenerouscoverage(Einav,Finkelstein,andCullen2010;Handel,Hendel,andWhin-
ston 2015). In the extreme, selection can completely unravel markets (Akerlof 1970; Hendren
2013). However, selectioncanaffectmorethanpricesandmarketstability. Itcanalsoincentivize
insurers to distort contracts to “cream-skim” low-risk consumers and avoid high-risk consumers
(Rothschild and Stiglitz 1976; Veiga and Weyl 2016). While price distortions affect who enrolls
ininsurance, contractdistortionscanreducethequalityofinsurancecontractsforallwhoenroll,
including restricting access to the benefits most needed by the sickest consumers. Hence, such
contractdistortionsmaybeafirst-orderconcernforconsumerwelfare.
In this paper, we provide new evidence on the role of adverse selection in shaping the de-
sign of hospital networks by health insurers. We study these incentives in Medicaid managed
care, the largest individual health insurance market in the U.S., covering over 55 million people
and accounting for over $300 billion in annual payments to private health plans (Kaiser Family
Foundation 2022). Because Medicaid covers some of the nation’s most vulnerable populations,
understandingtheincentivesthatshapeaccesstospecialtyhospitals—alongstandingconcernin
thismarket(Marksetal.2022)—ispotentiallyimportantforunderstandingthedriversofwidely-
documentedhealthandhealthcaredisparities. DespitetheimportanceofMedicaid, thereislittle
workontheroleofselectioninthismarket.1
TheMedicaidprogramrepresentsanovelandinterestingcontextinwhichtostudytheconse-
quences of adverse selection, as Medicaid markets differ in two key ways from more oft-studied
markets. First, Medicaid fully subsidizes premiums, so enrollees pay $0 for all plans. Second, in-
surer payments in Medicaid are typically set administratively, not through competition (Layton,
Ndikumana,andShepard2017). Pricecompetitionisacoreaspectofselectionmodelsgoingback
toRothschildandStiglitz(1976),withcream-skimmingincentivesarisingfrominsurers’abilityto
1.OnenotableexceptionisevidencefromTexasMedicaidthatselectionincentiveswidenedhealthdisparitiesunder
Medicaidmanagedcare(Kuziemko,Meckel,andRossin-Slater2018).
1

enterwithlow-qualityandlow-priceplans. Whetherandtowhatextentcream-skimmingarisesin
marketslikeMedicaid,withadministeredpricesandfully-subsidizedconsumerpremiums,isnot
known. In simple models of vertical competition, 100% premium subsidies eliminate problems
associated with selection, since consumers have no reason to choose lower-quality plans (e.g.,
Cutler and Reber (1998); Einav, Finkelstein, and Cullen (2010)). However, insurers’ inability to
adjustpricesinresponsetoselectionmaylimittheirabilitytoincreaseplangenerosity,potentially
worseningselection-relatedcontractdistortions.
Using data from New York’s Medicaid program, we present visually transparent evidence of
adverseselectioninresponsetoahealthplan’scoverageofatopspecialtycancerhospital. In2005,
a large, private Medicaid plan added this cancer hospital to its provider network, becoming the
only private plan in Medicaid to cover the hospital. Consistent with adverse selection, demand
among enrollees with cancer responded differentially to this change in coverage: the plan’s mar-
ket share rose by 50% among enrollees with cancer, while remaining constant among non-cancer
enrollees. One year after adding the cancer hospital, the plan reversed course and dropped the
hospitalfromitsnetwork,leadingtoasymmetricoutflowofenrolleeswithcancer.
Weexploreheterogeneityin,andpathwaysfor,thesedemandresponsestocoverageofthespe-
cialty cancer hospital. We find that people with more severe and costly cancers (e.g., metastatic
cancers) were more likely to shift to the plan. This exacerbates adverse selection and is consis-
tentwithamodelwheredemandforspecialtyhospitalcoverageriseswithdiseaseseverity. Both
the initial 2005 inflow and subsequent 2006 outflow of cancer enrollees were driven mainly by
enrolleesswitchingplans,ratherthanshiftsinnewMedicaidenrolleechoices,indicatingthatde-
mand for this hospital was strong enough to overcome the high levels of inertia in plan choice
typically observed in this market (Geruso, Layton, and Wallace 2020). Finally, there was little
change in use of the cancer hospital by the plan’s existing enrollees, suggesting that adverse se-
lection, rather than a change in utilization among inframarginal enrollees, was the driving factor
behindtheinsurer’sdecisiontosubsequentlydropthecancerhospitalfromitsnetwork.
Whilethereisclearevidenceofadverseselection,theenrolleesdrivingthisselectionconstitute
a small group. Only 2% of Medicaid enrollees in our setting have cancer. Hence, the prevalence
of cancer among the plan’s enrollees only rose from 2.2% to 3.2% following its decision to cover
thehospital,leadingtosmallchangesintheplan’saveragecost. Despitethis,theplanresponded
2