NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SEARCH FRICTIONS AND PRODUCT DESIGN IN THE MUNICIPAL BOND MARKET
Giulia Brancaccio
Karam Kang
Working Paper 30775
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30775
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2022
The research reported here was supported by the National Science Foundation through Grants
#2117227 and #2117297. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Giulia Brancaccio and Karam Kang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Search Frictions and Product Design in the Municipal Bond Market
Giulia Brancaccio and Karam Kang
NBER Working Paper No. 30775
December 2022
JEL No. L0,L12,L15,P0
ABSTRACT
This paper shows that product design shapes search frictions and that intermediaries leverage this
channel to increase their rents in the context of the U.S. municipal bond market. The majority of
bonds are designed via negotiations between a local government and its underwriter. They are
then traded in a decentralized market, where the underwriter often also acts as an intermediary.
Exploiting variations in state regulations that limit government officials’ conflicts of interest, we
provide evidence that bond design from the government’s perspective involves a trade-off
between flexibility and liquidity, but the underwriter benefits from designing and trading complex
bonds. Motivated by these findings, we build and estimate a model of bond origination and trades
to quantify market inefficiency driven by underwriters’ role in intermediating trades and discuss
policy implications.
Giulia Brancaccio
New York University
Kaufman Management Center
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
giulia.brancaccio@nyu.edu
Karam Kang
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Ave
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
kangk@andrew.cmu.edu

SEARCH FRICTIONS AND PRODUCT DESIGN
IN THE MUNICIPAL BOND MARKET
GIULIA BRANCACCIO AND KARAM KANG
Abstract. This paper shows that product design shapes search frictions and that
intermediariesleveragethischanneltoincreasetheirrentsinthecontextoftheU.S.
municipal bond market. The majority of bonds are designed via negotiations be-
tweenalocalgovernmentanditsunderwriter. Theyarethentradedinadecentral-
ized market, where the underwriter often also acts as an intermediary. Exploiting
variations in state regulations that limit government officials’ conflicts of interest,
we provide evidence that bond design from the government’s perspective involves a
trade-offbetweenflexibilityandliquidity, buttheunderwriterbenefitsfromdesign-
ingandtradingcomplexbonds. Motivatedbythesefindings,webuildandestimate
a model of bond origination and trades to quantify market inefficiency driven by
underwriters’ role in intermediating trades and discuss policy implications.
Keywords: Complexity, Decentralized market, Intermediaries, Negotiation, Prod-
uct design, Revolving-door regulation, Search frictions, Vertical relations
1. Introduction
Search frictions are present in many markets, including real estate, used goods,
healthcare, and over-the-counter financial markets. In these markets, the search pro-
cess may be more costly for niche products, those with unique features that are hard
to evaluate and decide on. Do some producers benefit from designing such products
at the expense of consumers? If so, can policies remedy it and improve market effi-
ciency? This paper studies these questions in the context of the U.S. municipal bond
Date: October 25, 2022.
Brancaccio (email: giulia.brancaccio@nyu.edu), New York University, CEPR, and NBER.
Kang (email: kangk@andrew.cmu.edu): Carnegie Mellon University and NBER.
We thank Heski Bar-Isaac, Panle Jia Barwick, Matilde Bombardini, Robert Clark, José Ignacio
Cuesta, Daniel Garrett, Alessandro Gavazza, Phil Haile, Burton Hollifield, Gaston Illanes, Jihye
Jeon, Teddy Kim, Claudia Robles-Garcia, Marc Rysman, Holger Sieg, Francesco Trebbi, Kenneth
Winston, Milena Wittwer, and the participants at seminars and conferences. Special thanks to
Santiago Tellez Alzate, Aneil Gir, Esha Gupta, Abigail Kessler, Akash Mankude, Michele Valinoti,
and Helen Zhao for excellent research assistance. The research reported here was supported by the
National Science Foundation through Grants #2117227 and #2117297.
1

2
market, with a $4 trillion market capitalization, on which state and local governments
rely to finance public infrastructure projects like schools and bridges. Lessons from
our study can be applicable to other markets; for example, the proliferation of highly
customized and increasingly complex products in insurance, annuity, and mortgage
markets has recently ignited a policy debate concerning whether a standardization
mandate could be beneficial (Aguilar, 2015; Bernard, 2016).
One of the prominent features of the municipal bond market is its relatively
low liquidity. This is costly for issuing governments, who need to offer higher yields
to compensate the investors for their bonds’ low liquidity. The policy community,
such as the US Securities and Exchanges Commission, considers the complexity of
municipal bonds as one of the culprits for the low liquidity. The simplest bonds only
specify the length of maturity and fixed interest rate paid on a semiannual base, but
many include nonstandard provisions to introduce features such as floating interest
rates and unique redemption clauses. On the one hand, these provisions introduce
flexibility valuable for the government. For example, redemption clauses may allow
the government to refinance its debt at a low rate. On the one hand, the provisions
are difficult to price and assess, increasing trading frictions for investors. This paper
studies whether municipal bond design resolves this trade-off between flexibility and
liquidity efficiently. In this respect we offer an important contribution to the policy
debate on how to lower the cost of investment in public infrastructure, much needed
to update the overstretched U.S. infrastructure that was built decades ago.
How the aforementioned trade-off in bond design is resolved depends on the
originationprocess. Mostmunicipalbondsareissuedvianegotiation,whereanissuing
government and an underwriter negotiate over bond design and the terms of sale. An
underwriter is typically an investment bank, whose primary role is to purchase the
entire bond from the government and resell it to investors. The underwriter is often
also a leading intermediary in the trading market of the bonds it issues, since it can
exploit its information on who initially purchased its bonds and who owns them to
more easily locate interested investors (O’Hara, 2011). This advantage can be more
pronouncedwhenabondismorecomplexandrequiresmoreinvolvedcommunications
with a potential new buyer. For this reason, an underwriter may benefit from adding
nonstandard provisions to a bond by improving its competitive advantage over other
intermediaries in the trading market. Our paper investigates how this incentive may
affect bond design and shape search frictions.