NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CENTRAL BANKS AS DOLLAR LENDERS OF LAST RESORT:
IMPLICATIONS FOR REGULATION AND RESERVE HOLDINGS
Mitali Das
Gita Gopinath
Taehoon Kim
Jeremy C. Stein
Working Paper 30787
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30787
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2022
We are grateful to Helene Hall for outstanding research assistance. Thanks also to Goetz von
Peter and Swapan-Kumar Pradhan of the BIS for helping us with the BIS data, to numerous IMF
country teams for obtaining and/or sharing country-level data with us, and to Wenxin Du and
IMF staff for their many helpful comments. The views expressed in this paper are those of the
authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF, its Executive Board, or IMF
management or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w30787.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 International Monetary Fund, circulated with permission. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Central Banks as Dollar Lenders of Last Resort: Implications for Regulation and Reserve
Holdings
Mitali Das, Gita Gopinath, Taehoon Kim, and Jeremy C. Stein
NBER Working Paper No. 30787
December 2022
JEL No. E42,F4,G15
ABSTRACT
This paper explores how non-U.S. central banks behave when firms in their economies engage in
currency mismatch, borrowing more heavily in dollars than justified by their operating exposures.
We begin by documenting that, in a panel of 53 countries, central bank holdings of dollar
reserves are significantly correlated with the dollar-denominated bank borrowing of their non-
financial corporate sectors, controlling for a number of known covariates of reserve
accumulation. We then build a model in which the central bank can deal with private-sector
mismatch, and the associated risk of a domestic financial crisis, in two ways: (i) by imposing ex
ante financial regulations such as bank capital requirements; or (ii) by building a stockpile of
dollar reserves that allow it to serve as an ex post dollar lender of last resort. The model
highlights a novel externality: individual central banks may tend to over-accumulate dollar
reserves, relative to what a global planner would choose. This is because individual central banks
do not internalize that their hoarding of reserves exacerbates a global scarcity of dollar-
denominated safe assets, which lowers dollar interest rates and encourages firms to increase the
currency mismatch of their liabilities. Relative to the decentralized outcome, a global planner
may prefer stricter financial regulation (e.g., higher bank capital requirements) and reduced
holdings of dollar reserves.
Mitali Das Taehoon Kim
International Monetary Fund International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street NW 700 19th St. NW
Washington, DC 20431 Washington, DC 20431
mdas@imf.org tkim@imf.org
Gita Gopinath Jeremy C. Stein
International Monetary Fund Department of Economics
700 19th St. NW Harvard University
Washington, DC 20431 Littauer 219
ggopinath@imf.org Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jeremy_stein@harvard.edu

1. Introduction
Central banks around the world hold large balances of foreign currency reserves, with the
U.S. dollar accounting for the dominant share of these reserves, at about 59% of the total.1 In the
aggregate, foreign official accounts held $7.06 trillion of dollar securities in March of 2022, with
$4.06 trillion of this in the form of U.S. Treasury securities.2 This makes foreign reserve managers
among the most important players in the Treasury market, a fact that is often argued to be a key
determinant of the level of U.S. interest rates.3 The implications of these reserve balances for
market outcomes were also dramatically highlighted in the COVID-pandemic-induced “dash for
cash” in March of 2020, when heavy foreign central bank selling of Treasuries played a major role
in the dislocations seen in that market.4
What explains the large appetite of global central banks for foreign currency reserves, and
for dollar reserves in particular? In this paper, we focus on one potential motive, arising out of the
fact that firms in many countries run a significant currency mismatch in their capital structures,
borrowing heavily in dollars even when they have largely domestic operating exposures.5 We
argue that in the face of such mismatch, a central bank will have a natural incentive to stockpile
dollars, so that it can more effectively serve as a lender of last resort in a state of the world where
the local economy and banking system are under stress and need to be bailed out. We then go on
to explore the normative implications of this behavior, showing how the reserve-accumulation
decisions of individual central banks can be excessive relative to a global optimum to the extent
that they do not internalize the general-equilibrium impact of their choices on the aggregate supply
of safe dollar assets and on the dollar interest rate.
We begin by presenting some simple empirical relationships to motivate our subsequent
theoretical work. We document that in a panel of 53 countries, central bank holdings of dollar
reserves (relative to GDP) are significantly correlated with the dollar-denominated bank borrowing
1 Source: IMF COFER data.
2 Source: Treasury International Capital data.
3Early analyses of the impact of foreign demand for U.S. dollar assets and its effect on interest rates include Bernanke
(2005), and Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas (2008).
4 See, e.g., Vissing-Jorgensen (2021).
5 This tendency is documented in Du and Schreger (2022).
1

of the non-financial corporate sector (again relative to GDP), controlling for a number of known
covariates of reserve accumulation. The interpretation we have in mind is that the latter variable is
a rough proxy for the currency mismatch of the corporate sector, which in turn drives the currency
exposure of the banking system and ultimately the dollar lender-of-last-resort motive in our theory.
Next, building on the framework in Gopinath and Stein (2018), we develop a model of
optimal reserve accumulation for a small open-economy central bank that faces a risk of a banking
crisis, a risk which is exacerbated when the non-financial corporate sector runs a currency-
mismatched capital structure. Importantly, while reserve holdings can help to mitigate the fallout
from a banking crisis ex post, they are not the only policy tool available. We consider the
possibility that the central bank can also deploy ex ante financial-regulatory tools, such as bank-
capital regulation. The optimal mix of these tools depends on a straightforward tradeoff. On the
one hand, when ex ante regulation is too stringent, this reduces the profitability of the local banking
sector and hence social welfare; this effect tends to favor reserve accumulation. On the other hand,
there is a carrying cost associated with reserve holdings, which is roughly given by the difference
between the domestic and dollar interest rates. When this carrying cost is larger, the balance tips
back towards using more heavy-handed financial regulation, and less reserve accumulation.
While this small open-economy version of the model helps to make sense of the basic
cross-sectional empirical patterns we see in the data, a primary contribution of the paper is in
fleshing out the model’s normative properties. In particular, suppose we have a global economy in
which many central banks act as price-takers in the market for safe dollar assets. If each of these
central banks sets their regulatory and reserve-holding policies individually, so as to maximize
own-country welfare, how does the outcome compare to one in which a global central planner
aims to maximize global welfare?
Here the model highlights a novel externality: individual central banks may tend to over-
accumulate dollar reserves, relative to what the global planner would choose. This is because
individual central banks do not internalize that their hoarding of reserves exacerbates a global
scarcity of dollar-denominated safe assets and puts downward pressure on dollar interest rates.
This downward pressure on dollar rates in turn exacerbates the tendency of private-sector firms to
engage in currency mismatch, increasing their exposure to a dollar appreciation. Relative to the
2