NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
NEWS DIFFUSION IN SOCIAL NETWORKS AND STOCK MARKET REACTIONS
David Hirshleifer
Lin Peng
Qiguang Wang
Working Paper 30860
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30860
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2023, Revised February 2024
The paper was previously circulated under the title “Social Networks and Market Reactions to
Earnings News.” We appreciate helpful comments and discussions from Linda Allen, Kenneth
Ahern, Brad Barber, Tony Cookson, Ming Dong, Anastassia Fedyk (discussant), William
Goetzmann, Jeremiah Green (discussant), Harrison Hong (discussant), Chong Huang, Paul Irvine,
Mark Kamstra, Matthew Jackson, Danling Jiang, Christian Leuz, Dongmei Li (discussant), Roger
Loh, Yueran Ma, Suraj Malladi, Asaf Manela (discussant), William Mullins (discussant), Lilian
Ng, Joshua Pollet (discussant), Asani Sarkar, Zheng Sun, Jun Tu, Wei Wu (discussant), Wei
Xiong, Lu Zheng, Dexin Zhou, Qifei Zhu, participants at BESC University of Queensland,
Nanyang Technological University, the University of California, Irvine, Peking University, Texas
A&M University, the University of Miami, the University of South Carolina, York University,
the European Securities and Markets Authority, ESCP Business School, the Bank of England, the
Financial Intermediation Research Society Meetings, the International Virtual Research Seminars
on Finance, the NBER conference on Big Data and Securities Markets, the American Economic
Association Annual Meetings, the American Finance Association Annual Meetings, the China
International Conference in Finance, the Midwest Finance Association Meetings, the USC/
Marshall Conference on Social and Behavioral Finance, the Conference on Network Science and
Economics, the Future of Financial Information Conference, the Western Finance Association
Conference, and the Hawaii Accounting Research Conference. We appreciate the recognition
from the Driehaus Center for Behavioral Finance Research Prize and Peng thanks the Krell
Research Fund and the Keynes Fund for generous support. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by David Hirshleifer, Lin Peng, and Qiguang Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

News Diffusion in Social Networks and Stock Market Reactions
David Hirshleifer, Lin Peng, and Qiguang Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 30860
January 2023, Revised February 2024
JEL No. G11,G12,G14,G4,G41
ABSTRACT
We study how the social transmission of public news influences investors’ beliefs and securities
markets. Using data on social networks, we find that earnings announcements from firms in
higher-centrality counties generate stronger immediate price, volatility, and trading volume
reactions. Post-announcement, such firms experience weaker price drift and faster volatility decay
but higher and more persistent volume. These findings indicate that greater social connectedness
promotes timely incorporation of news into prices, but also opinion divergence and excessive
trading. We propose the social churning hypothesis, which is confirmed using granular data from
StockTwits messages and household trading records.
David Hirshleifer Qiguang Wang
Marshall School of Business Hong Kong Baptist University
University of Southern California Wing Lung Bank Building,
3670 Trousdale Pkwy 34 Renfrew Road
Los Angeles, CA 90089 Kowloon Tong
and NBER Hong Kong
hirshlei@marshall.usc.edu China
qiguangw@hkbu.edu.hk
Lin Peng
Wasserman Department of
Economics and Finance
Baruch College
City University of New York
lin.peng@baruch.cuny.edu

1 Introduction
In classic models of information in asset markets, people learn from others only indirectly
through observation of market prices or quantities. There is growing evidence that more
direct forms of social interaction, such as conversation, also affect investment decisions (see
the review of Kuchler and Stroebel 2021). Past models of social interactions in financial
markets have identified both beneficial and deleterious effects on investor behavior. On the
one hand, they can disseminate valuable information and lead to superior decisions and
efficient prices. On the other hand, social interactions can also propagate incorrect beliefs
and naïve investor attention, thereby reducing information efficiency.1
We study here the social dissemination of attention to a crucial type of public news:
corporate earnings announcements. Past research has shown that stock prices do not in-
corporate this news promptly, leading to predictable abnormal returns over several months
after the event date (e.g., Ball and Brown 1968, Bernard and Thomas 1989). The leading
explanation for this delay is that not all investors are immediately attentive to earnings news
(see, e.g., Bernard and Thomas 1989, Hirshleifer and Teoh 2003). When there are inatten-
tive investors, attention to earnings news may spread through social networks. Accordingly,
this paper explores how investor social transmission networks influence the speed of news
diffusion, beliefs, trading behavior, and asset prices.
Our approach is motivated by the findings of Banerjee et al. (2013, 2019) that informa-
tion about microfinance or immunization spreads faster when signals are seeded at central
nodes in a network. In the stock market context, there is extensive evidence that investors
invest in local firms and are more attentive to news about such firms.2 This suggests that
earnings news may first capture the attention of local investors and that this attention then
disseminates through the network of investors via word-of-mouth.
We therefore hypothesize that investor attention to earnings announcements made by
firms located in counties with greater centrality in the social network of investors tends
1Models in which social interactions potentially improve decision-making and efficiency include Ellison
and Fudenberg (1995), Colla and Mele (2010), and Özsöylev and Walden (2011). However, other studies
haveshownthatsocialinteractionscanalsoleadtothespreadofrumors,amplifybehaviorbiases(DeMarzo,
Vayanos, and Zwiebel 2003, Hirshleifer 2020, Han, Hirshleifer, and Walden 2021), trigger information cas-
cades (Bikhchandani, Hirshleifer, and Welch 1992, Banerjee 1992), and create free-riding incentives (Han
and Yang 2013).
2Onlocalbiasininvesting,trading,andinformationsearch,seeCovalandMoskowitz(1999),Ivkovićand
Weisbenner(2005,2007),MassaandSimonov(2006),SeasholesandZhu(2010),Hongetal.(2014),andChi
and Shanthikumar (2017).
1

to diffuse more quickly. This implies stronger immediate volume and return responses to
earnings news and higher immediate return volatility. In other words, higher centrality
opposes the usual sluggishness of market responses to earnings news. This implies less post-
earnings announcement drift and a more precipitous post-event drop in return volatility.
To test for such effects, we define a firm’s local investor base as the set of investors
located in its headquarters county, and the firm’s centrality (CEN) as the centrality of
its local investor base in the social network of its potential U.S. investors. We find that
earnings announcements by firms based in high-centrality locations tend to generate stronger
immediate stock price, volatility, and trading volume responses for the two-day window
around the announcement, [0, 1]. Also consistent with earlier resolution of uncertainty,
during the post-announcement period ([2, 61 ]), returns exhibit weaker drift and faster decay
⇤
of volatility.3 Notably, however, for such firms, volume remains high and persistent in the
post-announcement period.
More specifically, our proxy for network centrality is based upon the newly available
Social Connectedness Index (SCI), which measures the connectedness between U.S. counties
(Bailey et al. 2018b) using data from Facebook, a social network with about a quarter of a
billion users in the United States and Canada.4 The centrality of a firm is measured as the
centrality of its headquarters county in the matrix of SCIs between county pairs.
Figure 1 presents a heat map showing one of the centrality measures - eigenvector cen-
trality, across U.S. counties that serve as headquarters for publicly listed firms. The darker
colors correspond to higher centrality deciles. The image illustrates marked geographical
variations, demonstrating that the centrality can vary significantly between two adjacent
counties. For instance, Cook County, IL, which encompasses the city of Chicago, ranks
among the counties with the highest centrality. In stark contrast, some counties neighboring
Cook, such as McHenry, IL, Berrien, MI, and Porter, IN, have significantly lower centrality,
falling into the bottom 30th percentile. This variation implies that social network central-
ity encompasses more than just state-level effects or factors related to geographic closeness.
3The post-announcement window ([2, 61⇤]) refers to the period from two days after an announcement to
five days before the next announcement.
4Facebookbecameavailableafter2004andhad243millionactiveusersintheUnitedStatesandCanada
asof2018. A2018surveyshowedthat68%ofU.S.adultsuseFacebook,thatroughlythree-quartersofthem
visit the site daily, and that users span a wide range of demographic groups (except for those 65 and older)
(Smith and Anderson 2018). Facebook social connectedness has been shown to be related to migration of
people, borders of historic empires, international trade, and upward income mobility (Bailey et al. 2018b,
2020, Chetty et al. 2022).
2