NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANK STRESS TESTING, HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT AND RISK MANAGEMENT
Thomas Schneider
Philip Strahan
Jun Yang
Working Paper 30867
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30867
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2023
Authors received no research funding from sources other than their home institutions. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Thomas Schneider, Philip Strahan, and Jun Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Bank Stress Testing, Human Capital Investment and Risk Management
Thomas Schneider, Philip Strahan, and Jun Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 30867
January 2023
JEL No. G20
ABSTRACT
This paper studies banks’ investment in risk management practices following the Global
Financial Crisis and the advent of stress testing. Banks that experienced greater losses during the
Crisis exhibit stronger demand for risk management talents. Banks increase their demand for
highly skilled stress test labor in anticipation of a test and following poor performance on a test.
Following this higher demand, banks exhibit lower systematic risk and lower profitability. While
stress testing has modernized banks’ internal risk management by spurring the acquisition of
highly skilled risk management talent, recent changes to the tests could erode its efficacy.
Thomas Schneider Jun Yang
Old Dominion University Notre Dame
Norfolk, VA 23529 South Bend, IN 46556
tischnei@odu.edu jyang23@nd.edu
Philip Strahan
Carroll School of Management
324B Fulton Hall
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
philip.strahan@bc.edu

1. INTRODUCTION
The 2007-2009 Global Financial Crisis (GFC) represents a massive risk management
failure on the part of both private-sector financial firms and their regulators. The financial system
itself became over-leveraged due to the growth of products like credit default swaps in the early
2000s, and lending practices became lax due to the growth of securitization in areas such as
subprime mortgage lending (Mian and Sufi, 2009). Many of these changes occurred, or were
accelerated, by gaps in regulation.1 In the aftermath of the GFC, regulators have attempted to fill
these gaps with new programs designed to foster resiliency, and bank stress testing is among the
most important of these regulatory innovations. Although a burgeoning literature studies the
efficacy of stress testing, little is known about how stress testing has changed the way banks
approach risk management.
This paper analyzes banks’ investment in human capital aimed at managing risk following
the GFC and the advent of bank stress testing.2 We first document a rising demand for risk
management expertise over the subsequent decade, and we show that this demand is greater among
banks that suffered heavier losses during the GFC.3 Next, we examine how stress testing has
shaped banks’ demand for risk managers and find that banks seek to hire highly skilled stress test
labor in anticipation of a test and following poor performance on a test. Finally, we find that this
higher demand translates to lower systematic risk and lower profitability. Overall, our results
1 OTC derivatives markets were loosely regulated and offered a means to increase economic leverage for firms like
AIG. Novel securitization techniques enabled banks to maintain ostensibly low levels of risk and hold artificially low
levels of regulatory capital. In one form of such regulatory arbitrage, Acharya et al. (2013) show that asset-backed
commercial paper vehicles used to support loan securitization were designed specifically to avoid bank capital
regulations. These structures collapsed spectacularly starting in the summer of 2007 and were the harbinger of the
full-on crisis in late 2008.
2 Our analysis is done at the level of the bank holding company (“BHC”). To avoid these clumsy terms, we instead
generally refer to ‘banks’ throughout the text.
3 Kho et al. (2000) focuses on loss exposure to emerging market crises of the 1990s, but they do not analyze subsequent
risk management hiring, as we do.
1

suggest that stress testing has catalyzed advancement in risk management through the acquisition
of highly skilled talent.
Our data come from Burning Glass Technologies (BGT), which reports comprehensive
information for online advertisements by firms looking to hire at all levels across the organization.
These data, we argue, capture labor demand, as they reflect the kinds of skills banks are seeking
to employ. As such, they help us understand what banks are trying to achieve in their human
resources policies, as opposed to whom they succeed in hiring (which would capture both labor
supply and demand effects).4
Using BGT, we document that total demand for risk management jobs climbed nearly six-
fold from 12,000 job posts by banks in 2010 to over 70,000 posts by 2019, before falling during
the coronavirus pandemic (Figure 1A). The data clearly show that risk management has been a
persistent and increasingly important factor at banks in the years following the GFC.
To understand this pattern, we consider two effects of the GFC on banks’ labor demand.
First, we look for, and find, evidence that banks learned about their risk exposure from the trial by
fire during the Crisis and responded by demanding more risk management skills. Specifically, we
focus on banks’ exposure to losses during the 2008-2009 period, and we find that banks with higher
losses during the GFC subsequently increase their hiring of people with risk management skills
relative to less-affected banks in the cross-section. This effect is large economically, and it is not
subsumed by bank characteristics such as size, real estate exposure, and whether the bank is subject
to stress testing.
4 We do not have access to data on actual bank hiring by skill domain. As far as we know, no such systematic data
exists for U.S. banks.
2