NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE FISCAL CONSEQUENCES OF MISSING AN INFLATION TARGET
Michele Andreolli
Hélène Rey
Working Paper 30819
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30819
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2023
We would like to thank for useful comments and discussions Olivier Blanchard, Luis Fonseca,
Philip Lane, Maurice Obstfeld, Anna Rogantini Picco, and Vania Stavrakeva as well as seminar
and conference participants at LBS, at the IMF Annual Research Conference, and at the EUI and
Banque de France "Headwinds: upcoming macroeconomic risks" Conference. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Michele Andreolli and Hélène Rey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Fiscal Consequences of Missing an Inflation Target
Michele Andreolli and Hélène Rey
NBER Working Paper No. 30819
January 2023
JEL No. E31,E44,E52,E60,F45,H63
ABSTRACT
The European Central Bank is unique in setting monetary policy for several sovereign states with
heterogeneous debt levels and different maturity structures. The monetary-fiscal nexus is central
to the functioning of the euro area. We focus on one particular aspect of that nexus, the effect the
reliability of the European Central Bank's monetary policy on public finances. We show that
when the ECB misses its inflation target this has large heterogeneous fiscal consequences for
Euro Area countries. For comparison we also estimate the fiscal consequences of the Federal
Reserve and the Bank of England missing their inflation targets. They are also sizeable.
Michele Andreolli
London Business School
mandreolli@london.edu
Hélène Rey
London Business School
Regents Park
London NW1 4SA
United Kingdom
and CEPR
and also NBER
hrey@london.edu

1 Introduction
WhentheEurowasborn,Mundell’soptimalcurrencyareatheorygaveanumberofimportant
insights (Mundell, 1961). A currency union would benefit from lower cross border transaction
costs, in part due to lower exchange rate volatility. This would stimulate international trade
(Rose, 2000) and international investment. A common currency would help complete the
single market. But relinquishing monetary policy would also lead to important costs. When
countries face asymmetric shocks, it would be harder for them to adjust, all the more so if
labour mobility were low. The Euro Area labour mobility was not as high as in the United
States due in particular to language barriers. In contrast, a non negligible amount of adjust-
ment came from that channel in the US (Blanchard and Katz, 1992). Kenen (1969) added
that the lack of fiscal transfers across countries would also be a problem. Against that view,
Frankel and Rose (1998) argued in favour of the “endogeneity of optimum currency areas”
making the point that a common monetary policy would lead to more symmetric demand
shocks and therefore that concerns about abandoning an independent monetary policy may
be overblown. In contrast Krugman (1993) pointed out that lower transaction costs in trade
would lead to more sectoral specialisation across countries, mirroring what had happened in
the United States. Portes and Rey (1998) emphasized the potential role of the Euro as an in-
ternational currency if financial fragmentation in European bond and capital markets were to
be reduced and the UK with its global financial centre were to become part of the Euro. The
problem of running a single monetary policy with heterogeneous fiscal policies was thorny.
The issue of moral hazard and the negative externality of the debt of one state on others was
discussed and resulted in the adoption of the Maastricht criteria and later the Stability Pact,
with the adoption of arbitrary numerical debt and deficit limits. Even though the importance
of financial regulation was probably under-appreciated at the time, particularly the doom
loop between sovereign and banking sector solvency, financial stability and the lender of last
resort role of the ECB were examined and warnings issued in the first CEPR Monitoring the
European Central Bank Report (Begg et al., 1998). But some topics, which turned out to be
important ex post were never discussed at any length in the literature. Among those are the
asymmetry of monetary policy transmission across Euro Area economies because of different
financial and debt structures or some important aspects of the nexus between a common
2

monetary policy and heterogeneous fiscal policies. For example, differences in the maturity
of public debt have important effects on monetary policy transmission (see Andreolli, 2022).
But debt of different durations also have important implications for the interactions between
fiscal and monetary policies. We take up one of the dimensions of the monetary fiscal policy
nexus in this paper. We start by documenting the important asymmetries in terms of debt
levels and duration structures across Euro Area countries. We then show that in an environ-
ment where a credible Central Bank systematically undershoots its target for many years,
heterogeneous duration structures lead to large differential fiscal effects across countries. In
a context of declining real rates such as the one we had since the birth of the Euro, countries
with long duration debt pay significantly higher service charges than countries with short
dated debt, ceteris paribus. This is all the more true if the ECB, a credible central bank,
persistently undershoots its target. Indeed, while short term bonds are priced using volatile
expectations highly related to realized inflation, longer-dated bonds are priced using close-to-
target inflation expectations. When realized inflation falls systematically short of the target
for an extended period of time, countries with high debt levels and long debt duration pay a
significantly higher fiscal costs than others. There are two effects which reinforce each other:
a long maturity effect, which is a conscious choice in order to insure against a rise in rates -
albeit a slow moving one as debt management offices, who pick debt maturity structures tend
to exhibit a strong status quo bias in terms of debt structures; a mispricing effect due to the
credibility of the Central Bank despite the persistent and one-sided deviations from target.
Quantitatively they add up to several additional points of GDP in service charges and to
large effects on debt accumulation -for some countries, in the order of 20 points of GDP. We
highlight therefore another potential channel of divergence in the Euro Area, which is linked
to heterogeneous debt durations and levels as well as persistent one-sided deviations from
the inflation target. In particular, missing an inflation target persistently increases the gap
between the fiscal positions of the long duration countries and those of the short duration
countries. We also examine the recent period where the Central Bank overshoots its target
significantly.
Related Literature We contribute mainly to two literatures: the optimal currency area
literature, as described above, and the literature on inflation expectations and their implica-
3