NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MUTUAL FUND FLOWS AND THE SUPPLY OF CAPITAL IN MUNICIPAL FINANCING
Manuel Adelino
Sophia Chiyoung Cheong
Jaewon Choi
Ji Yeol Jimmy Oh
Working Paper 30980
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30980
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2023
We thank Daniel Bergstresser, Peter Block, Jun Chen, Ahmet Degerli, Dimitris Georgoutsos,
Chang Joo Lee, Junho Oh, Clemens Sialm, Hanyi Livia Yi and seminar participants at the 2023
AFA, 2022 AIM Investment Conference, 2022 AoF, 2022 Asian FA, 2022 APAD, 2022
Brookings Municipal Finance Conference, 2022 CAFM, 2022 FMA, 2022 Paris December
Conference, 2022 PFMC, 2022 SFS Cavalcade Asia-Pacific, the University of Illinois Urbana-
Champaign, and the City University of Hong Kong. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Manuel Adelino, Sophia Chiyoung Cheong, Jaewon Choi, and Ji Yeol Jimmy Oh. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Mutual Fund Flows and the Supply of Capital in Municipal Financing
Manuel Adelino, Sophia Chiyoung Cheong, Jaewon Choi, and Ji Yeol Jimmy Oh
NBER Working Paper No. 30980
February 2023
JEL No. G23,G32,H74
ABSTRACT
This paper identifies the impact of fluctuations in the supply of capital from mutual funds on
municipal bond financing and makes three contributions to the literature. First, we develop an
identification strategy based on the Morningstar rating methodology at the moment that funds
reach 5 years in operation. This approach isolates supply-side effects that are orthogonal to both
fund and issuer fundamentals and can be applied in a broad range of settings. Second, we show
that exogeneous fund flows lead to more municipal bond issuances and raise bond prices, but only
when funds, issuers, and underwriters are connected through existing relationships. This result
highlights the role of relationship lending in the context of municipal bond financing. Third, our
results suggest that municipal bond issuers exploit favorable financing conditions to issue bonds
with shorter delays and lower transaction costs, such as non-general-obligation bonds that require
no voter approval and non-green bonds. These frictions can limit the impact of capital-supply
shocks on municipal financing.
Manuel Adelino Jaewon Choi
Fuqua School of Business Department of Finance
Duke University University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
100 Fuqua Drive jaewchoi@illinois.edu
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER Ji Yeol Jimmy Oh
manuel.adelino@duke.edu 25-2 Sungkyunkwan-ro
Jongno-gu
Sophia Chiyoung Cheong Seoul 03063
City University of Hong Kong Korea (South)
c.cheong@cityu.edu.hk jyjoh@skku.edu
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w30980

1. Introduction
Bond mutual funds are an important source of capital in the municipal bond market. Figure 1
shows that mutual funds accounted for 26.5% of all municipal bond holdings in the U.S. as of the third
quarter of 2020, making those funds the largest non-household municipal bondholders. In this paper, we
propose and implement a novel identification strategy to provide causal evidence that capital flows from
bond funds have a significant impact on municipal bond issuance decisions and that this impact is
mediated through existing fund-underwriter-issuer relationships.
FIGURE 1 HERE
It is not immediately apparent how much and through which mechanisms fund flows impact
municipal financing. On one hand, municipalities largely raise funds through bond issuance as opposed
to lending from banks.1 Mutual funds are the second largest holders of municipal bonds after households,
and, as such, a larger supply of capital to funds should encourage debt issuance. On the other hand,
demand-side frictions (e.g., institutional or local political constraints) could lead to a sluggish response
and a small measured elasticity of issuance to flows. More generally, measuring the effects of flows on
issuance is complicated by the fact that mutual fund flows are affected by past performance and,
consequently, by the fundamentals of bond issuers themselves (Wardlaw, 2020; Berger, 2021).
There is also limited evidence of whether fund-underwriter-issuer relationships matter in this
setting. Despite functioning as a public market, and thus in principle largely involving arm’s-length
lending, the municipal bond market is also highly fragmented. Small regional borrowers seeking financing
rely on their underwriters, who also have ongoing relationships with mutual funds.2 On the mutual fund
side, funds are likely to value relationships with underwriters who enable them to obtain the desired
1 Ivanov and Zimmermann (2021) estimate the size of the municipal bank loan market at around $200 billion as of the third
quarter of 2020, which only accounts for just over 5% of the total amount outstanding in municipal bonds, at over $3.9 trillion.
2 Municipal bonds for relatively small issuers (e.g., local municipalities) are typically sold through negotiated sales, in which
issuers sell bonds through their relationship underwriters. Large muni issuers (e.g., states) often issue bonds through
competitive sales, in which issuers take bids from multiple underwriters.
1

allocations in initial bond offerings,3 and they also need to trade with these institutions later when they
function as dealers in secondary markets.4 These factors suggest that capital flows from funds to
municipal issuers are likely to operate through fund-underwriter-issuer relationships, a channel that
shapes the feedback channel that operates through market prices.5
In this paper, we document a statistically and economically strong association between fund flows
and the likelihood of issuance. We use a sample of 20,502 municipal issuers held by one or more of the
3,312 share classes of 1,010 U.S. municipal bond funds between 2000 and 2020. A simple regression of
fund flows on issuance suggests that a one-standard-deviation increase in fund flows is associated with a
0.55% increase in the likelihood of new issuance by issuers already included in a fund’s portfolio as well
as with a 1.4% increase in the issuance amount.
We employ a new identification approach to separate the supply-side effects of bond investor
flows from demand-side effects in which municipalities may have better performance (and thus drive
fund flows) and also be more likely to issue new bonds to finance local growth opportunities. The starting
point for this approach is the stylized fact that Morningstar ratings are an important driver of fund flows
(Del Guercio and Tkac, 2008 and Reuter and Zitzewitz, 2021). Our instrument exploits mechanical and
predictable changes in Morningstar overall star ratings that are unrelated to recent performance or fund
fundamentals. Morningstar publishes overall star ratings ranging from 1 to 5 stars, calculated as the
weighted averages of 3-, 5-, and 10-year star ratings, which in turn are constructed using the within-
category rankings of each share class based on its risk-adjusted return over the corresponding time
horizon (Morningstar, 2021). Crucially, overall star-rating calculations depend on the age of a fund. When
a fund is between 3 and 5 years old, the 5-year star rating is unavailable and the overall star rating is the
3 Prior studies of corporate bonds document favoritism in bond offerings (e.g., Nikolova, Wang, and Wu, 2020), with
underwriters offering greater portions to their relationship investors at discounts (e.g., Cai, Helwege, and Warga, 2007).
4 The lack of market liquidity for municipal bonds also adds to the importance of relationships in this market (Harris and
Piwowar, 2006; Green, Li, and Schürhoff, 2007; Schwert, 2017). Lenders, or asset managers in the municipal bond market,
need to contact dealers, who also tend to be underwriters in the primary market, to execute secondary-market transactions.
5 Edmans, Goldstein, and Jiang (2012) and Khan, Kogan, and Serafeim (2012) show, for example, that noise in prices induced
by fund fire sales and purchases affects corporate financing. For municipal bonds, this feedback effect of market prices is
almost non-existent, as municipal bonds typically trade only a few times per year (see, e.g., Schwert, 2017).
2