NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO CONFLICT OF INTERESTS DISCLOSURES WORK?
EVIDENCE FROM CITATIONS IN MEDICAL JOURNALS
Christian Leuz
Anup Malani
Maximilian Muhn
Laszlo Jakab
Working Paper 30927
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30927
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2023
We thank Pierre Azoulay (discussant), Elissa Philip Gentry (discussant), Joey Engelberg, Matt
Gentzkow, workshop participants at Emir Kamenica, Raghu Rajan as well as Duke Empirical
Health Law Conference 2022, AEA Annual Conference 2021, Chicago Booth, 4th Annual
Theory of the Firm Conference at Columbia Business School, EAA Annual Conference 2021,
Goethe University of Frankfurt, Harvard Business School and University of Mannheim for their
helpful comments. We thank Denrick Bayot, Tom Barry, Pietro Bonetti, Conor Devitt, Phoebe
Holtzman, Kevin Jiang, Daniel Marcin, Matt O’Keefe, Bruno Pellegrino, Bartosz Woda, Chuck
Zhang as well as Brigid Adviento, Kathryn Burger, Li Cai, Amy Hua, Gang Huang, Yihao Jiang,
Jeff Lam, James Leiner, Miroslav Lysyuk, Stefan Mitrovic, Ji Min Park, Ognjen Rakita, Russell
Ruch, Steven Rand, Nicole Sherwood, Sonia Vora, and Chloe Zhu for tremendous research
assistance. We are grateful to Pierre Azoulay for sharing patent citation and NIH grant data with
us. We gratefully acknowledge the generous financial research support by the Initiative on Global
Markets at the Booth School and the University of Chicago Law School. Malani thanks Barbara
J. and B. Mark Fried Fund at the University of Chicago Law School for financial support. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w30927
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Christian Leuz, Anup Malani, Maximilian Muhn, and Laszlo Jakab. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Conflict of Interests Disclosures Work? Evidence from Citations in Medical Journals
Christian Leuz, Anup Malani, Maximilian Muhn, and Laszlo Jakab
NBER Working Paper No. 30927
February 2023
JEL No. D83,D84,G18,K20,L51,M40,O31
ABSTRACT
Financial ties between drug companies and medical researchers are thought to bias studies
published in medical journals. To enable readers to account for such bias, most medical journals
require authors to disclose potential conflicts of interest. We examine whether disclosure reduces
article citations, indicating a discount. A challenge to estimating this effect is selection as drug
companies may seek out higher quality authors. Our analysis confirms this positive association.
Including observable controls for article and author quality attenuates but does not eliminate this
relation. We perform three tests. First, we show that the positive association is weaker for review
articles, which are more susceptible to bias. Second, we examine article recommendations to
family physicians among articles that are a priori more homogenous in quality. We find a
significantly negative association between disclosure and expert recommendations, consistent
with discounting. Third, we conduct an analysis within author and article, exploiting journal
policy changes that result in conflict disclosure by an author. We examine the effect of this
disclosure on citations to a previously published article by the same author. This analysis reveals
a negative citation effect. Overall, our evidence is consistent with the notion that other
researchers discount articles with disclosed conflicts.
Christian Leuz Maximilian Muhn
Booth School of Business Chicago Booth
University of Chicago 5807 S Woodlawn Ave.
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue Chicago, IL 60637
Chicago, IL 60637-1610 United States
and NBER maximilian.muhn@gmail.com
cleuz@chicagobooth.edu
Laszlo Jakab
Anup Malani Analysis Group
University of Chicago Law School laszlo.jakab@analysisgroup.com
1111 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
amalani@uchicago.edu

1. Introduction
Financial ties between drug companies and doctors are thought to bias doctors’ judgments
about the value of medical treatments. Physicians given free drug samples or attending company-
sponsored symposia are more likely to prescribe sponsors’ drugs (Orlowski and Wateska 1992;
Engelberg et al. 2014). Similarly, research funded by drug companies is more likely to find
favorable treatment effects (Bekelman et al. 2003; Sismondo 2008; Lundh et al. 2017; Hansen et
al. 2019; Oostrom 2019). Potential reasons range from implicit bias to drug companies’ control
over research design or their suppression of adverse research results (Collier and Iheanacho 2002;
Moore and Loewenstein 2004; Sage 2006).
One solution is to bar such financial ties altogether. Laws such as Stark I and II prohibit
physicians from making referrals for diagnostic tests at labs to which they have a financial tie
(Bethard 2004). Many medical schools bar medical product companies from sponsoring student
events on their campuses (AMSA 2016). Prominent journals, such as The New England Journal
of Medicine (NEJM), from 1990, and The Lancet, from 2004, refused publishing reviews and/or
editorials by authors with relevant financial conflicts (Relman 1990; Drazen and Curfman 2002;
James and Horton 2003). Interestingly, editors of both journal later relaxed their bans as they had
difficulty finding qualified authors without conflicts (Drazen and Curfman 2002). Likewise, the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration for a period barred doctors with ties to drug companies from
serving on advisory committees making recommendations on drug approvals, but the policy has
been revised because it was difficult to find physicians without a conflict (Pham-Kanter 2014).
A reason not to ban financial ties is that they can also provide benefits. About two thirds of
the roughly $200 billion in U.S. medical research conducted each year is funded by drug
companies (Research America 2022). The pharmaceutical industry is particularly important for
1

clinical research: in 2014 it funded 6,550 human trials as compared to 1,048 funded by the NIH
(Cohn 2015). The free exchange of information between researchers and manufacturers could
facilitate technological advances in medicine, and hence stigmatizing industry interaction could
be detrimental to innovation (e.g., Epstein 2010; Stossel and Stell 2011). Financial ties to industry
could also facilitate the adoption of new drugs: for instance, physicians with drug company ties
were early adopters of calcium channel blockers for hypertension (Rosenbaum 2015).
An alternative to a ban on financial ties is the disclosure of such conflicts to relevant parties.
In 2013, the US adopted the Physician Payment Sunshine Act, which requires medical product
companies to disclose all payments over USD 10 to physicians on a public website. Physicians
are required to disclose to patients if they received a fee for referring their patients to a clinical
trial (Sah et al. 2016). Nearly all medical journals require disclosure of sources of funding and
other financial conflicts of interest by journal authors (Malani et al. 2015; Shawwa et al. 2016).
The idea behind such disclosure regulation is to enable readers to interpret the findings in light of
the conflicts. Moreover, to the extent that readers and other researchers view certain conflicts as
problematic, they can discount articles with such conflicts, which in turn provides researchers with
incentives to choose financial ties with drug companies judiciously. Therefore, disclosure
regulation is often viewed as an alternative to a ban, as well as a compromise between the concerns
about conflicts and the potential benefits of financial ties.1
1 Although this paper focuses on conflict disclosures in medical research, there is a broader trend towards disclosure
regulation in lieu of explicit rules for behavior in many areas (e.g., Fung et al., 2007; Leuz and Wysocki, 2016). But
there are also examples combining the two policy tools. In U.S. elections, some rules limit outside contributions to
political campaigns while others permit them but require that contributions be disclosed (Federal Election
Commission 2015). U.K. corporate governance follows a comply-or-explain approach, setting standards for audit
committees, remuneration committees and boards, from which a company may deviate, but then it has to provide an
explanation, which in turn could trigger a market sanction (Cadbury Report, 1992). Similarly, U.S. law firms are
barred from representing new clients whose interests may conflict with existing clients, unless the law firm discloses
that conflict to both existing and new clients, and both clients decide to waive it (Patterson 1980).
2