NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DYNAMIC PRICING REGULATION AND WELFARE IN INSURANCE MARKETS
Naoki Aizawa
Ami Ko
Working Paper 30952
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30952
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2023, Revised August 2024
We thank Mariacristina De Nardi, Ying Fan, Sebastian Fleitas, Eric French, Daniel Gottlieb,
Gautam Gowrisankaran, Ben Handel, Igal Hendel, Jean-François Houde, You Suk Kim, Karen
Kopecky, Dirk Krueger, Lorenzo Magnolfi, Nate Miller, Martin O’connell, Ashley Swanson,
Motohiro Yogo, as well as participants at the 2022 ASSA meeting, Becker Friedman Institute
(University of Chicago), Cowles Conference (Models & Measurement), Dynamic Structural
Econometrics Conference, LAEF conference at UCSB, MIT, Montreal Ageing Conference, NBER
Insurance group meeting, Rice, Ridge conference, SNU, Stanford Institute of Theoretical
Economics (IO of Healthcare and Consumer Finance Markets), Triangle Micro Conference at
UNC, University of Nebraska, USC, University of Wisconsin-Madison, and WashU Olin for
helpful comments and discussions. Funding from the Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation
provided by the University of Wisconsin-Madison Office of the Vice Chancellor for Research and
Graduate Education is gratefully acknowledged. All remaining errors are our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Naoki Aizawa and Ami Ko. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Dynamic Pricing Regulation and Welfare in Insurance Markets
Naoki Aizawa and Ami Ko
NBER Working Paper No. 30952
February 2023, Revised August 2024
JEL No. D14, G22, I13, L11, L51
ABSTRACT
While the traditional role of insurers is to provide protection against individuals’ idiosyncratic risks,
insurers themselves face substantial uncertainties due to aggregate shocks. To prevent insurers from
passing these aggregate risks onto consumers, governments have increasingly adopted dynamic
pricing regulations, which limit insurers’ ability to change premiums over time. We evaluate
dynamic pricing regulation using an equilibrium model of the U.S. long-term care insurance
market, featuring insurers’ lack of commitment and endogenous market structures. We find that
stricter dynamic pricing regulation has a limited impact on improving consumer welfare, while it
reduces insurer profits and increases market concentration.
Naoki Aizawa
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin-Madison
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
naoki.aizawa@nber.org
Ami Ko
Georgetown University
Department of Economics
3700 O st NW, ICC 557
Washington DC 20007
ami.ko@georgetown.edu

1 Introduction
Social insurance programs and private insurance markets have grown enormously over the
last several decades in many countries (Chetty and Finkelstein, 2013). Most studies on the
insurance sector focus on demand-side issues related to individual-level risks, such as adverse
selection and moral hazard. However, insurers themselves also face substantial financial un-
certainties in many markets. For example, insurers selling relatively new products confront
considerableclaimsuncertaintiesbecausetheylackexperienceinpredictinginsuredrisksand
pricing contracts accordingly. Even experienced insurers may be challenged when serving a
new class of consumers with demographics they have never dealt with before, such as those
in the health insurance marketplaces established by the Affordable Care Act. Insurers sell-
ing long-term contracts are particularly vulnerable because their financial stability is more
exposed to aggregate cost shocks and interest rate fluctuations.
One important concern is that insurers might pass the risks they face onto consumers
by adjusting premiums. The resulting premium volatility could exacerbate the financial
uncertainties that individuals must manage. To mitigate this issue, the government has
increasingly adopted dynamic pricing regulations, which limit insurers’ ability to adjust
rates. However, little is known about the welfare effects of these regulations. On the one
hand, dynamic pricing regulation might improve consumer welfare by decreasing uncertainty
about future rate increases. On the other hand, it might induce insurers to exit the market
or charge higher markups, which could adversely affect consumer welfare.
We study the impact of dynamic pricing regulation on market equilibrium and welfare in
the context of U.S. private long-term care insurance (LTCI). LTCI is a long-term contract,
with a lag of over 20 years between the purchase and use of the insurance. In addition to
being a relatively young insurance product, the dynamic nature of LTCI contracts makes it
challenging for insurers to accurately predict future claims costs. Insurers do not commit to
a fixed premium schedule over the lifetime of a contract and often revise rates for a given
buyer cohort, subject to state regulatory approval. To reduce uncertainty about future rate
increases, many states adopted new standards in their oversight of the LTCI industry in
the early 2000s, known as the Rate Stability Regulation of 2000 (RSR 2000). These new
standards were designed to deter rate increases for existing consumers. This paper examines
the design of dynamic pricing regulation by developing and estimating an equilibrium model
of LTCI.
Understanding the oversight of the LTCI industry is important in its own right. Long-term
care is one of the largest uninsured financial risks faced by elderly Americans. Formal long-
1

termcareexpensestotaledover$310billionin2013, whichiscloseto2%ofGDP.1 Long-term
care spending is expected to further increase with population aging. Yet, only 10% of the
elderly own private LTCI. Substantial progress has been made to assess several demand-side
channels, such as Medicaid’s crowd-out effect on the demand for private LTCI, informal care
provided by family members, and adverse selection. However, little is known about supply-
sideincentivesandtheirimpactonmarketoutcomesinLTCI.Thisgapintheliteraturecould
becriticalasthedemand-sidechannelsmightnotexplainthesubstantialdeclineofthesupply
sidewitnessedinthelasttwodecades: thenumberofactiveplansdeclinedbymorethan90%,
and the number of insurers selling new contracts plunged from over 100 to a dozen (NAIC,
2016). Thisperiodoverlapswiththetimewhenstatesimplementednewregulationstandards
to promote rate stability in the LTCI industry. One possibility is that the regulation was
one of the factors contributing to insurer exits by lowering their profitability.
We start by providing descriptive evidence for the effect of rate stability regulation on in-
surers.2 We use regulatory filings submitted by LTCI companies to the National Association
ofInsuranceCommissioners(NAIC)between2000-2007andrateincreasedataobtainedfrom
the California Department of Insurance for the years 2007-2017. Using variations in states’
adoptionofRSR2000, wefindsuggestiveevidencethattheregulationreducedrateincreases,
reaching its intended goal of improving rate stability. However, we also find evidence that
the regulation significantly reduced the number of available plans and insurers.
To quantify the trade-off surrounding dynamic pricing regulation, we develop an equi-
librium model of LTCI. In the market, risk averse consumers choose from LTCI products
supplied by distinct insurers. Risk neutral insurers face various aggregate risks (e.g., uncer-
tainty about future claims costs and interest rates) and decide whether to enter the market
and how to price their products over time conditional on entry.
The primary departures from the standard assumptions in long-term insurance markets
(e.g., Cochrane, 1995 and Hendel and Lizzeri, 2003) are the consideration of imperfect com-
petition among insurers and their lack of commitment. The LTCI market is highly con-
centrated, making it essential to accurately account for the market structure to understand
the impact of supply-side regulations. Insurers’ lack of (or limited) commitment to pricing
schedules may reflect various market frictions, including the following major ones considered
in the model. First, a significant fraction of consumers face choice frictions, believing that
premiums will remain constant over the lifetime of an LTCI contract. In this case, insurers
donotcommittofuturepremiumsbecauseofferingasmoothpricescheduledoesnotincrease
1https://www.kff.org/medicaid/report/medicaid-and-long-term-services-andsupports-a-primer/.
2We use dynamic pricing regulation and rate stability regulation interchangeably.
2