NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANK FUNDING RISK, REFERENCE RATES, AND CREDIT SUPPLY
Harry R. Cooperman
Darrell Duffie
Stephan Luck
Zachry Z. Wang
Yilin Yang
Working Paper 30907
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30907
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
February 2023, revised December 2023
The authors thank discussants Anne Duquerroy, Dan Greenwald, David Glancy, Anil Kashyap, Elie
Lewi, Jose-Luis Peydro, and Peter Zimmermann, and also thank Alena-Kang Landsberg for her
excellent research assistance. The authors are also grateful for conversations with Gara Afonso,
Yacov Amihud, Leif Andersen, Viral Acharya, Roc Armenter, Tom Baxter, Antje Berndt, Alastair
Borthwick, Tim Bowler, Laurent Clerc, Natalie Cox, Tom Deas, Fulvia Fringuelotti, Jason Granet,
Vivien Lévy-Garboua, Andrei Magasiner, John Marynowski, Bill Nelson, Peter Phelan, Michael
Roberts, Richard Sandor, Gagan Singh, Jeremy Stein, Jonathan Wallen, and Nathaniel Wuerffel, as
well as seminar and conference participants at FRBNY, Stanford University, NYU Stern, Wharton,
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Financial Stability Conference at the Federal Reserve Bank
of Cleveland, System Committee on Financial Institutions, Regulation, and Markets held at the
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, ES European Winter Meeting 2022, EFA 2022, AFA 2023 in
New Orleans, Banque de France, Symposium on Private Firms at University of Chicago, and Summer
Finance Symposium at London Business School. Duffie is an NBER Research Associate, CDI
Research Fellow, and Resident Scholar at FRBNY. The views stated in this paper are those of the
authors and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve
System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Harry R. Cooperman, Darrell Duffie, Stephan Luck, Zachry Z. Wang, and Yilin Yang.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Bank Funding Risk, Reference Rates, and Credit Supply
Harry R. Cooperman, Darrell Duffie, Stephan Luck, Zachry Z. Wang, and Yilin Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 30907
February 2023, revised December 2023
JEL No. E4,E43,G00,G01,G02,G20,G21
ABSTRACT
Corporate credit lines are drawn more heavily when funding markets are more stressed. This
covariance elevates expected bank funding costs. We show that credit supply is dampened by the
associated debt-overhang cost to bank shareholders. Until 2022, this impact was reduced by
linking the interest paid on lines to credit-sensitive reference rates such as LIBOR. We show that
transition to risk-free reference rates may exacerbate this friction. The adverse impact on credit
supply is offset if drawdowns are expected to be left on deposit at the same bank, which
happened at some of the largest banks during the COVID recession.
Harry R. Cooperman Zachry Z. Wang
Maiden Lane Stanford University
New York zzwang28@stanford.edu
hcoop18@stanford.edu
Yilin Yang
Darrell Duffie City University of Hong Kong
Graduate School of Business 9-216, Lau Ming Wai Academic Building
Stanford University 83 Tat Chee Ave
Stanford, CA 94305-7298 Kowloon Tong
and NBER Hong Kong
duffie@stanford.edu yiliyang@cityu.edu.hk
Stephan Luck
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty St
New York, NY 10045
stephan.luck@ny.frb.org

1 Introduction
In the US, most bank lending to corporations takes the form of revolving credit lines that give
borrowers the option to draw any amount of credit, up to an agreed line limit, at any time before
maturity and at committed pricing terms. Until 2022, the majority of US corporate loans, including
revolvers, had interest rates set to the London interbank offered rate (LIBOR) plus a fixed spread.1
In most of the world, however, banking has made a transition from credit-sensitive interest rate
benchmarks such as LIBOR to new “risk-free” benchmark reference rates such as the secured
overnight financing rate (SOFR). Credit-sensitive reference rates like LIBOR reduce a borrowers’
incentives to draw on committed credit lines when the cost to banks of funding these drawdowns is
high, for example during the global financial crisis (GFC) and the COVID recession. Risk-free loan
reference rates, in contrast, typically fall when markets are stressed, encouraging borrowers to draw
more heavily on credit lines just when bank funding costs rise sharply. Because of this, a collection
of large US banks argued that the transition to risk-free reference rates may reduce ex-ante incentives
for providing bank credit.2
This paper shows how the choice of loan reference rate affects the supply of revolving credit
lines. When banks are forced to fund line draws by issuing new debt, their shareholders bear a
disproportionate share of the interest expense, a form of debt overhang. This debt-overhang wedge
is priced ex-ante into the terms of credit lines. We show that the resulting adverse impact on
credit provision is in many cases mitigated by credit-sensitive reference rates that reduce borrowers’
incentives to draw on their lines when bank funding spreads are high.
We show that the transition from LIBOR to SOFR will lead to heavier drawdowns on credit
lines when bank credit spreads rise sharply. Our calibrated representative bank prices this behavior
into the terms of newly originated lines, increasing the expected cost of drawn credit by about 15
basis points, reducing total line commitments by around 6%, and reducing the expected quantity
of drawn credit by roughly 3%. The corresponding welfare loss is about 2.6%. The magnitudes of
these results are sensitive to assumptions, especially a bank’s prediction for how much of crisis line
draws will simply be left on deposit at the bank, reducing the bank’s marginal need for expensive
1We find that at the end of 2019, more than 70% of all US bank-firm lending referenced LIBOR as the underlying
floatinginterestrate.
2See the letter of September 23, 2019 of banks in the Credit Sensitivity Group to Randall Quarles, vice chair of
supervisionoftheBoardofGovernorsoftheFederalReserveSystem,JosephOtting,ComptrolleroftheCurrency,and
JelenaMcWilliams,ChairFederalDepositInsuranceCorporation.
1

external funding. If most line draws are anticipated to be left on deposit, then a transition to risk-free
reference rates could even increase the provision of credit lines.
Our analysis proceeds in three steps. First, we provide a simple equilibrium model of credit
provision. We show that giving borrowers the option to draw funds at a pre-agreed fixed spread
over a floating reference rate induces a debt-overhang cost to bank shareholders. This debt-overhang
wedge inefficiently dampens banks’ incentives to offer committed lines of credit. However, the
adverseimpactoncreditsupplyisattenuatedtotheextentthat: (1)referenceratesarecredit-sensitive
and(2)whenoriginallycontractingthelines, thebankexpectstohavealowmarginalcostoffunding
once the lines are eventually drawn. For example, the bank could anticipate that borrowers will leave
much of the drawn credit on deposit, which we show occurred during the COVID pandemic. Or, the
bank could anticipate that its marginal source of funding will be other source of deposits (Gatev and
Strahan, 2006) or low-cost emergency liquidity from the central bank.
The second part of our analysis is an empirical evaluation of funding costs associated with the
provisionofrevolvingcredit. Weuseconfidentialbank-leveldatafromtheFederalReserve’sFR2052a
report and Y14Q data collection that allow us to pin down the composition and dynamics of bank
funding costs for large US Bank Holding Companies (BHCs) in much more detail than was possible
in prior work. As of 2019, for our main sample consisting of the 20 largest US BHCs, non-financial
firms borrowed more from large banks by utilizing credit lines ($544 billion) than with conventional
term loans and other forms of commercial and industrial (C&I) lending ($444 billion). Moreover, the
largest 20 BHCs alone had around $1.3 trillion of undrawn credit-line commitments, more than the
total utilized credit from term lending and revolving credit combined. Contractually, these lines can
be drawn at any time, including under stressed-market conditions when wholesale bank funding
spreads are elevated.
Consistent with the premise of our theoretical model, we find that banks were indeed subject to
substantial draws on credit lines during the GFC (Ivashina and Scharfstein, 2010) and the COVID
recession (Acharya and Steffen, 2020; Greenwald, Krainer, and Paul, 2020). However, we find that
banksfundedlinedrawsmuchdifferentlyacrossthesetwoepisodes. DuringtheGFC,alargefraction
of cash drawn on credit lines left the banking sector, forcing banks to fund drawdowns with other
new borrowing, just when wholesale bank funding spreads were historically high (Acharya and
Mora, 2015). In contrast, we show that during the COVID recession, drawdowns were generally of
2