NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INTERNATIONAL SANCTIONS AND DOLLAR DOMINANCE
Javier Bianchi
César Sosa-Padilla
Working Paper 31024
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31024
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2023, Revised January 2025
We thank Franck Portier (editor), three anonymous referees, and participants at the Joint CEPR &
Kiel Institute Conference on Geoeconomics for insightful comments and suggestions. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Javier Bianchi and César Sosa-Padilla. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

International Sanctions and Dollar Dominance
Javier Bianchi and César Sosa-Padilla
NBER Working Paper No. 31024
March 2023, Revised January 2025
JEL No. E42, F31, F32, F34, F41, P48
ABSTRACT
We propose a simple monetary model to investigate the implications of international financial
sanctions for the preeminence of the US dollar in the international financial system. We show how
the anticipation of financial sanctions can reduce the US dollar convenience yield and the holdings
of US dollar assets. We also evaluate the implications for welfare and show that they are generally
detrimental for all countries.
Javier Bianchi
8016 West 18th Street
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis
javieribianchi@gmail.com
César Sosa-Padilla
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
3060 Jenkins Nanovic Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556
and NBER
csosapad@nd.edu

1 Introduction
The rise in geopolitical tensions triggered by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine is altering the
landscape of the international monetary system. One emerging question is whether the threat
of international sanctions could dilute the preeminence of the dollar as foreign countries
reconsider the composition and location of their foreign assets. For example, Janet Yellen,
US Treasury Secretary, argued that1
....There is a risk when we use financial sanctions that are linked to the role of
the dollar that over time it could undermine the hegemony of the dollar....
In this paper, we provide a framework to understand how the deployment of international
sanctions could undermine the preeminence of the dollar and examine the welfare implications.
We propose a simple monetary model of a reserve currency with two key ingredients.
First, we assume that dollar assets provide a special liquidity value. Second, we assume that
there is a cost of issuing safe dollar assets. These two ingredients imply that dollar assets
command a premium in equilibrium, in line with the observation that the US obtains an
“exorbitant privilege” from its status as reserve currency (Gourinchas and Rey, 2007). In this
environment, we study the implications of the anticipation of financial sanctions that reduce
a foreign country’s return on dollar assets holdings in the event of an international conflict.2
Our analysis starts from two frictionless cases, each of which abstracts from one of our key
assumptions: either issuing assets is costless for US investors, or there is no special liquidity
value from holding dollar assets. We demonstrate that in these two cases, sanctions have
no impact on the dollar’s exchange rate. We then show that in our model, in expectation
of financial sanctions, a foreign country reduces its holdings of dollar reserves. Ultimately,
the effects on the dollar exchange rate depend on monetary policy. To the extent that
monetary policy is not tightened sufficiently, we show that sanctions weaken the value of the
dollar vis-a-vis other currencies. In terms of welfare, we show that the effects are generally
detrimental for both countries. Specifically, the US incurs losses due to a diminished premium
on U.S. dollar assets, which reduces its exorbitant privilege.
Motivating empirical evidence. Figure 1 illustrates a gradual yet steady decline in the
share of foreign reserves held in US dollars. This share exceeded 70% at the start of the
1The quote is taken from an interview with CNN from April of 2023. See also Eichengreen (2022),
Brunnermeier, James and Landau (2022) and ‘How the Ukraine war could boost China’s global finance
ambitions” by Hudson Lockett, Financial Times, March 7, 2022. For an overview of the policy discussions,
see Weiss (2022).
2For example, in the aftermath of the invasion of Ukraine, Russia’s holdings of dollar reserves in the US
were frozen.
1

21st century but has since fallen to below 60%. At the same time, the role of the Renminbi
and other currencies has increased, especially in the last 15 years. While we do not observe
a sharp move away from the US dollar in the quarters immediately following the Russian
sanctions (triggered by its invasion of Ukraine), cautionary comments from Yellen and others
point to the possibility that this and future rounds of sanctions may contribute to a reduced
role of the US dollars in official reserves. In particular, there are concerns that China may
shift its portfolio away from US dollar assets in anticipation of potential sanctions. Relatedly,
the incoming second Trump administration has threatened to impose tariffs on BRIC nations
should they transition from the dollar to the Renminbi.3
Figure 1: Currency composition of FX reserves. Quarterly data on the currency
composition of official reserves is from the IMF (COFER). Currencies that are part of the
IMF’s Special Drawing Rights (SDR) basket are the US dollar, the euro, the Japanese
yen, the British pound, and the Chinese renminbi (RMB), the latter since October 2016.
All other reserve currencies are referred to as non-SDR currencies.
Literature. Our paper is related to the literature on reserve currencies. A theme in this
literature is understanding the foundations and implications of the hegemony of the US
dollar in the global financial system (e.g., Farhi and Maggiori, 2018, Gopinath and Stein,
2021, Bianchi, Bigio and Engel, 2021, Gourinchas, Rey and Govillot, 2020, Kekre and Lenel,
3In recent work, Choi, Kirpalani and Perez (2022) estimate that the demand elasticity for US government
bonds has increased since 2015, suggesting reduced US market power (and hence, a lower convenience yield).
While they do not show that this is related to sanctions, it is suggestive that the convenience yield can
potentially respond to this and other international events.
2