NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CAPITAL CONTROLS AND TRADE POLICY
Simon P. Lloyd
Emile A. Marin
Working Paper 31082
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31082
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2023
Previously circulated and presented with the title: Capital Controls and Free-Trade Agreements.
We are especially grateful to Giancarlo Corsetti for many helpful discussions. We also thank
Laura Alfaro (discussant), Pol Antras, Gianluca Benigno, Paul Bergin, Charles Brendon, Tiago
Cavalcanti, Luca Dedola, Rob Feenstra, Rebecca Freeman, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Juan
Carlos Hallak (discussant), Oleg Itskhoki, Dennis Reinhardt, Alan Taylor, Shang-Jin Wei (editor)
and Robert Zymek, as well as presentation attendees at the University of Cambridge, Bank of
England, Money, Macro and Finance Annual Conference 2021, Royal Economic Society Annual
Conference 2021, European Economic Association Annual Conference 2022, CRETE 2022, the
2022 London Junior Macro Workshop, the V Spanish Macroeconomics Network Conference, the
Global Research Forum on International Macroeconomics and Finance (FRB New York), and the
NBER Conference on International Fragmentation, Supply Chains and Financial Frictions (Banco
Central de Chile) for useful comments. Any views expressed are solely those of the authors and
so cannot be taken to represent those of the Bank of England or to state Bank of England policy.
This paper should therefore not be reported as representing the views of the Bank of England or
members of the Monetary Policy Committee, Financial Policy Committee or Prudential
Regulation Committee. Marin acknowledges support from the Janeway Institute at the University
of Cambridge. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Simon P. Lloyd and Emile A. Marin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Capital Controls and Trade Policy
Simon P. Lloyd and Emile A. Marin
NBER Working Paper No. 31082
March 2023
JEL No. F13,F32,F33,F38
ABSTRACT
How does the conduct of optimal cross-border financial policy change with prevailing trade
agreements? We study the joint optimal determination of trade policy and capital-
flow management in a two-country, two-good model with trade in goods and assets.
While the cooperative optimal allocation is efficient, a country-planner can achieve higher
domestic welfare by departing from free trade in addition to levying capital controls,
absent retaliation from abroad. However, time variation in the optimal tariff induces
households to over- or under-borrow through its effects on the path of the real exchange
rate. As a result, optimal capital controls can be larger when used in conjunction with
optimal tariffs in specific cases; and in others, the optimal trade tariff partly substitutes for
the use of capital controls. Accounting for strategic retaliation, we show that committing to a
free-trade agreement can reduce incentives to engage in costly capital-control wars for both
countries.
Simon P. Lloyd
Bank of England
Threadneedle Street
London
EC2R 8AH
United Kingdom
simon.lloyd@bankofengland.co.uk
Emile A. Marin
University of California, Davis
Department of Economics
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95811
emarin@ucdavis.edu

1 Introduction
Trade and capital-flow management have long been key topics of macroeconomic policy and
have, once more, come into sharp focus following the Covid-19 pandemic. Following at least
two decades of integration (Baier and Bergstrand, 2007), the process of trade liberalization
appears to have stalled. The decline in average tariff rates observed worldwide in the years
prior to the global financial crisis has abated (green line, Figure 1). Alongside this, there has
been a decline in the number of new regional-trade agreements and a deceleration of global
value chain integration.1 More recent events like the US-China trade war and supply-chain
pressures have since contributed to substantially heightened uncertainty around world trade
(Ahir, Bloom, and Furceri, 2022).2 After moving in line with trade openness in the years
prior to the global financial crisis, financial liberalization too has slowed in recent years and
the International Monetary Fund has partially revised their ‘institutional view’ to emphasize a
role for managing capital flows in specific circumstances (Qureshi, Ostry, Ghosh, and Chamon,
2011).3 Partly reflecting this, the trend decline in capital-flow restrictions (Fern´andez, Klein,
Rebucci, Schindler, and Uribe, 2016) seen prior to 2007 has since reversed (blue line, Figure 1).
However, despitetradepolicyandcapital-flowmanagementgrowinginprominencesincethe
global financial crisis as this evidence suggests, academics and policymakers have typically dis-
cussed these measures separately. Trade policy discussions often balance economic forces (e.g.,
comparative advantage) with political factors (e.g., consequences of de-industrialization, trade
sanctions), while recent debates about capital controls have centred on their role in insulating
countries from large and volatile cross-border flows.
In this paper, we show that adjustments to trade policy influence optimal capital-flow man-
agementthroughtheireffectsonthepathforrealexchangeratesand, inturn, privateincentives
to borrow on international financial markets. We provide a unifying framework to study the
joint optimal determination of trade policy and capital-flow management, in a model where
both instruments are driven by a common motive: to exploit a country’s monopoly power in
markets. Within this setup, we assess how prevailing trade arrangements influence the incen-
tives for, and the size of, optimal capital flows. We then extend this framework to account for
strategic interactions between countries and use it to assess the implications of international
trade and financial arrangements for global welfare and the likelihood that capital-control wars
can emerge.
Thestartingpointforouranalysisisacanonicaltwo-country,two-goodendowmenteconomy
model, absent nominal or financial frictions. Households make an inter-temporal consumption-
savings decision and choose their optimal consumption bundle intra-temporally. In the laissez-
faireordecentralizedallocation, relativeconsumptiongrowthacrosscountriesisproportionalto
1SeeD’Aguanno,Davies,Dogan,Freeman,Lloyd,Reinhardt,Sajedi,andZymek(2021)forfurtherdiscussion.
2See Amiti, Redding, and Weinstein (2019) and Itskhoki and Mukhin (2022) for studies into the US-China
trade war and recent sanctions on Russian goods, respectively.
3See, for example, the prevalence of ‘macroprudential’ foreign-exchange interventions targeting cross-border
flows (Ahnert, Forbes, Friedrich, and Reinhardt, 2020).
2

Figure 1: Capital Controls and Trade Policy Over Time
21
01
8
6
4
)%(
sffiraT
.gvA
0.42
0.40
0.38
0.36
0.34
)1−0(
ssenevitcirtseR
wolF−latipaC
.gvA
1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
Year
Capital Controls (LHS) Tariffs (RHS)
Notes: Average capital-control restrictions (0-1 index) and tariff rates (%) across 99 countries from 1995-2019
(annual frequency). Capital-control restrictions data from Ferna´ndez, Klein, Rebucci, Schindler, and Uribe
(2016). Measure used here captures all restrictions (inflow and outflow). Tariff rates from World Development
Indicators (World Bank). Metric used here uses weighted mean applied tariff for all products, which measures
the average of effectively applied tariffs weighted by the product import shares corresponding to each partner
country. Vertical dashed line at 2007.
the relative decrease in price levels—i.e., the rate of real exchange rate depreciation.4 However,
households do not internalize the effect of their actions on relative prices. These pecuniary
externalities, described in Geanakoplos and Polemarchakis (1986), imply that a country plan-
ner maximizing domestic welfare has an incentive to manipulate the inter- and intra-temporal
terms of trade—i.e., world interest rates and relative goods prices, respectively—even though
the laissez-faire allocation is optimal from a global perspective. Within this setup, Costinot,
Lorenzoni, and Werning (2014) show that, when domestic households borrow between two
periods, the planner tends to levy capital-inflow taxes to delay consumption relative to the
decentralized allocation, but must trade off the incentive to drive down the world interest rate
with second-best effects on relative goods prices.5 In this paper, we ask: what more can a
country planner achieve by deviating from a free-trade agreement (FTA), and what might this
imply for the conduct of optimal capital controls and world welfare?
4Thiscondition,highlightedinBackusandSmith(1993)andKollmann(1995),reflectstheperfectrisk-sharing
underlying open-economy macroeconomic models with complete international asset markets.
5Capital controls introduce a wedge to the risk-sharing condition, so consumption growth can be slower
than the rate of exchange-rate depreciation. This wedge can also be understood as a measure of exchange-rate
misalignment induced by the planner at the optimal allocation (e.g., Corsetti, Dedola, and Leduc, 2020).
3