NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE MARCH 2023 BANK INTERVENTIONS IN LONG-RUN CONTEXT – SILICON
VALLEY BANK AND BEYOND
Andrew Metrick
Paul Schmelzing
Working Paper 31066
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31066
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2023
Nothing to disclose. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not
been peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that
accompanies official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Andrew Metrick and Paul Schmelzing. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The March 2023 Bank Interventions in Long-Run Context – Silicon Valley Bank and beyond
Andrew Metrick and Paul Schmelzing
NBER Working Paper No. 31066
March 2023
JEL No. G01
ABSTRACT
U.S. and European banking institutions were hit by a wave of distress in March 2023.
Policymakers on both sides of the Atlantic reacted with an array of interventions, some targeting
individual institutions, others designed to shore up the banking sector as a whole. This paper
contextualizes events using a new long-run database on banking-sector policy interventions over
the last eight centuries. On that basis, recent actions have already been unusual in their policy mix
and size – in the database, the vast majority of events with the same pattern of interventions
ultimately evolved into “systemic” bank-distress episodes.
Andrew Metrick
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
metrick@yale.edu
Paul Schmelzing
Carroll School of Management
140 Commonwealth Ave
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
USA
and Hoover Institution
paul.schmelzing@bc.edu
A source data and root paper is available at paper-and-database
https://som.yale.edu/centers/program-on-financial-stability/metrick-schmelzing-

The March 2023 bank interventions in long-run context – Silicon Valley Bank
and beyond
Andrew Metrick1 and Paul Schmelzing2
March 24, 2023
Abstract
U.S. and European banking institutions were hit by a wave of distress in March 2023.
Policymakers on both sides of the Atlantic reacted with an array of interventions, some targeting
individual institutions, others designed to shore up the banking sector as a whole. This paper
contextualizes events using a new long-run database on banking-sector policy interventions over
the last eight centuries. On that basis, recent actions have already been unusual in their policy mix
and size – in the database, the vast majority of events with the same pattern of interventions
ultimately evolved into “systemic” bank-distress episodes.
In March 2023, the failure of Silicon Valley Bank (SVB) shocked global financial markets. In many
ways, the SVB failure was a classic bank run, with details that appear drawn from the 19th century
rather than the 21st. With a deposit base more than 90% uninsured and a balance sheet badly damaged
by a combination of bad luck and bad strategy, SVB could not be saved by the standard tools of the
Federal Reserve and FDIC. Instead, the FDIC was forced to take the unusual step of a takeover during
business hours, with many details of this resolution not released until the next weekend. These events
began a series of bank interventions on both sides of the Atlantic that is still ongoing as of this writing.
A long-horizon view through the prism of intervention patterns can allow for the identification of a
“systemic” banking crisis long before the macroeconomic data of that period is complete; in this case
the combination and size of interventions in March 2023 strongly suggest that we are already in the
midst of a systemic event.
Beginning with Bagehot (1873), the management of banking crises has been closely related to the
lender-of-last-resort function of central banks. But while this association is highly salient, it has never
represented the full story. Instead, crisis-fighting finds central bankers joining fiscal authorities, deposit
insurers, and other regulators while using multi-pronged interventions that target every region of banks’
balance sheets. In this paper, we attempt to place the March 2023 interventions within this “full balance
1 Yale School of Management and NBER.
2 Boston College and Hoover Institution, Stanford. schmelzi@bc.edu.
1

sheet” framing, following the taxonomy and database of Metrick and Schmelzing (2023, henceforth
MS – online database). Figure 1 illustrates this taxonomy with 7 major categories and 20 sub-
categories; the corresponding database includes almost 2,000 interventions covering 138 countries over
750 years. Importantly, policy interventions are often associated with a “systemic” banking crises event
– standard chronologies such as Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) use evidence of policy interventions to
determine the severity of a bank-distress event: however, the MS database goes beyond such definitions
and also includes hundreds of policy intervention events that are not included in these standard
chronologies. This intervention prism allows drawing some implications for current dynamics, given
the most recent sequence of events.
Figure 1: Overview of major intervention categories and subcategories during banking-crisis
intervention episodes.
Figure 1 displays the seven major intervention categories (separate boxes) and sub-categories associated with each major
category (items within boxes), with items located on a stylized balance sheet for the financial sector. The category and sub-
category labelling follow the specific definitions in Metrick and Schmelzing (2023).
2