NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SPECIALIZATION IN BANKING
Kristian Blickle
Cecilia Parlatore
Anthony Saunders
Working Paper 31077
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31077
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2023
We would like to thank Tobias Berg, Darrell Duffie, Quirin Fleckenstein, Linda Goldberg,
Sebastian Hillenbrand, Victoria Ivashina, Elena Loutskina, Stephan Luck, Matt Plosser, Philipp
Schnabl, Johannes Stroebel, and Toni Whited as well as seminar participants at the Federal
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, The Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Temple University,
Vilanova, the University of Sydney for helpful comments and suggestions. The opinions
expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research. Any errors are our own.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Kristian Blickle, Cecilia Parlatore, and Anthony Saunders. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Specialization in Banking
Kristian Blickle, Cecilia Parlatore, and Anthony Saunders
NBER Working Paper No. 31077
March 2023
JEL No. D04,G20,G21
ABSTRACT
Using supervisory data on the loan portfolios of large US banks, we document that these banks
specialize by concentrating their lending disproportionately in a few industries. This
specialization is consistent with banks having industry-specific knowledge, reflected in reduced
risk of loan defaults, lower aggregate charge-offs, and higher propensity to lend to opaque firms
in the preferred industry. Banks attract high-quality borrowers by offering generous loan terms in
their specialized industry, especially to borrowers with alternative options. Banks focus on their
preferred industry in times of instability and relatively lower tier 1 capital as well as after sudden
surges in deposits.
Kristian Blickle Anthony Saunders
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Stern School of Business
33 Liberty St New York University
New York City, New 10045 44 West 4th Street, Room 9-91
kristian.blickle@ny.frb.org New York, NY 10012
asaunder@stern.nyu.edu
Cecilia Parlatore
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
cps272@stern.nyu.edu

1 Introduction
Banks are traditionally tasked with selecting high-quality borrowers and monitoring their
adherence to loan covenants. However, borrower selection and loan monitoring require
the costly acquisition of information. Economies of scale and deeper experience may be
built up through the specialization of lending to certain industries. After all, repeated
interactions with individual borrowers have been shown to improve a bank’s knowledge
of a borrower.1 In a similar vein, repeated lending in a specific industry can enable banks
to better evaluate the business models or collateral of borrowers in that industry.2 In
this paper, we document loan portfolio specialization across industries among large U.S.
banks and explore the determinants of such specialization and its potential consequences
for credit supply and bank stability.
First, we use detailed data on the loan portfolios of stress-tested banks in the United
States to show that even large banks specialize in lending to specific industries. We show
this pattern using several measures of specialization. Most simply, specialization can be
thought of as the degree to which a bank is "over-invested" in an industry relative to a
"diversified" lending portfolio based solely on the relative size of industries. Accordingly,
specialized banks direct a greater proportion of their C&I lending to a particular industry
– at the expense of other industries – than would be expected under pure diversification.
In Figure 1, we plot the average over-investment (in percentage points) of the 40 banks in
our sample. Over-investment is computed as the deviation between the share of a bank’s
portfolio that should be invested (if the bank were diversified) and the actual investment
1Foradiscussionofrelationshiplendingsee: Bernanke(1983),James(1987),PetersenandRajan(1995),
BergerandUdell(1995),orDegryseandOngena(2005).
2SpecializationinindustriesisdiscussedbyParavisinietal.(2020),specializationinsmallbankbusiness
models is discussed in Blickle (2020), and specialization in bank collateral has been discussed in Gopal
(2019).
1

in that industry. Additionally, we look separately at a bank’s favorite, second-favorite,
and all other industries. As can be seen, the average bank directs 8.2% more of its total
C&I lending to its single "favorite" industry (measured here at the two-digit NAICS level)
than would be expected if it were diversified. Banks only have one or two preferred
industries, which remain stable over time.
[Figure 1 about here]
Second, we find that this type of specialization is consistent with banks having supe-
rior knowledge in their specialized industry, which facilitates better ex-ante screening
and ex-post monitoring of loans. Specifically, loans made by banks specialized in a
borrower’s industry are less likely to become non-accruing or be downgraded prior to
maturity/renegotiation. By leveraging a bank’s internal loan ratings – that are unob-
servable to the market–, we can show that this performance is the result of both the
superior screening of loan applicants as well as superior post-origination monitoring.
Our results are more pronounced in non-syndicated loans. After all, a specialized bank is
most incentivized to use its superior information in instances where free-rider concerns
are mitigated. In a first extension to our main analysis, we show that despite an aggregate
decrease in bank lending to SMEs in recent years, specialized banks are more willing to
lend to smaller, more opaque firms in their industry of specialization.
Third, by looking at periods of tighter tier 1 capital within a bank or a sudden and
quasi-unsolicited increase in deposits – such as occurred during the COVID-19 outbreak
– we find that banks do not reshuffle their loan portfolio proportionally: they are less
likely to decrease lending to their industry of specialization when funds are tight and
more likely to increase lending to it after unplanned fund inflows. Moreover, using
COMPUSTAT data, we can show that this preference has very real effects on firm growth
2