NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ANALYST BIAS AND MISPRICING
Mark Grinblatt
Gergana Jostova
Alexander Philipov
Working Paper 31094
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31094
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2023
Nothing to disclose The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Mark Grinblatt, Gergana Jostova, and Alexander Philipov. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Analyst Bias and Mispricing
Mark Grinblatt, Gergana Jostova, and Alexander Philipov
NBER Working Paper No. 31094
March 2023
JEL No. G12,G13,G14,G24,G41
ABSTRACT
Cross-sectional forecasts of conservative and optimistic biases in analyst earnings estimates
predict a stock's future returns, especially for firms that are hard to value. Trading strategies—
whether based on the component of analyst bias that is correlated with major return anomalies or
the component that is orthogonal to these anomalies—earn abnormal profits. The prevalence of
optimistic analyst earnings estimates and rarity of conservative estimates emerges as a common
link between anomaly-generating firm characteristics and subsequent negative alphas. For the
vast majority of anomaly strategies, profitability disappears once we control for analyst bias.
Mark Grinblatt Alexander Philipov
Anderson School of Management George Mason University
UCLA 4400 University Drive,
110 Westwood Plaza Fairfax, VA 22030
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481 aphilipo@gmu.edu
and NBER
mark.grinblatt@anderson.ucla.edu
Gergana Jostova
George Washington University
Department of Finance
Washington, DC 20052
jostova@gwu.edu

A large body of research ties cross-sectional stock return differences to characteristics for
which high uncertainty, and often high risk, signals low returns. These characteristic-based
return signals are used to generate long-short “anomaly investment strategies.” The charac-
teristicsincludecreditrisk(Dichev1998),pastreturns(JegadeeshandTitman1993),earnings
surprises (Ball and Brown 1968), asset growth (Cooper, Gulen, and Schill 2008), analyst fore-
cast dispersion (Diether, Malloy, and Scherbina 2002), gross profitability (Novy-Marx 2013),
and a whole zoo of other characteristics summarized in Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2020).
Heterogeneity in analyst forecast bias across stocks facilitates understanding of the puz-
zling links between average returns and these characteristics. Prior research documents that
analyst earnings forecasts tend to be optimistic and their errors are predictable.1 It also
shows that forecast optimism increases with uncertainty (De Bondt and Thaler 1990; Das,
Levine, and Sivaramakrishnan 1998). Considering that anomaly strategies profit mostly from
stocks with low earnings predictability and high valuation complexity (Avramov, Chordia,
Jostova, and Philipov 2013), we investigate the extent to which anomalies “disappear” once
we control for the analyst biases associated with these stocks.
For almost all of the attributes listed above, predictable analyst forecast bias among hard-
to-value (“HTV”) stocks accounts for the anomaly strategy returns. In 5×5 sorts, the low
returns of stocks identified as overvalued by each attribute occur primarily in the most opti-
mistically forecasted quintiles. In less optimistically forecasted quintiles almost no anomaly
yields significant profits; and, with most anomalies, the long-short strategy “backfires,” pro-
ducing negative payoffs for stock quintiles with the most predictably conservative earnings
estimates. Moreover, in cross-sectional regressions of future returns on the anomaly attribute
or, separately, on our analyst bias regressors, the anomaly variable and analyst bias are sta-
tistically significant. However, when the anomaly and analyst bias regressors are included
together in the regression, the anomaly variable is insignificant in all but one cases, while the
interaction between a hard-to-value dummy and analyst bias is always significant.
1See De Bondt and Thaler (1990), Frankel and Lee (1998), Linnainmaa, Torous, and Yae (2016), and
Abarbanell and Lehavy (2003), among others.
1

We decompose analyst bias into two components, both with similar efficacy at return
prediction. The first component is orthogonal to the major anomaly characteristics. The
second is correlated with anomalies. By construction, the orthogonal component of analyst
bias cannot explain return anomalies generated by firm characteristics. Conversely, anomaly
characteristics cannot explain the return prediction success of analyst bias’s orthogonal com-
ponent. By contrast, the anomaly-correlated component of analyst bias tends to be “the
winning horse” in races between the analyst bias of hard-to-value stocks and anomalies as
return predictors. For example, of the six aforementioned anomalies, only one significantly
predicts returns once the correlated component of analyst bias is controlled for. In all cases,
however, the anomaly-correlated component of analyst bias, like its orthogonal sibling, sig-
nificantly predicts returns despite controls for the characteristic-based anomalies.
For the 20% hardest-to-value stocks, the persuasion of analysts, even when biased, is likely
to be more salient. Accordingly, alpha spreads within this stock category, which most likely
arisefromconvergencetofairvalue,standoutforthesizeoftheeconomiceffect. Here,5-factor
Fama and French (2015) alpha spreads between the least and most optimistically forecasted
quintiles of HTV stocks are between 1.1% and 1.2% per month. These magnitudes are not
a small-stock phenomenon as the quintiles are value weighted. Finally, the spread is about
the same, irrespective of whether bias quintiles are formed from the correlated or orthogonal
components of analyst bias.
These results offer a parsimonious and nuanced view of characteristic-based stock re-
turn anomalies. Prior research documents that anomaly strategy profits derive mostly from
the strategy’s short leg (Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan 2012; Avramov, Chordia, Jostova, and
Philipov 2013). Such findings motivate short sales frictions that deter arbitrageurs from cor-
recting inflated prices as an explanation for the anomaly and the asymmetry between the
profitability of its long and short legs. However, analyst bias also accounts for additional
return variation that is separate from its correlation with the anomaly characteristic. In
particular, when analysts are relatively conservative, stocks in the anomaly’s short leg tend
to earn high returns, even though the anomaly characteristic predicts a low return. Thus,
2