NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE MACROECONOMICS OF TRADE CREDIT
Luigi Bocola
Gideon Bornstein
Working Paper 31026
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31026
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2023
We thank Alessandro Dovis and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki for extensive discussions that shaped the
direction and scope of our paper. We also thank Adrien Auclert, Javier Bianchi, Saki Bigio, Laura
Castillo-Martinez, Luigi Iovino, Victoria Vanasco, Jaume Ventura, Rob Townsend, and seminar
participants at Stanford, Berkeley, LSE, CREi, UAB, University of Barcelona, UC3M, ECB,
EIEF, and Luiss for insightful comments. We thank Mohamad Adhami for research assistance.
Luigi Bocola thanks the Alfred P. Sloan foundation and the National Science Foundation for
generous funding. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Luigi Bocola and Gideon Bornstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Macroeconomics of Trade Credit
Luigi Bocola and Gideon Bornstein
NBER Working Paper No. 31026
March 2023
JEL No. E44,G01,G30
ABSTRACT
In most countries, suppliers of intermediate goods and services are also the main providers of
short-term financing to firms. This paper studies the macroeconomic implications of these
financial links. In our model, trade credit is the outcome of a long-term contract between firms
linked in the production process, and it is sustained in equilibrium by reputation forces as
customers lose the relationship with their suppliers in case of a default. These financial links give
rise to a credit multiplier: suppliers can enforce repayment of these IOUs, and they can discount
these bills with banks to obtain liquidity. This process can either dampen or amplify the output
effects of financial shocks, depending on the borrowing capacity of suppliers. Using Italian data,
we find that the credit multiplier is sizable and show that trade credit amplified the output costs of
the Great Recession by 45%.
Luigi Bocola
Department of Economics
Landau 342
Stanford University
579 Jane Stanford Way
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
lbocola@stanford.edu
Gideon Bornstein
3620 Locust Walk
2317 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104
United States
gideonbo@wharton.upenn.edu

1 Introduction
After the Great Recession, a significant amount of research was dedicated to determin-
ing the role of financial factors in overall economic instability. Most of the models used
by economists to gauge the impact of financial shocks—for instance, those building on
the pioneering work of Kiyotaki and Moore (1997b) and Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist
(1999)—put capital markets and financial intermediaries at the forefront. In these models,
companies’ funding needs are solely met by these institutions, implying, by construction,
direct spillovers of financial shocks to the demand for capital and labor by businesses.
In reality, however, most companies around the world address the bulk of their liquidity
needs using trade credit—the financing that suppliers of intermediate inputs provide in
the form of extended payment terms. Figure 1 shows the significance of this phenomenon
for non-financial businesses for a selection of advanced economies. Noticeable in the figure
is that trade credit claims are usually as large—and in countries such as Spain and Italy,
evenlargerthan—short-termdebtsecuritiesandloansissuedbynon-financialcorporations
combined. Inaddition,tradecreditisoftenmorevolatilethantheseotherdebtinstruments,
underscoring the importance of understanding its drivers and the economic effects of these
movements.
In this study, we propose a framework for examining the macroeconomic significance of
this phenomenon and reevaluate the question of how financial shocks spread through the
restoftheeconomy. Inourmodel, firmscanborrowfrombanksandfromtheirsuppliersof
intermediate inputs. Unlike bank debt, which is partially upheld by law, trade credit relies
on a reputation mechanism for enforcement, with customers having an incentive to repay
it to avoid being cut off from future supplies of the goods.1 Suppliers can then discount
these claims with banks, enhancing in this fashion the liquidity of the overall system. We
show that this credit multiplier reduces the economic distortions due to financial frictions
on average, but it also makes the economy potentially more exposed to financial market
disruptions—in that credit supply shocks not only affect firms bank financing but also
hinder the ability of their suppliers to provide trade credit. Indeed, when calibrating our
model to Italian data, we show that the presence of trade credit amplified the output costs
of the Great Recession by 45%.
We consider an economy in which households consume a basket of differentiated goods.
The production of these goods is organized on different supply chains (or sectors), with
upstream firms producing intermediate goods using labor and downstream firms using
1We introduce this asymmetry in the legal enforcement of bank and trade credit because, in most legis-
lations, trade credit is one of the most junior forms of credit. See Cuñat and García-Appendini (2012) and
JacobsonandVonSchedvin(2015)foradiscussion.
1

1.4
Trade credit as a share of short term financing
Relative volatility of trade credit
1.24
1.2
1.06
1.01
1 0.98
0.81
0.8
0.75
0.6 0.60
0.56
0.49
0.46
0.44
0.4
0.21
0.2
0
Spain Italy Germany France USA UK
Figure 1: Relative size and volatility of trade credit
Note: OurcalculationsfromannualEurostatInstitutionalSectorAccountsforthe1995-2017period. Trade
creditis"Tradecreditandotherreceivables"onthe(unconsolidated)liabilitysideofnon-financialcorpo-
rations. Short-term debt is the sum of "Short-term debt securities" and "Short-term loans" on the liability
sideofnon-financialcorporations. Wedefineshort-termfinancingasthesumofshort-termdebtandtrade
credit. The blue bar reports for each country the sample mean of trade credit as a fraction of short-term
financing. Toconstructtheredbar,wefirstHP-filterthelogoftradecreditandshort-termdebt,compute
thestandarddeviationsofbothseries,anddeterminetheirratio. Avalueabove1indicatesthatthecyclical
componentoftradecreditismorevolatilethanthatofshort-termdebt.
these inputs to produce consumption goods. We follow Bigio and La’o (2020) and assume
that part of the revenues of the final good firms are realized only after they purchase
inputs, so these firms need credit to operate. Banks can lend to firms, but because of
limited commitment, they can lend only up to a fraction of the firms’ revenues. As in
Jermann and Quadrini (2012), this debt limit is time-varying and stochastic, and we will
think about an unexpected tightening as a negative credit supply shock. Importantly, we
allow the downstream firms to borrow also from their suppliers within the context of a
long-term contract. These contracts specify not only the quantity of the good supplied and
its price but also the financing—whether payments occur at the beginning or at the end of
the period. We refer to the payments that occur at the end of the period as trade credit.
Trade credit can emerge in equilibrium as part of the optimal contract between down-
2