NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MODEL-FREE AND MODEL-BASED LEARNING AS
JOINT DRIVERS OF INVESTOR BEHAVIOR
Nicholas C. Barberis
Lawrence J. Jin
Working Paper 31081
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31081
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2023, Revised July 2023
We are grateful to Andrew Caplin, Alex Chinco, Cary Frydman, Xavier Gabaix, Alex Imas, Chen
Lian, Stefan Nagel, Elise Payzan-LeNestour, Indira Puri, Antonio Rangel, Josh Schwartzstein,
Andrei Shleifer, Michael Woodford, and seminar participants at Caltech, Columbia University,
Cornell University, Harvard University, Imperial College London, the University of California
Los Angeles, the University of Chicago, the University of Pennsylvania, Washington University,
Yale University, the AFA Annual Meeting and the NBER Behavioral Finance conference for
very useful feedback. We are also grateful to Colin Camerer, Nathaniel Daw, Peter Dayan, Sam
Gershman, John O'Doherty, and members of their lab groups for very helpful discussions about
the psychological concepts in the paper. Steven Ma provided excellent research assistance. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Nicholas C. Barberis and Lawrence J. Jin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Model-free and Model-based Learning as Joint Drivers of Investor Behavior
Nicholas C. Barberis and Lawrence J. Jin
NBER Working Paper No. 31081
March 2023, Revised July 2023
JEL No. D03,G02,G11
ABSTRACT
Motivated by neural evidence on the brain's computations, cognitive scientists are increasingly
adopting a framework that combines two systems, namely “model-free” and “model-based”
learning. We import this framework into a financial setting, study its properties, and use it to
account for a range of facts about investor behavior. These include extrapolative demand,
experience effects, the disconnect between investor allocations and beliefs in the frequency
domain and the cross-section, the inertia in investors’ allocations, and stock market non-
participation. Our results suggest that model-free learning plays a significant role in the behavior
of some investors.
Nicholas C. Barberis
Yale School of Management
P O Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
nick.barberis@yale.edu
Lawrence J. Jin
Johnson College of Business
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
and NBER
lawrence.jin@cornell.edu
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w31081

1 Introduction
Afundamentalquestioninbotheconomicsandpsychologyasks: Howdopeoplemakedecisions
in dynamic settings? The traditional answer in economics is to say that people act as if they
havesolvedadynamicprogrammingproblem. Bycontrast, overthepastdecade, psychologists
and neuroscientists have embraced a different framework for thinking about decision-making
in dynamic settings. This framework combines two algorithms, or systems: a “model-free”
learningsystemanda“model-based”learningsystem. Inthispaper,weimportthisframework
into a simple financial setting – one where investors allocate between a risk-free asset and a
riskyasset–studyitsimplicationsforinvestorbehavior,andshowthatitishelpfulforthinking
about a range of facts in finance.1
The goal of both the model-free and the model-based algorithms is to estimate the value
of taking a given action. The model-free system goes about this in a way that is different from
traditional economic models. As its name suggests, it does not use a “model of the world”: it
makes no attempt to construct a probability distribution of future outcomes. Rather, it learns
by experience. At each date, it tries an action, observes the outcome, and then updates its
estimate of the value of the action by way of two important quantities: a reward prediction
error – the reward it observes after taking the action relative to the reward it anticipated –
and a learning rate. If the prediction error is positive, the algorithm raises its estimate of
the value of the action and is more likely to repeat the action in the future; if the prediction
error is negative, it lowers the estimated value of the action and is less likely to try it again.
This model-free framework has been increasingly adopted by psychologists and neuroscientists
because of evidence that it reflects actual computations performed by the brain: numerous
studies have found that neurons in the brain encode the reward prediction error used by
model-free learning.
The model-based algorithm, by contrast, is similar to traditional economic approaches in
that it does construct a model of the world – a probability distribution of future outcomes –
and then uses this to compute the value of different actions. There are a number of model-
based approaches; we use one that is often adopted in research in psychology and that, like
1An early paper on this framework is Daw, Niv, and Dayan (2005). Two prominent implementations in
laboratory settings are Glascher et al. (2010) and Daw et al. (2011). Useful reviews include Balleine, Daw,
and O’Doherty (2009) and Daw (2014). We discuss the behavioral and neural evidence for the framework in
more detail in Section 2.
2

the model-free system, has neuroscientific support. Under this approach, after observing an
outcome at some moment in time, the model-based system increases the probability it assigns
to that outcome and downweights the probabilities of other outcomes. To do the updating,
it again uses a learning rate and a prediction error that measures how surprising a realized
outcome is; as before, there is evidence that the brain computes such prediction errors.
Recent research in psychology argues that, to make decisions, people use these two systems
in combination: they take a weighted average of the model-free and model-based estimates
of the value of different actions and use the resulting “hybrid” estimates to make a choice
(Glascher et al., 2010; Daw et al., 2011).
In this paper, we import this framework into a financial setting, study its implications for
investor behavior, and use it to account for a range of empirical facts. To our knowledge,
this is the first time the framework has been applied, in a comprehensive way, in an economic
domain outside the laboratory. We choose a simple setting: one where an individual allocates
money between a risk-free asset and a risky asset in order to maximize the expected log utility
of wealth at some future horizon. This problem fits the canonical context in which model-free
and model-based algorithms are applied. The two algorithms tackle the problem in different
ways. The model-based system learns a distribution of stock market returns over time by
observing realized returns and uses it to decide on an allocation. The model-free system, by
contrast, simply tries an allocation and observes the resulting portfolio return; if this return
is good, the model-free system raises its estimate of the value of this allocation and is more
likely to recommend this allocation again in the future.
Webeginbycharacterizinginvestorbehaviorinourframework, payingparticularattention
to the model-free system – for economists, the more novel system. Specifically, we look at
how the stock market allocation proposed by each of the model-free and model-based systems
depends on past stock market returns. The model-based allocation puts weights on past
market returns that are positive and that decline for more distant past returns. We find
that the model-free system also recommends an allocation that puts positive weight on past
returns, and show that it does so through a mechanism that is new to financial economics. In
brief: A good stock market return reinforces the investor’s previous allocation, whether the
allocation was low or high. However, this reinforcement is stronger when the prior allocation
is high: for a given positive market return, the reward, or portfolio return, is higher when the
3