NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TRACING THE INTERNATIONAL TRANSMISSION OF A CRISIS THROUGH
MULTINATIONAL FIRMS
Marcus Biermann
Kilian Huber
Working Paper 31061
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31061
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2023
We are grateful to Gianmarco Ottaviano, Veronica Rappoport, Daniel Sturm, Catherine Thomas,
Rodrigo Adao, Javier Cravino, Swati Dhingra, Doireann Fitzgerald, Basile Grassi, Gregor
Matvos, Isabelle Mejean, Eduardo Morales, Holger Mueller, Stefan Nagel, Brent Neiman, Steve
Pischke, Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, Thomas Sampson, Rishi Sharma, Amir Sufi, Chad Syverson,
Felix Tintelnot, Emil Verner, and numerous seminar audiences for helpful comments. We thank
the Research Data and Service Centre of the Deutsche Bundesbank for their hospitality and for
access to the Microdatabase Direct Investment (MiDi) and corporate balance sheets (Ustan).
Valerii Baidin, Jian Li, and Sixun Tang provided excellent research assistance. Biermann
gratefully acknowledges financial support from the German National Academic Foundation and
the Fund for Scientific Research (FNRS Grant PDR/GTO T.0180.19). The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Marcus Biermann and Kilian Huber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Tracing the International Transmission of a Crisis Through Multinational Firms
Marcus Biermann and Kilian Huber
NBER Working Paper No. 31061
March 2023
JEL No. E4,F2,F3,G01,G2,G3
ABSTRACT
We show that multinational firms transmit shocks across countries through their internal capital
markets. We study a credit supply shock to parent firms in Germany. International affiliates
outside Germany supported their parents through internal lending, became financially constrained
themselves, and experienced lower real growth. We find that managers were "Darwinist" with
respect to international affiliates but "Socialist" in the home country, that internal capital markets
transmitted the credit shock more strongly than a non-financial shock, and that access to
developed credit markets attenuated the real effects. The total real impact of shock transmission
through multinationals on foreign economies was large.
Marcus Biermann
Department of Business Administration
and Economics
Bielefeld University
Universitätsstraße 25
33615 Bielefeld
Germany
marcus.biermann@uni-bielefeld.de
Kilian Huber
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
kilianhuber@uchicago.edu
An internet appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w31061

I Introduction
Theinternalcapitalmarketsofmultinationalfirmsareakeydeterminantofglobalcapitalmove-
ments. Inrecentyears,internalcapitalflowsbetweenmultinationalparentfirmsandtheirinter-
national affiliates accounted for over 50 percent of total capital inflows in the median country.
Internal capital flows are also large relative to aggregate output, amounting to 3.6 percent of
GDPinthemediancountry.1
Despite their size and ubiquity, it has not been fully established how internal capital mar-
kets of multinationals operate and whether they impact the real economy. Do internal capital
marketstransmitshocksacrosscountries? Whichmechanismsandfrictionsplayarole,forex-
amplemanagerialbiases,accesstoexternalcreditmarkets,differentcurrencies,andgeographic
distance? Do internal capital markets transmit financial and non-financial shocks differently?
How large and persistent are the real effects of internal capital market shocks? Evidence on
these questions has been limited because causal identification is challenging and data on inter-
nalcapitalflowsarescarce.
We address these questions by combining a quasi-experimental research design with de-
tailed micro data on internal capital positions of German multinationals. We study a lending
cutbyCommerzbank,alargeGermanbank,whichdirectlyreducedthecreditsupplyofparent
corporationsofmultinationalslocatedinGermany,butnotthecreditsupplyofinternationalaf-
filiates of these multinationals. We show that German parents indirectly transmitted the credit
shock to their international affiliates. Sales and employment of international affiliates with
affectedparentsfellsharplyandremainedlowforthreeyears,relativetounaffectedaffiliates.
Wearguethatinternalcapitalmarketscontributedtoshocktransmission,astherealeffects
were concentrated among affiliates that increased internal lending to their parent and became
financially constrained themselves. Weak international affiliates were hit more strongly, sug-
gesting that managers of multinationals are relatively "Darwinist" with respect to international
affiliates. Incontrast,affiliateswithinGermanywerenotsignificantlyharmed,eveniftheywere
weak, implying that managers are home biased and have relatively "Socialist" preferences to-
ward home country affiliates. Frictions due to currency, geography, and capital controls were
not important, but developed external credit markets helped affiliates to partially attenuate the
negativerealeffects.
We calculate that the transmission of Commerzbank’s lending cut through multination-
als had large effects on countries outside Germany. For instance, the total impact amounted
1Parents and international affiliates together produce 36 percent of global output. Foreign-owned affiliates
alone produce 11 percent of output globally, 8 percent in the US, and 21 percent in the EU (OECD Analytical
AMNEdatabasefor2016). SeeBroneretal.2010andIMFdata.
1

to roughly 0.4 percent of aggregate sales in Austria and the Czech Republic and 0.1 percent
in Spain and the UK. In comparison, a non-financial flooding shock to parents did not have
significant effects, suggesting that the internal capital markets transmit financial shocks more
strongly.
Identifying the role of multinationals and internal capital markets in shock transmission is
difficult. The key empirical challenge is that parents and their affiliates are subject to common
shocks. For example, parents and affiliates frequently use similar raw materials, sell similar
products, and share similar productivity, size, and other characteristics (Guadalupeet al. 2012;
Fort et al. 2013; Foster et al. 2016). Shocks to common input prices, to common product de-
mand,andtofirmswithcorrelatedcharacteristicscouldgeneratecomovementbetweenparents
and affiliates, even if shocks to the parent are not transmitted to affiliates. Common shocks
also affect internal capital flows, for example if affiliates transfer revenue to their parent after
acommon demandshock. Inthis case,internalcapital flowswouldspuriously co-occurwitha
demandshocktotheparent,butwecouldnotconcludethatinternalcapitalmarketscontributed
toshocktransmissionfromparenttoaffiliate.
We overcome the empirical challenge by studying a shock that directly affected only par-
ents of German multinationals and not their international affiliates. The shock was a lending
cut by Commerzbank, a large German bank. Commerzbank experienced significant losses on
its financial investments during the 2008/09 financial crisis. The losses were caused by a com-
bination of misjudgments and bad luck in the international investment and trading divisions.
Crucially, the origin of the losses was independent of Commerzbank’s corporate lending di-
vision. We present a range of evidence that firms borrowing from Commerzbank would have
beenonsimilargrowthpathsasborrowersofotherGermanbanks,hadthelendingcutnothap-
pened. The lending cut eventually affected corporate borrowers, however, because the losses
forcedCommerzbanktoreduceloansupplytoitsborrowers.
Commerzbank’s exposure to the crisis and its lending cut were severe compared to other
German banks.2 Existing evidence shows that European firms of all sizes, including multina-
tionals,struggletoraisefinancingwhenarelationshipbankcutslending(Bentolilaetal.2018;
Huber 2018). As a result, Commerzbank’s lending cut was an exogenous shock to the credit
supply of German firms with a preexisting relationship to Commerzbank, relative to German
firmsborrowingfromotherbanks. Parentswithhigherpre-crisisdependenceonCommerzbank
reducedbankdebt,didnotusealternativesourcesofexternalfinancing,andexperiencedlower
2The vast majority of German banks had not invested in international financial markets. A few other banks
alsosufferedlossesin2008/09(Purietal.2011). Foridiosyncraticreasons,theseotherbanksdidnotcutlending
orarenotwellsuitedtoidentifyingaquasi-experimentalshocktofirmcreditsupply,aswediscussinSectionsII,
VII.G,andAppendixC.
2