NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DYNAMIC BANKING WITH NON-MATURING DEPOSITS
Urban Jermann
Haotian Xiang
Working Paper 31057
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31057
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2023
We thank Arvind Krishnamurthy, Ye Li, Cecilia Parlatore, Ned Prescott, Tom Sargent, Alex
Ufier, Fabrice Tourre, Ivan Werning, Wei Cui and Yao Zeng for comments, as well as
participants at presentations at EFA, SED, Stanford SITE, Annual Bank Research Conference,
SFS Cavalcade, ITAM, Bonn/UCL, Tsinghua, FDIC, and Wharton. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Urban Jermann and Haotian Xiang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Dynamic Banking with Non-Maturing Deposits
Urban Jermann and Haotian Xiang
NBER Working Paper No. 31057
March 2023
JEL No. E44,G21,G28
ABSTRACT
The majority of bank liabilities are deposits typically not withdrawn for extended periods. We
propose a dynamic model of banks in which depositors forecast banks’ leverage and default
decisions, and withdraw optimally by trading off current against future liquidity needs.
Endogenous deposit maturity creates a time-varying dilution problem that has major effects on
bank dynamics. Interest rate cuts produce delayed increases in bank risk which are stronger in
low rate regimes. Deposit insurance can exacerbate the deposit dilution and amplify the increase
in bank risk.
Urban Jermann
Finance Department
The Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
jermann@wharton.upenn.edu
Haotian Xiang
Peking University
No.5 Yiheyuan Road
Haidian District
Beijing 100871
China
xiang@gsm.pku.edu.cn

1 Introduction
According to the FDIC, deposits account for 83% of U.S. banks’ balance sheets at the
endof2021. Timedepositswithlimitedmaturitiesaccountforonly6%ofalldeposits.
The remaining deposits are non-maturing: they have no explicit maturity date and
are typically not withdrawn for extended periods. Because these deposits can be
withdrawn at any time, their maturity varies with bank risk and market conditions.
In this paper, we bring to center stage this feature of bank liabilities and develop
a dynamic model of banks with endogenous deposit maturity. Banks create liquidity
through issuing deposits and are exposed to the risk of default. Depositors withdraw
from their accounts optimally by trading off between current and future risk-adjusted
liquiditybenefits. Wehighlightthefirst-ordereffectstheendogenousdepositmaturity
has on bank dynamics.
In typical macro-finance banking models, deposits are modelled as one-period
debt. As such, when banks issue new deposits, there is no outstanding deposits that
can be diluted. With long-term debt, when new debt is issued, borrowers do not
internalize the reduction in value of the outstanding debt. This gives rise to debt
dilution. Recent studies have shown that dilution affects debt dynamics in major
ways (Gomes, Jermann and Schmid, 2016; Admati, DeMarzo, Hellwig and Pfleiderer,
2018).
In our model, there are frictional costs that prevent deposits from being with-
drawn and repriced every period. Depositors face liquidity shocks and they withdraw
only if the liquidity value net of withdrawal costs exceeds the expected future liq-
uidity benefit of the deposit. This converts redeemable deposits into long-term debt
with endogenous maturity, and thus exposes deposits to time-varying dilution. Banks
cannot credibly commit to not dilute depositors in the future. We show that bank
dynamics are affected by time-varying dilution in significant ways through the lens
of banks’ responses to interest rate shocks. Overall, our analysis suggests that ac-
counting for endogenous deposit withdrawals is important for modeling banks and
studying monetary policy transmission.
First, we find that an interest rate cut generates an initial reduction in bank
default risk but is followed by an extended period of significantly higher default
1

risk and higher leverage. Endogenous maturity is key for such boom-bust dynamics.
Following a rate reduction, future liquidity benefits of deposits become more valuable.
Deposit withdrawals decline and lengthen the maturity, which gives rise to stronger
debtdilutionincentives. Banksissuenewdepositsanddriveupthesubsequentdefault
risk.
A second finding is that such a delayed bust is more pronounced in a low interest
environment than in a high interest environment. In a low interest environment,
futureliquiditybenefitsofdepositsarelargeanddepositwithdrawalsarelesssensitive
tomarginalvariationsinbanks’defaultrisk. Asaresult,whenabsorbingnewdeposits
and driving up the default risk, banks are less worried about existing depositors
pulling out their money. This means deposit dilution is less disciplined in a low
interest environment. Banks in this case would like to dilute more aggressively the
additional unwithdrawn deposits created by an interest rate cut, relative to banks in
a high interest environment.
It is important to notice that the key mechanism in the model—deposit dilution—
does not vanish with the presence of deposit insurance. The FDIC estimates 53.3%
of US bank deposits to be insured at the end of 2021. We extend our model to
include both uninsured and insured deposits. Issuing insured deposits does not dilute
the value of legacy insured depositors who are protected by the deposit insurance
against default. However, issuing insured deposits can dilute the value of uninsured
depositors because banks’ default decisions are also affected by the amount of insured
deposits. We show that giving banks the choice to substitute into insured deposits
can exacerbate the dilution of uninsured deposits and in turn amplify the increase in
bank risk following an interest rate cut.
Literature—Our paper contributes to the literature on dynamically modeling
banks. In particular, we study bank deposits with endogenous maturity and when
dilution is possible. Our work is related to several research areas.
Since the pioneering work by Farmer (1984), Williamson (1987), and Bernanke
and Gertler (1989), a large literature has emerged to study the macroeconomic im-
plications of financial markets and institutions, i.e. banks.1 While many papers in
1Recent work using macro-banking models for policy analyses includes e.g., Gertler and Karadi
(2011), Angeloni and Faia (2013), Gertler and Kiyotaki (2015), Davydiuk (2017), Brunnermeier
2