NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO BANKS HEDGE USING INTEREST RATE SWAPS?
Lihong McPhail
Philipp Schnabl
Bruce Tuckman
Working Paper 31166
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31166
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2023, Revised June 2024
We thank Chalinee (Bam) Charoenwong, Itamar Drechsler, Andreas Fuster, Anna Kovner, Scott
Mixon, Tomasz Piskorski (discussant), Alexi Savov, Amit Seru (discussant), Andrew
Teodorescu, James Vickery, and seminar participants at the 2024 American Economic
Association Meeting, IMF 6th Annual Macro-Financial Research Conference, Qatar Center for
Global Banking and Finance Annual Conference, Interest Rate Variability and the Financial
Sector Workshop, the Treasury Department’s Financial System Risk seminar, and the Federal
Reserve Board’s Financial Stability seminar for helpful comments. This research presented was
produced in each author’s official capacity as an economist or consultant with the CFTC. The
Office of the Chief Economist (OCE) has approved the paper for release to the public. OCE
economists produce original research on a broad range of topics relevant to the CFTC’s mandate
to regulate commodity future markets, commodity options markets, and the expanded mandate to
regulate the swap markets pursuant to the Dodd-Frank Act. The analyses and conclusions
expressed in this paper are those of the author(s) and do not reflect the views of other
Commission staff, the Office of the Chief Economist, the Commission, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research. The paper is considered a government work product and may not be
individually copyrighted.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Lihong McPhail, Philipp Schnabl, and Bruce Tuckman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Banks Hedge Using Interest Rate Swaps?
Lihong McPhail, Philipp Schnabl, and Bruce Tuckman
NBER Working Paper No. 31166
April 2023, Revised June 2024
JEL No. G21,G32
ABSTRACT
We analyze whether banks use interest rate swaps to hedge the interest rate risk of their assets,
primarily loans and securities. By examining regulatory data on individual swap positions from
the largest 250 U.S. banks, we find that banks hold large swap positions with an average notional
value of $434 billion. However, after accounting for offsetting swap positions, the average bank
exhibits almost no net interest rate risk from swaps: a 100-basis-point increase in rates reduces
the value of its swaps by only 0.1% of bank equity. The variation in swap positions across banks
indicates that banks use swaps to hedge interest rate risk, thereby facilitating risk transfer within
the banking sector. Additionally, we find that swap dealer banks primarily hold swap positions
for market making, while non-dealer banks use swaps to meet borrower demand for fixed-rate
loans. Despite the substantial notional amounts, our findings suggest that swap positions are not
economically significant in hedging the overall interest rate risk of bank assets. Instead, banks
primarily rely on their deposit franchise to hedge interest rate risk.
Lihong McPhail Bruce Tuckman
Commodity Futures Trading Commission New York University
1155 21st Street, NW 44 West 4th St
Washington, DC 20581 New York, NY 10012
lmcphail@cftc.gov btuckman@stern.nyu.edu
Philipp Schnabl
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
schnabl@stern.nyu.edu

I. Introduction
Banks are in the business of borrowing short and lending long, which exposes them to
interest rate risk. In particular, on the lending side, the values of fixed-rate loans and
investments in fixed-rate securities decline when market interest rates rise.
Recently, market interest rates increased from January 2022 to March 2023 as central
banksaroundtheworldtightenedmonetarypolicytocombatinflation. IntheUnitedStates,
the Federal Reserve Bank increased the market short-term rate, i.e., the Fed Funds rate,
from close to 0% in early January 2022 to more than 5% in March 2023. As a result, the
long-term interest rate, i.e., 10-year Treasury rate, increased by about 2.5%. These large
increases in market interest rates significantly lowered the value of bank loans and securi-
ties. Drechsler et al. (2023) estimate that the U.S. banking sector lost around $700 billion
on security investments and a total of $1.5 trillion on both securities and loans.
These large losses raise the question of how banks manage their interest rate risk. Inter-
estrateswaps(“swaps”’)areacommonlyusedfinancialinstrumentforthispurpose. Swaps
involve exchanging fixed interest rate payments for floating rate payments, thus allowing
banks to transfer interest rate risk within the banking sector or across to other sectors. Al-
mostalllargeU.S.banksuseswaps,andthetotalnotionalvalueofswappositionsamounts
to six times the total assets of the banking sector.
In this paper, we ask whether banks use swaps to hedge the interest rate risk of their
assets. Banks can use swaps to hedge the interest rate risk of individual assets, a portfolio
of loans or securities, or their entire balance sheet. The aggregate banking sector may also
use swaps to move interest rate risk to non-bank financial institutions such as insurance
companies, pension funds, or sovereign wealth funds. At the same time, banks may use
swaps to increase their exposure to interest rate risk, possibly because they engage in risk
takingorriskshifting. Banksmaypreferswapsoverfixed-rateassetsfortakingoninterest
1

rate risk because swaps have embedded leverage, may require less regulatory capital, and
may be harder for outsiders to evaluate.
The main challenge in answering our research question is that banks’ exposure to swaps
is notoriously hard to measure. A proper evaluation of whether swaps hedge bank assets
requires highly granular data on swap positions including swap-specific information on no-
tional amount, maturity, interest rate, and the direction of the swap. In practice, how-
ever, publicly available data on swaps is mostly limited to bank-level data on total notional
amounts and market values. This information is insufficient to provide a proper evaluation
of the interest rate risk embedded in swaps.
We address this challenge by using regulatory (non-public) data on bank swap positions
collected from the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC). Our analysis focuses
on the positions of the largest 250 U.S. commercial banks, which amount to more than 8
million swap contracts and constitute nearly all swap positions of the U.S. banking sector.
In this way, our data allow us to measure and evaluate the interest rate exposure at the
swap-level, at the bank-level, and at the aggregate banking sector level. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first paper examining the interest rate risk of bank swap positions
using such detailed data.
Weevaluatebankexposuretoswappositionsusingtwocommonmetrics. Thefirstmetric
isthenotionalamount,whichmeasuresthetotaldollaramountthatisreferencedinaswap.
For example, the notional amount of a fixed-for-floating interest rate swap is the dollar
amount used to calculate the interest rate payments required by the contract. Notional
amounts are straightforward to compute and commonly reported, although they cannot be
interpreted as measuring the interest rate exposure of swap positions.
ThesecondmetricistheDV01(thedollarvalueofan’01),whichisthechangeinthevalue
ofaswappositionduetoaone-basis-pointchangeininterestrates. TheDV01ofaswapcan
only be computed using detailed information on swap positions including information on
notional value, maturity, swap rate, and direction of the swap. Banks use DV01 as the
2