NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DEPOSIT FRANCHISE RUNS
Itamar Drechsler
Alexi Savov
Philipp Schnabl
Olivier Wang
Working Paper 31138
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31138
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2023, revised September 2024
This paper previously circulated as 'Banking on Uninsured Deposits.' We thank Viral Acharya,
Xavier Gabaix, Sam Hanson, Pablo Kurlat, Martin Oehmke, Thomas Philippon, Matt Richardson,
Anjan Thakor, Andrei Shleifer, Alp Simsek, Sorin Sorescu, Jeremy Stein, René Stulz, Bruce
Tuckman, Lucy White, Yufeng Wu and seminar participants at the AFA, Bundesbank Research
Conference, Central Bank of Iceland Economic Conference, Columbia University, Banco de
Portugal Conference on Monetary Economics, BIS, BIS-CEPR-SCG-SFI Conference on
Financial Intermediation, CUNY, ECB, FDIC, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland/OFR
Financial Stability Conference, Federal Reserve Board, Federal Reserve Stress Testing Research
Conference, Frankfurt School of Finance, IMF, Martin Gruber Five Star conference, NYU, OCC,
OFR, Peking University, Rochester University, Santiago Finance Workshop, Stanford University,
Temple University, UC Berkeley, UCLA, and WUSTL for helpful comments. We gratefully
acknowledge research funding from the NBER Market Frictions and Financial Risks Initiative.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Itamar Drechsler, Alexi Savov, Philipp Schnabl, and Olivier Wang. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Deposit Franchise Runs
Itamar Drechsler, Alexi Savov, Philipp Schnabl, and Olivier Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 31138
April 2023, revised September 2024
JEL No. E52,G12,G21
ABSTRACT
We model a new type of bank run, a deposit franchise run. Banks pay below-market rates on
deposits, which makes the deposit franchise a valuable asset. For a bank to keep this value,
deposits must stay in the bank; if they leave, their value is lost to the bank. This makes the deposit
franchise a runnable asset. Unlike Diamond-Dybvig runs, deposit franchise runs can occur even if
the bank’s loans are fully liquid. Since the deposit franchise value increases with interest rates, a
run is more harmful, and hence more likely, when rates are high. To avoid runs, banks can
shorten the duration of their assets, but this can make them insolvent if interest rates fall.
Avoiding both runs and insolvency requires additional capital in proportion to the value of the
uninsured portion of the deposit franchise. We use our model to estimate deposit franchise values
and show how to identify vulnerable banks in the context of the 2023 Regional Bank Crisis.
Itamar Drechsler Philipp Schnabl
Wharton School Stern School of Business
University of Pennsylvania New York University
3620 Locust Walk 44 West Fourth Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104 New York, NY 10012
and NBER and NBER
idrechsl@wharton.upenn.edu schnabl@stern.nyu.edu
Alexi Savov Olivier Wang
Stern School of Business New York University
New York University Kaufman Management Center 44 West Fourth Street
44 West Fourth Street, Suite 9-80 New York, NY 10012
New York, NY 10012 olivier.wang@nyu.edu
and NBER
asavov@stern.nyu.edu

1 Introduction
IntheyearleadinguptoMarch2023,theFederalReserveraisedshort-terminterestrates
by nearly 5%. Long-term rates rose by 2.5%. The sharp increase had a big impact on
the value of bank assets. Banks held $17 trillion of long-term loans and securities with
an average duration of about four years. The implied loss on these assets was thus 4×
0.025×$17 = $1.7 trillion. Bank equity stood at $2.2 trillion, hence these losses had the
potentialtowipeoutmostofthecapitalofthebankingsector.
Strikingly, bank investors were unconcerned. The value of bank stocks, shown in
Figure 1, held up well and tracked the overall stock market throughout 2022 and early
2023. Bank profits, as captured by their net interest margins, also held up and even rose
slightly despite the large maturity mismatch. Evidently, banks had another source of
profitssupportingtheirvalue.
That source of profits was deposits. Deposits are special, as reflected in their rates,
whicharelowandinsensitivetomarketrates. This“lowbeta”makesdepositsmuchmore
profitable for banks when interest rates rise. Historically, deposit betas have been about
0.4. As a result, when the Fed raised rates banks went from earning 0% to a (1−0.4)×
0.05 = 3% spread on deposits. Deposits stood at $17 trillion, so deposit profits rose by
$510billionperyear. Atthisrate,itwouldtakebanksjustoverthreeyearstorecouptheir
assetlosseswithhigherdepositprofits.
Theoffsettingimpactofinterestratesonbankassetsanddepositsisnotacoincidence.
Priorworkshowsthatbanksuselong-termassetstohedgetheirdepositfranchise(Drech-
sler et al., 2021). This explains the stability of bank stocks in the face of interest rate hikes
seeninFigure1. YetthefigurealsoshowsthatsomethingbrokeinMarch2023whenSili-
conValleyBank(SVB)failed. Bankstocksdroppedby20%andstayeddown. Thedeposit
franchisehedgeturnedouttobefragile. Whywasitfragile?
In this paper, we argue that the deposit franchise is a runnable asset, and that this
createsfragilitywheninterestratesrise. Whenratesrise,thevalueofabank’sassetsfalls
whilethevalueofitsdepositfranchiserises. Forthedepositfranchisetoremainvaluable,
however, deposits must stay in the bank. If they run, the bank loses the future profits it
would have earned on them, and the deposit franchise is destroyed. The bank’s asset
losses, on the other hand, remain. The loss of the deposit franchise can therefore make
the bank insolvent. This justifies the run in the first place. Unlike in traditional bank
run models (Diamond and Dybvig, 1983), a run equilibrium arises even if loans are fully
liquid. Therunisonthedepositfranchiseitself. Wecallitadepositfranchiserun.
Weprovideamodelofdepositfranchiserunsandanalyzetheconditionsunderwhich
theyoccur. Arepresentativebankissuesdepositsandinvestsinloansandsecuritieswith
1

SVB failure
120 6
100 5
80 4
60 3
40 2
20 1
0 0
Sep 21 Dec 21 Mar 22 Jun 22 Sep 22 Dec 22 Mar 23 Jun 23 Sep 23
Bank stock index S&P 500 Fed funds rate (right)
Figure1: ThefigureplotstheNASDAQBankStockIndex(BANK)inred,theS&P500indexinbluedash,
and Fed funds rate in black dash-dot (right scale). The bank index and S&P 500 are indexed to 100 in
September,2021. TheverticallinemarksthefailureofSiliconValleyBank.
a given duration. These assets are fully liquid; there are no fire sales or liquidation costs.
The bank has deposit market power, which allows it to pay a deposit rate that is low
and insensitive to the market interest rate, i.e. its deposit beta is less than one. The bank
thus earns a deposit spread that increases with the market rate. This makes its deposit
franchise valuable. The deposit franchise does not come for free: the bank must pay an
operating cost to maintain it. The deposit franchise therefore resembles an interest rate
swap in which the bank pays fixed (the operating cost) and receives floating (the deposit
spread). Likeaswap,thedepositfranchisehasnegativeduration,atleastpartlyhedging
thepositivedurationofthebank’sloansandsecurities.
Unlike a swap, the deposit franchise is an intangible asset. Depositors are not con-
tractually obligated to pay the bank its deposit spread. They can withdraw at any time,
leavingthebankwithfewerprofits. Thislowersthevalueofthebank’sdepositfranchise,
and by extension its total value. The lower bank value gives the remaining depositors
an incentive to run. Specifically, we assume that a fraction of depositors are uninsured.
Uninsured depositors take the bank’s solvency into account in deciding to stay or run. If
they stay, the deposit franchise is valuable and the bank is solvent, which justifies their
decision to stay. But if they run, the uninsured portion of the deposit franchise is de-
stroyed. If the loss exceeds the value of the bank’s equity, the bank becomes insolvent.
Thisjustifiesthedecisiontorun. Arunequilibriumthusemergeswithoutloanilliquidity.
2