NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A LOCAL PROJECTIONS APPROACH TO DIFFERENCE-IN-DIFFERENCES
Arindrajit Dube
Daniele Girardi
Òscar Jordà
Alan M. Taylor
Working Paper 31184
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31184
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2023, revised May 2025
We thank Alexander Busch, Colin Cameron, Clement de Chaisemartin, Sophie Hatte, Thomas
Høgholm Jørgensen, and seminar participants at UC Davis, University of Milan La Statale, 2022
NBER Summer Institute, 2023 Annual AEA Meetings, 2023 EEA-ESEM Annual Congress,
PolMeth Europe 2023, Asia School of Business (ASB), Sant’Anna School of Advanced Studies,
UMass Amherst, University of Pisa and King’s College London for helpful comments and
exchanges. The lpdid STATA command, which implements the LP-DiD estimators discussed in
this paper, can be found at https://econpapers.repec.org/software/bocbocode/S459273.htm.
Additional STATA example files are available at https://github.com/danielegirardi/lpdid/. The
views expressed in this paper are the sole responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the Bank of England, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the Federal Reserve
System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w31184
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Arindrajit Dube, Daniele Girardi, Òscar Jordà, and Alan M. Taylor. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Local Projections Approach to Difference-in-Differences
Arindrajit Dube, Daniele Girardi, Òscar Jordà, and Alan M. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 31184
April 2023, revised May 2025
JEL No. C1, C23, C5
ABSTRACT
We propose a local projections (LPs) based difference-in-differences approach that subsumes many
of the recent solutions proposed in the literature to address possible biases arising from negative
weighting. We combine LPs with a flexible ‘clean control’ condition to define appropriate sets of
treated and control units. Our proposed LP-DiD estimator can be implemented with various
weighting and normalization schemes for different target estimands, can be extended to include
covariates or accommodate non-absorbing treatment, and is simple and fast to implement. A
simulation and two empirical applications demonstrate that the LP-DiD estimator performs well in
common applied settings.
Arindrajit Dube Òscar Jordà
University of Massachusetts, Amherst Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Department of Economics and University of California, Davis
and NBER and also CEPR
adube@econs.umass.edu oscar.jorda@gmail.com
Daniele Girardi Alan M. Taylor
King's College London Columbia University
daniele.l.girardi@gmail.com and CEPR
and also NBER
amt2314@columbia.edu
A STATA example files illustrating the implementation of the LP-DiD estimators discussed in this paper can be
found here: is available at https://github.com/danielegirardi/lpdid/

1 Introduction
Difference-in-differences (DiD) designs are commonly used to estimate treatment effects
with observational data. In canonical form, with two periods and two groups (of which
one is treated), and under no anticipation and parallel trends assumptions, the DiD
comparison is an unbiased estimator of the average treatment effect on the treated (ATT).
In this basic two-periods/two-groups setting, conventional two-way fixed-effects (TWFE)
or first-difference regression can be used to implement the DiD method.
However, a recent literature has shown that conventional TWFE implementations
can be biased in more general multi-period settings, where the dates of treatment can
differ across groups (staggered treatment) and treatment effects can be dynamic and
heterogeneous. In this setting, the conventional TWFE implementation has been shown to
estimate a weighted average of group-specific effects where the weights may be negative,
leading to potentially severe bias. Because of this ‘negative weighting’ bias, the TWFE
estimate could even lie outside of the range of group-specific treatment effects. This
1
problem has led to the search for, and a proliferation of, several alternative estimators.
In this paper we propose a framework for DiD estimation that exploits an important
link to local projections (LPs), a statistical technique introduced in a time-series context
2005
in Jorda` ( ). By its very design, and as used in applied macroeconomics, the LP
approach was set up to estimate dynamic average effects. As we show in this paper,
an under-appreciated feature of the LP framework is that it is straightforward to limit
the set of permissible comparisons based on a desired criterion, such as past treatment
history. Leveraging this feature, we further develop the LP framework to derive a simple
to implement, general and flexible regression-based framework for DiD.
Our LP-DiD approach employs LPs to estimate dynamic effects alongside a flexible
2019
‘clean control’ condition in the spirit of Cengiz et al. ( ) to avoid the negative weighting
bias of conventional fixed-effects estimators. Intuitively, negative weighting arises because
previously treated units, which might still be experiencing lagged time-varying and
heterogeneous treatment effects, are implicitly used as controls for newly treated ones.
The LP-DiD clean control condition avoids this bias by restricting the estimation sample
so that ‘unclean’ observations, whose outcome dynamics are still potentially influenced
by previous changes in treatment status, are not in the control group.
Under the usual DiD assumptions, LP-DiD provides an unbiased estimate of a convex
1 SeeforexampleChaisemartinandD’Haultfœuille(2020),Goodman-Bacon(2021),SunandAbraham
(2020),CallawayandSant’Anna(2020),Borusyak,Jaravel,andSpiess(2024),Chaisemartin,D’Haultfœuille,
etal.(2022),Gardneretal.(2024),Baker,Larcker,andWang(2022),andWooldridge(2021). Surveysofthis
‘newDiD’literatureareprovidedbyRothetal.(2023)andChaisemartinandD’Haultfœuille(2022)
1

weightedaverageofcohort-specificeffects. Weexplicitlycharacterizetheweightsassigned
to each cohort-specific effect, and show that they are always positive and depend on
treatment variance and subsample size. As we will explain, however, it is easy to
implement different weighting schemes to obtain alternative estimands – including the
equally-weighted ATT. It is also easy to obtain a ‘pooled’ estimate, averaged over the full
post-treatment window.
We then extend the LP-DiD approach to settings with covariates or non-absorbing
treatment. Under conditional parallel trends, a regression-adjustment LP-DiD specifica-
tion yields an unbiased estimate of the ATT. We also clarify the additional assumptions
underwhichcovariatescanbeaddeddirectlytoanOLSLP-DiDspecification. Toillustrate
how our framework can accommodate non-absorbing treatment, we derive (i) a LP-DiD
estimator for the effect of first-time treatment entry, and (ii) a LP-DiD estimator for the
average effect of a treatment event under an additional effect stabilization assumption.
Importantly, several recent DiD estimators can be reproduced as specific sub-cases
of our general approach based on either weights assigned to treatment events, or the
choice of a base period for constructing LPs. In a baseline variance-weighted version,
the LP-DiD estimate is numerically equivalent to the estimate from a stacked regression
2019
approach as implemented in Cengiz et al. ( ). The re-weighted LP-DiD regression that
recovers an equally-weighted ATT is numerically equivalent to the estimator proposed
2020
by Callaway and Sant’Anna ( ). Yet another version of LP-DiD, reweighted and with
an alternative pre-treatment base period, is very close to the Borusyak, Jaravel, and
2024
Spiess ( ) imputation estimator. However, the LP-DiD implementation is simpler and
computationally faster, and can be more easily generalized for non-absorbing treatment.
Moreover, all the estimators proposed in this paper allow for standard statistical
inference using well understood techniques, already incorporated in common statistical
software. For this reason, we don’t discuss statistical inference here.
Evidence from a Monte Carlo simulation suggests that LP-DiD performs well in
staggered DiD settings, also in comparison with other recent estimators. We consider a
binary staggered treatment with dynamic and heterogeneous effects, where the parallel
trends assumption holds but conventional TWFE performs poorly because of negative
2020
weighting bias. We show that LP-DiD performs similarly to the Sun and Abraham ( ),
2020 2024
Callaway and Sant’Anna ( ) and Borusyak, Jaravel, and Spiess ( ) estimators, while
being computationally faster.
We employ LP-DiD to estimate the impact of banking deregulation on the labor
2020
share (replicating and extending Leblebiciog˘lu and Weinberger ) and the effect of
2019
democratization on economic growth (replicating and extending Acemoglu et al. ),
2