NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MINIMUM WAGES AND POVERTY:
NEW EVIDENCE FROM DYNAMIC DIFFERENCE-IN-DIFFERENCES ESTIMATES
Richard V. Burkhauser
Drew McNichols
Joseph J. Sabia
Working Paper 31182
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31182
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2023
Richard Burkhauser is a Senior Research Fellow in the Civitas Institute at the University of Texas
—Austin and acknowledges its research support for this project. Dr. Sabia acknowledges research
support from the Center for Health Economics & Policy Studies (CHEPS), which has received
grants from the Troesh Family Foundation and the Charles Koch Foundation. We thank Kyutaro
Matsuzawa for outstanding research assistance as well as Sama Aziz for helpful editorial
assistance. We also thank seminar participants at the 2021 Southern Economic Association
meetings, the 2022 Association of Public Policy Analysis and Management, the 2022 European
Society of Population Economics, and Chapman University for helpful comments and
suggestions on a previous draft of this paper. This research was conducted while Dr. McNichols
was a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Center for Health Economics and Policy Studies (CHEPS) prior
to his employment at Amazon. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w31182
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Richard V. Burkhauser, Drew McNichols, and Joseph J. Sabia. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Minimum Wages and Poverty: New Evidence from Dynamic Difference-in-Differences Estimates
Richard V. Burkhauser, Drew McNichols, and Joseph J. Sabia
NBER Working Paper No. 31182
April 2023
JEL No. J23,J38
ABSTRACT
Advocates of minimum wage increases have long touted their potential to reduce poverty. This
study assesses this claim. Using data spanning nearly four decades from the March Current
Population Survey, and a dynamic difference-in-differences approach, we find that a 10 percent
increase in the minimum wage is associated with a (statistically insignificant) 0.17 percent
increase in the probability of longer-run poverty among all persons. With 95% confidence, we can
rule out long-run poverty elasticities with respect to the minimum wage of less than -0.129, which
includes central poverty elasticities reported by Dube (2019). Prior evidence suggesting large
poverty-reducing effects of the minimum wage are (i) highly sensitive to researcher’s choice of
macroeconomic controls, and (ii) driven by specifications that limit counterfactuals to
geographically proximate states (“close controls”), which poorly match treatment states’ pre-
treatment poverty trends. Moreover, an examination of the post-Great Recession era — which
saw frequent, large increases in state minimum wages — failed to uncover poverty-reducing
effects of the minimum wage across a wide set of specifications. Finally, we find that less than 10
percent of workers who would be affected by a newly proposed $15 federal minimum wage live in
poor families.
Richard V. Burkhauser Joseph J. Sabia
Cornell University San Diego State University
Department of Policy Analysis & Management Department of Economics
Ithaca, NY 14853-4401 Center for Health Economics
and AEI and IZA & Policy Studies
and also NBER 5500 Campanile Drive
rvb1@cornell.edu San Diego, CA 92182
and IZA & ESSPRI
Drew McNichols jsabia@sdsu.edu
16656 Marine View Dr SW
Burien, WA 98166
United States
drewmcnichols@gmail.com

1. Introduction
During the 85 years since the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that state minimum wage laws were
constitutional (West Coast Hotel Co. v. Parrish, 300 U.S. 379, 1937), prominent advocates of minimum
wage increases — from Presidents Franklin D. Roosevelt through Joseph R. Biden — have
consistently touted their potential to reduce poverty. 1 Indeed, poverty reduction has been a central
argument in support of the Living Wage Now Act and the Raise the Wage Act, each of which would
more than double the Federal minimum wage from $7.25 to $15 per hour (House Bill 325; Senate
Bill S.53).2
There are several channels through which minimum wage increases could reduce poverty. If
minimum wage increases raise hourly wages paid to poor workers — without causing substantial
adverse labor demand effects (Card and Krueger 1995; Cengiz et al. 2019)) — such hikes could raise
family incomes and lift poor workers out of poverty (Bernstein and Sherholz 2014; Dube 2019).3 In
addition, if low-skilled labor markets are monopsonistic or characterized by search-related frictions
(Card and Krueger 1995; Manning 2003), minimum wage increases could, in theory, increase
employment and raise incomes among the working poor. Moreover, if minimum wage hikes boost
spending among low-skilled workers, who typically have a high marginal propensity to consume,
minimum wage hikes could stimulate aggregate demand and generate longer-run economic growth
that lifts some poor workers out of poverty (Congressional Budget Office 2021).
1 In West Coast Hotel Co. v. Parrish (300 U.S. 379 (1937)), the U.S. Supreme Court upheld the first state minimum wage
law, stating that states could regulate wages to “reduce the evils of the ‘sweating system’, the exploiting of workers at
wages so low as to be insufficient to meet the bare cost of living.“ With respect to U.S. Presidents and leading Senators,
such rhetoric began with Franklin Roosevelt’s advocacy for the Fair Labor Standards Act and continuing through
President Biden’s support for the Raise the Wage Act. To take a handful of examples, President John F. Kennedy stated,
“The fiscal burden of an inadequate minimum wage law lies upon the community…We can no longer tolerate growing
patches of poverty and injustice in America” (1961); President Lyndon B. Johnson stated, “The new minimum
wage…will bring workers and their families a little bit above the poverty line, $3,000 a year. It will help them carry on.
It will help them to not worry about three meals a day. It will enable them to help themselves develop skills so that they
can someday earn more” (1966), Senator Edward Kennedy stated, “The minimum wage was, as it should be, a living
wage, for working men and women . . .who are attempting to provide for their families, feed and clothe their children,
heat their homes, [and] pay their mortgages” (1989); President Bill Clinton stated, “I’ve studied the arguments and the
evidence for and against a minimum wage increase…But the most important thing is, you can’t make a living on $4.25
an hour." (1996); President Barack Obama stated, “In the richest nation on earth, nobody who works full-time should
have to live in poverty” (2014); and finally, President Joseph R. Biden, in 2020, stated, “No one should work 40 hours a
week and live below the poverty wage. And if you’re making less than $15 an hour, you’re living below the poverty
wage.”
2 The Living Wage Now Act, reintroduced by Congressman Steve Cohen (D-TN) in January 2023, would raise the Federal
minimum wage immediately, while the Raise the Wage Act of 2021 would phase in a Federal minimum wage hike over five
years as well as eliminate the “tip credit” and several other coverage other exemptions.
3 Some have further argued that by reducing poverty, an unintended public budget-related benefit of minimum wage
increases may be a reduction in low-skilled workers’ dependence on means-tested public assistance programs such as the
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (West and Reich 2015).
1

On the other hand, if low-skilled labor markets are competitive, minimum wage increases
could reduce employment and work hours among low-skilled workers (Stigler, 1946, Clemens and
Wither 2019; Clemens and Strain 2021; Neumark and Shirley 2021). If these employment losses are
felt by some poor and near-poor workers, family incomes could fall, thereby plunging some low-
skilled workers into (deeper) poverty (Neumark and Wascher 2002; Burkhauser and Sabia 2007;
Sabia and Burkhauser 2010). Additionally, if minimum wage hikes impact output prices, particularly
for products that poor individuals are more likely to purchase, then the effects of minimum wage
hikes may be quite regressive (MaCurdy 2015).
Therefore, the net impact of minimum wage increases on poverty largely depends on (1)
wage, employment, and hours elasticities with respect to the minimum wage, (2) the distribution of
earnings gains and losses for poor and near poor workers, and (3) spillover effects of the minimum
wage on output prices and spending-induced longer-run economic growth.4
Despite significant disagreement among labor economists over the employment effects of
U.S. minimum wage increases (Neumark and Shirley 2021; Cengiz et al. 2019; Clemens and Wither
2019; Neumark, Salas, and Wascher 2014; Dube et al. 2010), there had largely been a consensus
among labor economists that minimum wage increases did little to reduce poverty (Sabia and
Burkhauser 2010; Burkhauser and Sabia 2007; Neumark and Wascher 2002; Card and Krueger
1995). This consensus was owed to low rates of minimum wage labor supplied by individuals living
in poor families (Card and Krueger 1995), and the diminished association between an individual
earning a low wage and living in a poor family (Stigler 1946; Burkhauser and Sabia 2007).5
However, the consensus among labor economists that the minimum wage serves as an
ineffective anti-poverty tool has been broken. A highly influential study by Dube (2019) finds that
minimum wage increases enacted in the 1980s, 1990s, and 2000s were associated with statistically
significant and economically substantial declines in poverty. Using data from the March 1984-2013
Current Population Surveys (corresponding to calendar years 1983-2012) and a variety of difference-
in-differences approaches, Dube (2019) estimates contemporaneous poverty elasticities with respect
to the minimum wage of -0.2 to -0.5 for non-elderly individuals (those ages 0-to-64) as well as
longer-run (three years or more) elasticities as large as -0.9 for racial/ethnic minorities. The largest
4 In addition, poverty could be indirectly impacted by the effects of minimum wages on the prices of goods in the
market basket that determines the poverty threshold or on economic growth (CBO 2021).
5 Moreover, Neumark and Wascher (2002) further argued that while increases in wages of some poor workers would lift
them (and their family members) out of poverty, adverse employment and hours effects among other near-poor workers
would reduce their income, plunging them (and their family members) into poverty.
2