NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FIRM COMMITMENTS
Patrick Bolton
Marcin Kacperczyk
Working Paper 31244
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31244
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2023
We are grateful to Trucost for giving us access to their corporate carbon emissions data. This
project has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the ERC
Advanced Grant program (grant agreement No. 885552 Investors and Climate Change). The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Patrick Bolton and Marcin Kacperczyk. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Firm Commitments
Patrick Bolton and Marcin Kacperczyk
NBER Working Paper No. 31244
May 2023
JEL No. D62,D82,G23,G30
ABSTRACT
A growing fraction of companies globally have made commitments to reduce their carbon
emissions by a certain date. While the companies that make commitments subsequently reduce
their emissions, the effect on overall emissions of companies (including those that do not commit)
has been small; the companies that commit, and those that make the most ambitious
commitments, tend to have lower emissions; firm commitments are less prevalent in countries
where governments have made national commitments. Overall, the commitment movements have
been successful in drawing the willing but have found greater resistance from the companies that
most need to reduce their emissions.
Patrick Bolton
Columbia Business School
804 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
pb2208@columbia.edu
Marcin Kacperczyk
Imperial College Business School
Tanaka Building
South Kensington Campus
London SW7 2AZ
United Kingdom
m.kacperczyk@imperial.ac.uk

More and more companies — and it will be a tsunami by Glasgow — will have net
zero emissions plans1. Mark Carney (2020)
1. Introduction
The landmark climate agreement reached in Paris in 2015 has set in motion a race to the top for
countries in setting decarbonization commitments for their economies. In the runup to the
agreement, countries made intended nationally determined contributions (INDCs), which were for the
most part converted into nationally determined contributions (NDCs) after the agreement. Moreover,
many of these NDCs have now taken the form of carbon neutrality or net-zero commitments. By now,
113 countries, representing half of world GDP have made net-zero commitments. The brunt of
the decarbonization effort, however, will be borne by the private sector. Indeed, the 500 largest
global corporations (the Global 500) together produce around one third of world GDP, and
consequently also a similar share of global greenhouse gas emissions. It is not entirely surprising,
therefore, that several net-zero target initiatives have also sprung up in the corporate sector, most
notably the carbon disclosure project initiative (CDP) and the science-based target initiative (SBTi) to
encourage companies to commit to a carbon emissions reduction pathway.2 By some measures,
this firm commitments campaign has already received significant backing by corporations, with by
now over 2800 companies joining the SBTi and almost 1300 setting formal targets according to
the SBTi’s 2021 progress report.
In this paper, we explore what companies’ characteristics predict their decision to join a
commitment movement, and how these commitment drives correlate with subsequent real effects,
including carbon emission reductions. Two broad opposing perspectives immediately suggest
themselves for why companies seek to join SBTi or CDP. On the positive side, making a long-
term decarbonization commitment may be an effective way of signaling the company’s
sustainability credentials. Likewise, it could be a self-disciplining device to ensure that current and
future management will carry out the advertised carbon emission reductions. Finally, making
commitments may be an effective way of reducing cost of capital. However, on the negative side,
commitments have been decried by critics as mostly empty promises, a convenient way of
appearing virtuous while putting off difficult and costly choices. A slightly softer critique is that
the companies signing up to SBTi or CDP were already on a decarbonization pathway: making
commitments does not change anything, it simply formalizes and advertises a process the company
had already engaged in.
1 The Carney quote above refers to the COP26 meetings in Glasgow in November 2021.
2 SBTi is a joint initiative by CDP, the UN Global Compact, the WWF, and the WRI.
1

We begin our analysis by exploring the impact of the firm commitments drive on aggregate
corporate carbon emissions. We look at the annual growth in total carbon emissions of all publicly
traded companies tracked by Trucost and explore how this growth rate is correlated with the rise
in firm commitments since 2012. We look at the total carbon emissions of all publicly listed
companies, whether they have made commitments or not, because what ultimately matters is the
effect of firm commitment campaigns on the entire sector, not just on the companies that have
joined the movement. Our first finding is that there is a weak negative relation between the growth
in total corporate carbon emissions and the increase in the number of firms making commitments
(see Figure 1). Interestingly, this negative relation is stronger in Europe, than in North America
and Asia, suggesting that European companies take commitments more seriously.
The role of firm commitments in reducing carbon emissions in Europe is somewhat
encouraging. Still, over our sample period, firm commitments have had little aggregate impact. It
is possible, of course, that it is too soon for the commitments by over one thousand firms to have
materialized into a significant reduction in emissions. However, there are other possible
explanations such as selection effects, and the limited ambition of most firm commitments, in
particular the choice of emission intensity targets over emission level targets. Regarding selection
effects, our second main finding is that the companies that choose to make a commitment are the
ones with lower carbon emissions to begin with. In other words, the companies making a
commitment are the least problematic ones in terms of carbon emissions. The companies that
have the biggest challenge in terms of meeting net-zero targets are also the ones least likely to
commit. We also find that among the companies that commit, it is mostly those with lower levels
of emissions that further strengthen their commitments, for example by switching from emission
intensity targets to level targets. In other words, companies with higher emissions make half-
hearted commitments. Commitments are voluntary and companies for which the pros outweigh
the cons are most likely the ones with the lowest carbon emissions. This basic finding highlights a
fundamental weakness of purely voluntary initiatives driven by civil society based on goodwill and
ethical motivations.
Another important selection effect derives from corporate governance. The socially
responsible investment (SRI) movement (which precedes the firm commitments drive but gained
further momentum after the Paris Agreement) is an increasingly powerful source of influence by
institutional investors to prod companies to reduce their negative environmental and social
impacts. In terms of external governance, companies that are in the public eye (have greater analyst
coverage and receive more media attention) may be more inclined to show that they are doing
something about the climate by making a commitment to decarbonize. Alternatively, those that
face greater short-term activist shareholder pressure may be less inclined. In terms of internal
2