NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
AN ALTERNATIVE TO THE BASIC CAUSAL REQUIREMENT FOR LIABILITY
UNDER THE NEGLIGENCE RULE
Steven Shavell
Working Paper 31219
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31219
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2023
I thank John Goldberg, Marcel Kahan, Louis Kaplow, A. Mitchell Polinsky, and David
Rosenberg for advice and comments on this article, Daniel Belgrad, Tuhin Chakraborty, Heather
Pincus, and Lisa Wang for able research assistance, and the John M. Olin Center for Law,
Economics, and Business at Harvard University for research support. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Steven Shavell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

An Alternative to the Basic Causal Requirement for Liability under the Negligence Rule
Steven Shavell
NBER Working Paper No. 31219
May 2023
JEL No. K1,K13
ABSTRACT
The primary causal requirement that must be met for a negligent party to be held liable for a harm
is a demonstration that the harm would not have occurred if the party had not been negligent.
Thus, for a speeding driver to be found liable for harm done in a car accident, it must be shown
that the accident would not have happened if the driver had obeyed the speed limit. The main
point made here is that this basic causal requirement may be difficult to satisfy and hence may
interfere with the discouragement of negligence. Therefore, an alternative and usually easier-to-
meet causal requirement is proposed—that the harm would not have occurred if the party not
been engaged in his activity (if the driver had not been driving).
Steven Shavell
Harvard Law School
1575 Massachusetts Avenue
Hauser Hall 508
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
shavell@law.harvard.edu

An Alternative to the Basic Causal Requirement
for Liability under the Negligence Rule
Steven Shavell*
The primary causal requirement that must be met for a negligent party to be held liable for a
harm is a demonstration that the harm would not have occurred if the party had not been
negligent. Thus, for a speeding driver to be found liable for harm done in a car accident, it must
be shown that the accident would not have happened if the driver had obeyed the speed limit.
The main point made here is that this basic causal requirement may be difficult to satisfy and
hence may interfere with the discouragement of negligence. Therefore, an alternative and
usually easier-to-meet causal requirement is proposed—that the harm would not have occurred
if the party not been engaged in his activity (if the driver had not been driving).
1. Introduction
In this article I will suggest that the principal causal requirement for a finding of liability under
the negligence rule may needlessly hamper deterrence of negligent conduct; and in light of that, I
will consider a possibly advantageous alternative requirement.
At present, a negligent party cannot be held liable for a harm unless the party’s negligence was a
cause in fact of the harm—meaning that the harm would not have occurred if the party’s conduct
had not been negligent, that is, if the party had instead exercised reasonable care.1 Suppose that a
driver negligently speeds on a city street and strikes a pedestrian on a crosswalk, whereas if the
driver had been traveling at the speed limit, he would have been able to stop short of the
* Samuel R. Rosenthal Professor of Law and Economics, Harvard Law School, and Research Associate, National
Bureau of Economic Research. I thank John Goldberg, Marcel Kahan, Louis Kaplow, A. Mitchell Polinsky, and
David Rosenberg for advice and comments on this article, Daniel Belgrad, Tuhin Chakraborty, Heather Pincus, and
Lisa Wang for able research assistance, and the John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and Business at Harvard
University for research support.
1 See Restatement, Third, Torts: Liability for Physical and Emotional Harm (hereafter “Restatement Third”) § 26
Factual Cause, stating that “Tortious conduct must be a factual cause of harm for liability to be imposed. Conduct is
a factual cause of harm when the harm would not have occurred absent the conduct.” See also Becht and Miller
(1961) and Dobbs, Hayden, and Bublick (2016) ch.14. For the most part, I will use the terms cause in fact, factual
cause, or sometimes simply cause in this article instead of other commonly employed synonyms, notably, actual
cause, but for cause, necessary cause, and cause sine qua non. Additionally, I note that Restatement Third, § 27
Multiple Sufficient Causes, accords wider meaning to the term factual cause. To avoid distracting issues, however, I
will restrict attention to the definition of factual cause of § 26. Finally, I observe that in other Common Law
countries and in civil law countries generally, negligence must also be shown to be a cause in fact of harm for a
party to be held liable for it; see, for example, Infantino and Zervogianni (2017). Thus the § 26 cause-in-fact
requirement for liability under the negligence rule appears to be a universal feature of tort law.
1

crosswalk and prevent the accident. Here the driver’s negligence would be a cause in fact of the
accident and the driver could be held liable for it.
It can readily happen, however, that a speeding driver brings about an accident even though his
excessive speed would not be a cause in fact of that event. Suppose that a speeding driver
encounters an area of sheer ice and slides on it into a parked car; and suppose also that if the
driver had not been speeding, he would still have lost control of his vehicle on the ice and
collided with the parked car. In this instance, the driver’s negligent speeding would not be a
cause in fact of the damage to the parked car and he could not be held liable for it.
Cases resembling the preceding illustration, in which a negligent party might be able to avoid
liability because the party’s negligence might not be found to be a cause in fact of a harm, are
routinely addressed by courts. In Joshi v. Providence Health System, 149 P.3d 1164 (Or. 2006),
for example, the claimed negligence of physicians and a hospital in initially failing to diagnose a
patient’s stroke was held not to be a cause in fact of his death because his stroke was so serious
that he was likely to have died from it even if it had been correctly diagnosed; in O’Grady v.
State of Hawaii, 398 P.3d 625 (Hawaii 2017), the asserted breach by Hawaii of its duty to
provide the public a reasonably safe highway system was not held to be a cause in fact of
motorists’ injuries from a falling boulder because it was unclear whether the existence of a
satisfactory highway safety program would have averted the particular rockfall in question; and
in Fedorczyk v. Carribean Cruise Lines Ltd., 82 F.3d 69, 73 (3d Cir. 1996), the alleged
negligence of the defendant cruise lines in not having affixed an adequate number of adhesive
safety strips to the bottom surface of a stateroom bathtub was not held to be a cause in fact of a
slip and fall injury to a passenger because it was not demonstrated that a properly higher number
of adhesive strips would have prevented her specific accident.2
There thus appears to be a real chance that negligent parties will be able to circumvent liability
for harm because of the requirement that their negligence must be found its cause in fact. This
2 Let me add several other typical illustrations. In Morris v. National Seating & Mobility, WL 2343020 (Texas
2019), the alleged negligence of the defendant in maintaining a wheelchair was not found to be a cause in fact of its
collapse and injury to its occupant because the occupant’s weight might have led to its failure in any event; in June
v. Union Carbide Corp., 577 F.3d 1234 (10th Cir. 2009), the defendant had engaged in uranium milling operations
and allegedly exposed individuals living in a town to radioactive materials, but the plaintiffs were unable to establish
that they would not have suffered from their illnesses for other reasons in the absence of their exposure; and in
Yearty v. Scott Holder Enterprises, 349 Ga. App. 718 (Georgia 2019), the defendant was claimed to have
negligently installed a smoke alarm that failed to warn the plaintiff of a kitchen fire, resulting in a burn injury,
whereas evidence suggested that she might still have been burned if the smoke alarm had functioned properly. See
generally Restatement Third § 26 Comment for well-organized and valuable critical observations about factual
causation and illustrations of it, and see Reporters’ Note for extensive discussion of literature on, and cases
involving, factual causation.
2