NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE ECONOMICS OF FINANCIAL STRESS
Dmitriy Sergeyev
ⓡ
Chen Lian
ⓡ
Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Working Paper 31285
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31285
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2023, Revised October 2023
For helpful comments and suggestions, we are grateful to Marios Angeletos, Abhijit Banerjee,
Nicholas Barberis, David Berger, Tito Boeri, Leonardo Bursztyn, James Choi, Stefano
Dellavigna, Eliana La Ferrara, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Joel Flynn, Jonathon Hazell, Supreet
Kaur, Yueran Ma, Anandi Mani, Gonzalo Maturana, Peter Maxted, Tim Mcquade, Sendhil
Mullainathan, Emi Nakamura, Gautam Rao, Dmitry Taubinsky, Neil Thakral (discussant),
Ricardo Perez-Truglia, Gautam Rao, Christopher Roth, Karthik Sastry, Jon Steinsson, Frank
Schilbach, Benjamin Schoefer, and seminar participants at Behavioral Economics Annual
Meeting, NBER Behavioral Finance Meeting, Bocconi, CKGSB, Miami Behavioral
Finance Conference, TSE, Stanford, SED, UC Berkeley, UC Davis, Biennial Consumer
Finance and Macroeconomics Conference, Psychology and Economics of Poverty Annual
Convening, and the 16th CSEF-IGIER Symposium on Economics and Institutions. The survey
was approved by UC Berkeley IRB 2021-11-14868. We thank Zhuoran Lyu, Jack Mannion,
Emily Martell, Bruno Smaniotto, and Laura Waring for excellent research assistance and the
BB90 fund for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w31285
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Dmitriy Sergeyev ⓡ Chen Lian ⓡ Yuriy Gorodnichenko. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Economics of Financial Stress
Dmitriy Sergeyev ⓡ Chen Lian ⓡ Yuriy Gorodnichenko
NBER Working Paper No. 31285
May 2023, Revised October 2023
JEL No. D9,E7,O1
ABSTRACT
We study the psychological costs of financial constraints and their economic consequences.
Using a representative survey of U.S. households, we document the prevalence of financial stress
in U.S. households and a strong relationship between financial stress and measures of financial
constraints. We incorporate financial stress into an otherwise standard dynamic model of
consumption and labor supply. We emphasize two key results. First, both financial stress itself
and naivete about financial stress are important components of a psychology-based theory of the
poverty trap. Sophisticates, instead, save extra to escape high-stress states because they
understand that doing so alleviates the economic consequences of financial stress. Second, the
financial stress channel dampens or reverses the counterfactual large negative wealth effect on
labor earnings because relieving stress frees up cognitive resources for productive work.
Financial stress also has macroeconomic implications on wealth inequality and fiscal multipliers.
Dmitriy Sergeyev Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Department of Economics Department of Economics
Bocconi University 530 Evans Hall #3880
Office 5-e1-02 University of California, Berkeley
Via Roentgen, 1 Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
Milan, 20136 and IZA
Italy and also NBER
dmitriy.sergeyev@gmail.com ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu
ⓡ
Chen Lian
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
Evans Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
chen_lian@berkeley.edu
ⓡ

1 Introduction
Financialconstraintsareapainfulreminderthatourwishesarelimitedbyourmeans. Findingways
to reduce the pain from stressful tradeoffs is the bread and butter of economics. And yet, financial
stress, thenumber one source ofstress for Americans (American PsychologicalAssociation,2022a),
is not a key object for macroeconomics and household finance.1 Although the traditional approach
does concentrate on financial constraints as a pervasive limiting factor for consumption smoothing
and portfolio allocations, stress itself is out of the picture. This status quo is striking, given that
behavioral economics has underscored a wide spectrum of negative effects stemming from financial
stress. For example, Mani et al. (2013) and Mullainathan and Shafir (2013) argue that financial
stress leads to a “scarcity” of cognitive resources and pushes people into a state of tunneling
(i.e., neglecting activities outside the “financial stress” tunnel). As a result, financially stressed
individuals have difficulty focusing, perform poorly in economic tasks, and make poor decisions.
These factors lead to significant economic consequences for labor supply and earnings, as well
as consumption and saving decisions (Haushofer and Fehr, 2014; Ong, Theseira and Ng, 2019;
Lichand and Mani, 2020; Banerjee et al., 2020; Kaur et al., 2022).2
Tobroadentheperspectiveandlinkbehavioralandtraditionaltakesonfinancialconstraints,we
develop a tractable theoretical model incorporating the psychological costs of financial constraints,
i.e., financial stress. In this framework, financial stress not only has a direct effect on households’
utility but also influences their economic behavior. This behavioral impact is especially costly for
those not sophisticated enough to make complex optimization decisions considering the impact
of stress. Using our survey of U.S. households to discipline the model, we show that financial
stress can significantly alter household consumption, saving, and labor supply decisions and lead
to extra welfare costs. Together, our analysis sheds new light on the causes of wealth inequality
and the impact of stimulus checks issued to households during the COVID-19 crisis and previous
recessions.
In the first step, we conduct a large-scale survey targeting American prime-age workers to doc-
umentaseriesoffactsaboutfinancialstress. Thesurveyisrepresentativeofthegeneralpopulation
1AccordingtoCapitalOneCreditWisesurvey(CNBC,2021),73percentofAmericansrankfinancesastheNo.1
stress in life. The post-COVID inflation makes things worse. American Psychological Association (2022a) shows
that 87 percent of Americans are stressed about their finances in March 2022, the highest number in the history of
APA’s Stress in America survey.
2Popular personal finance books also discuss financial stress and its impact extensively. For example, Chilton
(1998, p.171) writes: “And, not only can excessive borrowing tap your cash flow, it can also cause stress.” Olen
and Pollack (2016, p.21) add: “The harder it is to make it through to the next day financially – whatever the
reason – the harder you will find it to make careful and disciplined decisions.” In a similar spirit, The Washington
Post (2023) also emphasized the psychological toll of inflation: “US households are frustrated by how much more
attention they must pay to these rising costs — attention that is itself costly.”
2

in terms of gender, age, region, total household income, and education. We introduce questions
that help quantify the consequences of financial stress, a valuable contribution that provides a
more direct mapping between data and theory. We find that the majority of survey respondents
feel financially stressed (in line with Yakoboski, Lusardi and Hasler, 2020 and Hasler, Lusardi
and Valdes, 2021), and they suffer negative economic consequences from financial stress along a
number of metrics. For example, survey respondents spend a median of 6 hours per week worrying
about and dealing with issues related to household finances, draining valuable time and cognition
from productive work. We also observe that measures of financial stress are strongly correlated
with measures of whether households are at their financial constraints. Another innovation of our
survey is to use hypothetical questions to elicit information about how respondents’ financial stress
would change if they received additional money (e.g., a stimulus check).
Informed by the survey evidence and previous work (e.g., Kaur et al., 2022), we introduce
financial stress into an otherwise standard dynamic model of consumption, labor supply, and
wealthdistribution(Achdouetal.,2022). Themodelhasthreenovelfeatures. First,financialstress
enters our model by crowding out valuable cognitive resources and time. Second, financial stress
decreases with the distance to financial constraints. Third, households’ degrees of sophistication
versus naivete can vary (O’Donoghue and Rabin, 1999, 2001). We calibrate our model in different
ways: based on our survey results and based on the evidence in Kaur et al. (2022).
We show that the sophistication-naivete dimension is a key determinant of how financial stress
shapeshouseholdbehavior. Inourcontext, sophisticatedhouseholdshaveastrongincentivetosave
to avoid future financial stress, because they understand that doing so alleviates future stress and
its negative impact on productive labor and earnings. Because sophisticates save themselves out
of high-stress states, financial stress leads to fewer households at financial constraints despite its
negative direct effect on earnings. On the other hand, naive households (“naifs”) fail to internalize
possible future financial stress and hence do not have this extra saving motive. Due to the negative
direct effect of stress on productive labor and earnings, naifs save less and are pushed to financial
constraints more often, resulting in a more dispersed wealth distribution.
The sophistication-naivete dimension is also crucial in determining the welfare costs of financial
stress. For this purpose, we develop a money-metric measure of the welfare costs of financial stress.
We find that the welfare costs of naifs’ financial stress are an order of magnitude larger than
the costs of sophisticates’ financial stress, as naifs may become persistently trapped in the state
of financial stress. Together, our results mean that a psychology-based theory of poverty traps
(Mullainathan and Shafir, 2013) requires two key important ingredients: financial stress itself and
naivete about financial stress.
The financial stress channel can also reverse the counterfactual large negative wealth effect on
3