NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FATAL ERRORS: THE MORTALITY VALUE OF ACCURATE WEATHER FORECASTS
Jeffrey G. Shrader
Laura Bakkensen
Derek Lemoine
Working Paper 31361
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31361
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2023
Any views expressed are those of the authors and not those of the U.S. Census Bureau. The
Census Bureau's Disclosure Review Board and Disclosure Avoidance Officers have reviewed this
information product for unauthorized disclosure of confidential information and have approved
the disclosure avoidance practices applied to this release. This research was performed at a
Federal Statistical Research Data Center under FSRDC Project Number 2112. (CBDRB-FY22-
P2112-R9939) We thank Michael Best, Matthew Gibson, Michael Greenstone, Matthew Neidell,
and Wolfram Schlenker as well as seminar participants at the NBER Environment and Energy
Economics Spring Meeting, ASSA Annual Meeting, and several university seminars for helpful
comments and suggestions. Special thanks to Anouch Missirian for providing code and guidance
on dealing with wind data. Gabriel Gonzalez Sutil provided excellent research assistance. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Jeffrey G. Shrader, Laura Bakkensen, and Derek Lemoine. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Fatal Errors: The Mortality Value of Accurate Weather Forecasts
Jeffrey G. Shrader, Laura Bakkensen, and Derek Lemoine
NBER Working Paper No. 31361
June 2023
JEL No. D83,I12,Q51
ABSTRACT
We provide the first revealed preference estimates of the benefits of routine weather forecasts.
The benefits come from how people use advance information to reduce mortality from heat and
cold. Theoretically, more accurate forecasts reduce mortality if and only if mortality risk is
convex in forecast errors. We test for such convexity using data on the universe of mortality
events and weather forecasts for a twelve-year period in the U.S. Results show that erroneously
mild forecasts increase mortality whereas erroneously extreme forecasts do not reduce mortality.
Making forecasts 50% more accurate would save 2,200 lives per year. The public would be
willing to pay $112 billion to make forecasts 50% more accurate over the remainder of the
century, of which $22 billion reflects how forecasts facilitate adaptation to climate change.
Jeffrey G. Shrader Derek Lemoine
Columbia University Department of Economics
420 W 118th St. University of Arizona
New York, NY 10027 McClelland Hall 401EE
jgs2103@columbia.edu Tucson, AZ 85721
and CEPR
Laura Bakkensen and also NBER
University of Arizona dlemoine@email.arizona.edu
School of Government & Public Policy
315 Social Science
P.O. Box 210027
Tucson, AZ 85721-0027
laurabakkensen@arizona.edu
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w31361

1 Introduction
Routine weather forecasts are the product of a sophisticated scientific and policy effort
requiring global cooperation (Benjamin et al., 2018). Data from around the world are con-
tinuously gathered and processed to produce forecasts that are disseminated to the public
multiple times per day, largely for free. Despite their ubiquity and the effort that goes into
their creation, surprisingly little is known about their value to the public. Understanding
this value is important for at least two reasons. First, weather forecasts are a far-reaching
information intervention that is particularly well-suited to offering empirical insights into
how individuals use information.1 Yet economists have only rarely used forecasts to study
informational questions (e.g., Roll, 1984). Second, forecasts are a costly but potentially
important policy tool. Globally, public funding for forecasting agencies exceeds $15 billion
per year (Rogers and Tsirkunov, 2013),2 and decisions about future investments in forecasts
require information about the value of making forecasts more accurate.3 Economists have
studied the value of weather warnings (e.g., Craft, 1998) but have not valued improvements
in weather forecasts.
We combine new theory and comprehensive data to provide the first revealed preference
evidence of behavioral responses to forecasts and the value of improved forecasts. In par-
ticular, we examine how much more accurate forecasts help people avoid mortality from
temperature. We do so by formally demonstrating that whether more accurate forecasts
reduce mortality depends on the relationship between mortality risk and forecast errors. If
mortalityriskisconvexinforecasterrors, thenimprovementsinforecastaccuracywillreduce
expected mortality. The convexity of mortality risk depends on how agents’ chosen actions
depend on whether they receive one forecast or another. Namely, risk is convex if actions are
“appropriate” in the sense of seeking to suit the weather rather than being “protective” in
the sense of monotonically reducing mortality as more action is taken. Because either model
of adaptation is plausible, it is an empirical question whether or not more accurate forecasts
reduce mortality.
1Economists have long been interested in the role of information in decision-making, with particular
growth in experimental evaluations of information interventions. Many experimental information inter-
ventions find effects on subjective beliefs but not actions, a difference that may reflect small sample sizes
(Haaland et al., 2023). We take advantage of the ubiquity of forecasts to measure how people respond to
information in a higher-powered environment.
2Each year, the U.S. National Weather Service has a budget of around $1 billion, collects around 76
billion weather observations, and issues around 1.5 million forecasts (NOAA, 2021).
3This point as been emphasized by both national and international observers (Chapman, 1992, WMO
etal.,2015). Weatherforecastshavesteadilyimprovedsince1980(Baueretal.,2015). Manyexpectforecast
skill to continue increasing in the near future as weather forecasting groups improve observational networks,
data assimilation, modeling, and computing power (Toth and Buizza, 2019, Zhang et al., 2019). Many have
emphasized the need for good estimates of the economic value of forecast improvements (e.g., Freebairn and
Zillman, 2002, Pielke and Carbone, 2002, National Research Council, 2010, Katz and Lazo, 2011).
2

Toestimatetheeffectofweatherforecastsonmortality, wecombinetheuniverseofdeaths
reported by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) with daily weather and
forecasts issued by the National Weather Service (NWS). We study the continental U.S. from
2005 through 2017 and focus on day-ahead forecasts of temperature. A large literature
across economics, epidemiology, and other fields has shown that extreme temperatures are
a major source of mortality,4 the NWS says that one goal when issuing forecasts is to
minimize loss of life,5 and households say these short-run temperature forecasts are among
themostimportantforecastproductstothem(StratusConsultingInc.,2002). Ourregression
framework accounts for potential location-specific and time-varying confounders as well as
for the potential direct effects of temperature and other aspects of weather on mortality.
Across the full sample, we find that mortality risk is indeed convex in forecast errors.
Reducing the standard deviation of forecast errors by 50% would save 2,200 lives per year.
We find that mortality risk is especially convex in forecast errors on days with extreme heat.
This convexity indicates that either adaptation is particularly responsive to forecasts during
periods of extreme heat or adaptation is especially consequential for mortality in extreme
heat. Climate change will make such days more common over the coming century. As a
result, climate change increases the mortality benefit of improved forecasts to 2,400 lives
saved annually by 2100. Short-run weather forecasts thereby facilitate adaptation to climate
change.
Wealsoformallyshowhowtoestimateagents’exantewillingnesstopayformoreaccurate
forecasts, accounting for their costs of acting on forecasts. Related literature arrives at net
valueforclimate-inducedmortalitybyusingcross-sectionalvariationinclimateandmortality
risk to empirically identify marginal benefits of adaptation, then using first-order conditions
to equate those marginal benefits of adaptation to marginal costs of adaptation, and finally
summing these adaptation costs with mortality benefits estimated from panel variation in
weather (Carleton et al., 2022). Instead, we formally derive the change in an agent’s value
function from more accurate forecasts and we measure that change from panel variation in
forecasts and weather, without relying on cross-sectional variation for identification.6 We
find that the net value of making forecasts 50% more accurate is $2.1 billion per year, or
roughly 10% of the monetized mortality benefit. Climate change increases that value to $2.9
4See, for instance, Anderson and Bell (2009), Deschˆenes and Moretti (2009), Gasparrini et al. (2015),
Barreca et al. (2016), Carleton et al. (2022).
5This goal is part of the NWS mission statement: “Provide weather, water and climate data, forecasts,
warnings,andimpact-baseddecisionsupportservicesfortheprotectionoflifeandpropertyandenhancement
of the national economy.”
6Anestablishedliteraturetheoreticallyanalyzesthevalueofchangesinmortalityrisk(e.g.,Bergeretal.,
1987, Shogren and Crocker, 1991), which corresponds to valuing changes in temperature in our setting. One
canviewCarletonetal.(2022)asimplementingequation(17)inBergeretal.(1987). Wedifferinanalyzing
and estimating the value of changes in uncertainty about a mortality risk.
3