NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO MUNICIPAL BOND INVESTORS PAY A
CONVENIENCE PREMIUM TO AVOID TAXES?
Matthias Fleckenstein
Francis A. Longstaff
Working Paper 31389
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31389
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2023
We are grateful for helpful discussions with Andrew Kalotay. All errors are our responsibility.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w31389
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Matthias Fleckenstein and Francis A. Longstaff. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Municipal Bond Investors Pay a Convenience Premium to Avoid Taxes?
Matthias Fleckenstein and Francis A. Longstaff
NBER Working Paper No. 31389
June 2023
JEL No. G12
ABSTRACT
We study the valuation of state-issued tax-exempt municipal bonds and find that there are
significant convenience premia in their prices. These premia parallel those identified in Treasury
markets. We find evidence that these premia are tax related. Specifically, the premia are related to
measures of tax and fiscal uncertainty, forecast flows into state municipal bond funds, and are
directly linked to outmigration from high-tax to low-tax states and to other measures of tax
aversion such as IRA and retirement plan contributions. These results suggest that investors are
willing to pay a substantial premium to avoid taxes.
Matthias Fleckenstein
University of Delaware
Lerner College of Business and Economics
310 Purnell Hall
Newark, DE 19716
mflecken@udel.edu
Francis A. Longstaff
UCLA
Anderson Graduate School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
francis.longstaff@anderson.ucla.edu

1. INTRODUCTION
One of the most important challenges in asset pricing is understanding how
taxation impacts the valuation of securities. In markets where the marginal
investor is subject to taxation, taxes create a wedge between the pre-tax returns
frominvestmentandthe after-taxreturnsthatinvestorscanuseforconsumption.
Furthermore, the deep connections between the government sector, fiscal and
monetary policy, financial markets, and the macroeconomy create the potential
for taxation to be a systematic risk factor impacting investment pricing and
outcomes in many markets.
Investors are well aware of the corrosive effects of taxation on their wealth
and actively seek to mitigate its impact. Key examples include the widespread
participation by households in tax-deferred or tax-exempt investment vehicles
such as IRAs, SEP-IRAs, Roth IRAs, 401(k) and 403(b) retirement savings ac-
counts, tax-sheltered annuities, tax-advantaged 529 qualified tuition plans, and
1
pre-tax health savings accounts (HSAs). Single-state municipalbond funds that
invest exclusively in the debt issuedwithin a specific state are increasinglypopu-
lar because they allow in-state resident investors to avoid both federal and state
income taxation. Investors frequently use Section 1031 like-kind exchanges to
defer the payment of capital gains taxes on appreciated real estate. An impor-
tant recent trend in the mutual fund industry is the growth of tax-managed
funds that minimize taxes by following strategies such as tax-loss harvesting,
holding stocks with lower dividend yields, or avoiding the sale of stocks that
would result in short-term capital gains. A highly-emphasized feature of the
rapidly-growing exchange-traded fund (ETF) market is the tax efficiency of its
unit creation/redemption mechanism. Wealth management and estate planning
services are standard components of the portfolio of products and strategies of-
fered to high-net-worth clients by many investment advisors.
These market trends suggest a strong revealed preference for investment
options that allow investors to avoid or defer taxes. There is an extensive litera-
ture documentingthat investorsoften pay a substantialconveniencepremiumfor
Treasurysecuritiesbecauseof theirroleas safeassets. In likemanner,the intense
focus on limiting the negative effects of taxation on wealth raises the possibility
1
The total value of the more than 47.9 million IRAs held by U.S. householdswas
$12.2 trillionat end of 2020. Total assets in Section 529 plans were $452.6 billion
at the end of 2021. See ICI Research (2021a, 2021b).
1

that a similar type of convenience premium could be priced into securities that
provide safety from the impact of taxation.
To explore this possibility, this paper examines whether there is evidence of
a tax-related convenience premium in security prices. In doing this, we focus on
the municipal bond market since it provides an ideal setting for identifying this
type of premium and studying its properties. This is because municipal bonds
are typically exempt from income taxation, making them particularly attractive
to high-net-worth tax-averse investors. This aspect may also help explain the
unique nature of this market in which most municipal bonds have historically
been held directly by individual buy-and-hold investors rather than through fi-
2
nancial intermediaries as in other fixed income markets. The U.S. municipal
bond market ranks among the largest fixed income markets in the world with
a total notional amount of more than $4.0 trillion outstanding as of the end of
3
2021.
The analysis is based on an extensive dataset of market prices for general
obligation bonds issued by a broad cross-section of individual states, and for
which the source of repayment is the state’s general fund. Previous research
makes clear that it is important to control for differences in credit risk and
liquidity when comparing municipal bond yields to those in other fixed income
4
markets. To identify the credit risk of a state-issued general obligation bond,
we use the credit default swap (CDS) spread for the state that is the actual
issuer of the bond. Since the credit risk of the bond is simply the default risk
of its issuer, this approach provides a clean measure of the credit component
in municipal bond yields. To identify liquidity effects, we compare the credit-
adjusted yields for the subset of municipal bonds in the sample that are taxable
and for a matching set of Treasury bonds. The key to this novel identification
approach is that taxable municipal bonds receive the same tax treatment as
Treasury bonds. Thus, by holding fixed the tax treatment while also controlling
for credit risk, any difference in yields provides a direct measure of the size of
the liquidity component in municipal bond yields. We confirm that credit and
liquidity spreads are significant components of the yields on municipal bonds,
and work with the adjusted yields obtained by controlling for these credit and
2
Table 2 of Bergstresser (2022) indicates that as much as 56 percent of all mu-
nicipal bonds were held directly by households at times during the 1990–2020
period. In contrast, only about two percent of all Treasury and corporate bonds
are held directly by households.
3
See SIFMA (2022).
4
For example, see Wang, Wu, and Zhang (2008), Ang, Bhansali, and Xing (2010,
2014), and Schwert (2017).
2