NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A WELFARE ANALYSIS OF TAX AUDITS ACROSS THE INCOME DISTRIBUTION
William C. Boning
Nathaniel Hendren
Ben Sprung-Keyser
Ellen Stuart
Working Paper 31376
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31376
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2023
We gratefully acknowledge research assistance from Jamie Emery. We are also grateful for
feedback from conference and seminar participants at the National Tax Association, the Office of
Tax Analysis, the 2022 and 2023 ASSA meetings, and the NBER TAPES 2022. This research
was supported by Policy Impacts, which receives funding from the Spiegel Family Fund. This
research was conducted while an author was an employee at the U.S. Department of the Treasury.
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views or the official positions of the U.S. Department of
the Treasury. Any taxpayer data used in this research was kept in a secured Treasury or IRS data
repository, and all results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is
disclosed. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by William C. Boning, Nathaniel Hendren, Ben Sprung-Keyser, and Ellen Stuart. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Welfare Analysis of Tax Audits Across the Income Distribution
William C. Boning, Nathaniel Hendren, Ben Sprung-Keyser, and Ellen Stuart
NBER Working Paper No. 31376
June 2023
JEL No. H0
ABSTRACT
We estimate the returns to IRS audits of taxpayers across the income distribution. We find an
additional $1 spent auditing taxpayers above the 90th income percentile yields more than $12
in revenue, while audits of below-median income taxpayers yield $5. We draw upon
comprehensive internal accounting information and audit-level enforcement logs to quantify
the average costs and revenues associated with each audit. We begin by estimating the average
initial return to all audits of US taxpayers filing in 2010-2014. On average, $1 in audit
spending raises $2.17 in initial revenue. Audits of high-income taxpayers are more costly,
but the additional revenue raised more than offsets the costs. Audits of the 99-99.9th percentile
have a 3.2:1 return; audits of the top 0.1% return 6.3:1. We then exploit the 40% audit
reduction between tax years 2010 and 2014 to examine the returns to marginal audits. We find
they exceed the returns to average audits. Revenues remain relatively unchanged but marginal
costs fall below average costs due to economies of scale. Next, we use randomly selected
audits to examine the impact of an initial audit on future revenue. This specific deterrence
effect produces at least three times more revenue than the initial audit. Deterrence effects are
relatively consistent across the income distribution. This results in the 12:1 return above the
90th percentile. We conclude by estimating the welfare consequences of audits using the
MVPF framework and comparing audits to other revenue raising policies. We find that audits
raise revenue at lower welfare cost.
William C. Boning Ben Sprung-Keyser
Office of Tax Analysis Harvard University
Department of the Treasury 1500 Department of Economics
Pennsylvania Avenue, NW Cambridge, MA 02138
Washington, DC 20220 bsprungkeyser@g.harvard.edu
William.Boning@treasury.gov
Ellen Stuart
Nathaniel Hendren University of Sydney
Harvard University School of Economics
Department of Economics Sydney NSW 2026
Littauer Center Room 230 Australia
Cambridge, MA 02138 ellen.stuart@sydney.edu.au
and NBER
nhendren@gmail.com

1 Introduction
IRSestimatessuggestthatmorethan$500billionintaxobligationsgounpaideachyear(IRS,2022).
Thoseunpaidtaxliabilitiesareconcentratedamongtaxpayersatthetopoftheincomedistribution.
For example, the top 10% of earners may owe more than 60% of all unpaid tax liabilities (DeBacker
et al., 2020; Guyton et al., 2021; Johns and Slemrod, 2010).
Evidence suggests that, on average, tax audits can recoup unpaid taxes and raise revenue in the
process. There is, however, very limited evidence on the returns to tax audits across the income
distribution (Holtzblatt and McGuire, 2016, 2020).
Do audits of high-income taxpayers generate more revenue per dollar spent on tax enforcement?
Does the increased complexity of auditing those high-income taxpayers reduce the “bang for the
buck” on enforcement spending? In this paper, we provide a detailed analysis of the returns to
in-person tax audits of individuals across the income distribution. Our analysis proceeds in four
steps.
We begin by estimating the average costs and average revenue raised from in-person audits.1 In
order to construct the cost estimates, we rely on two sources of data. First, we use a comprehensive
database that tracks enforcement activities by IRS personnel on all audits conducted since 2003.
The database contains the revenue raised from each step of each audit. It also contains activity
logs recording the time spent on each audit by each IRS employee. When combined with the
General Scale (GS) classification for each employee, this allows us to estimate the hourly costs of
all direct enforcement activities. Second, we utilize detailed internal IRS business unit accounting
information. This provides us with a comprehensive picture of other IRS costs beyond the direct
labor cost of hours spent conducting audits. It includes additional labor costs such as wages for
non-auditing hours, the cost of management, and fringe benefits of employees. It also includes
central overhead costs such as building and technology service costs. This information has, to the
best of our knowledge, not been used in academic studies of tax enforcement. We show that this
datais, nonetheless, criticaltoconstructaccuratemeasuresofthetotalcostofenforcementactivity.
The wage costs of hours spent by auditors on direct enforcement activity is only 20% of the total
cost of conducting audits.
We combine these measures of audit costs and audit revenue to estimate the average return to
1We restrict our analysis to focus on in-person audits rather than audits conducted via correspondence. This
is because correspondence audits have a fundamentally different cost structure and are narrower in scope. They
generally focus on a restricted set of issues, such as EITC compliance. In-person audits are generally more intensive
and broader in their scope, examining a wide set of potential compliance concerns.
2

auditexpenditures. Weestimatethateach$1spentonanauditreturnsanaverageof$2.17ininitial
revenue. We then merge this information with income reported on individual tax returns to study
how these costs and revenues vary across the income distribution. We find that audits of higher
income taxpayers are more time intensive and more costly than audits of low-income taxpayers.
For example, audits of taxpayers with incomes in the bottom 50% of the income distribution cost
an average of $5,218 while audits of taxpayers in the top 1% and 0.1% cost an average of $11,382
and $15,170 respectively.2 That said, these rising costs across the income distribution are more
than offset by increasing revenues. We estimate that audits of taxpayers in the bottom 50% of the
income distribution produce $0.96 in revenue for each dollar of audit cost. Audits of the top 1%
produce $4.25 in revenue and audits of the top 0.1% produce a return of $6.29 for each dollar of
audit cost.
In the second step of our analysis, we estimate the costs and revenue associated with a marginal
audit expansion. In order to estimate marginal revenues, we exploit the fact that there was a 40%
decline in US audit rates for tax returns filed between 2010 and 2014. We examine how revenues
changed during these steep cuts in order to assess the returns to reversing those cuts. If audit
selection decisions during this time prioritized reducing audits with low rates of return, we would
expect that the decline in audits would be associated with an increase in revenues from an average
audit. In fact, we see no such pattern. Revenues per hour of auditing remained stable during
this period. We show that this is driven by a consistent decline in audit rates across the income
distribution and that the audit revenues also remained stable within income groups. These patterns
align with IRS guidelines, which suggest that auditors maintain balanced portfolios of audits across
a range of non-revenue-focused criteria. The patterns also suggest that expanding audit rates from
2014 back to their 2010 levels could deliver revenues per audit similar to the average revenue figures
we estimate.
We also consider the costs associated with marginal audit expansions. It is natural to expect
someeconomiesofscaleinthenon-directcostsofconductingauditactivities. Weexploitthedetailed
nature of our business unit accounting information as well as information from existing IRS budget
requests to estimate the magnitude of fixed versus variable costs. The evidence suggests that,
in the case of a major audit expansion, approximately 27% of total costs are likely to be fixed.
2In particular, audits of taxpayers in the bottom 50% of the income distribution take an average of 28 hours and
are conducted by auditors who earn $37 per hour on average. This leads to $1,020 in labor costs for direct audit
hoursandtotalcostsof$5,218oncenon-auditlaborandnon-laboroverheadcostsareincorporated. Fortaxpayersin
thetop0.1%,auditstakeanaverageof65hoursandareconductedbyauditorswhoearnanaverageof$46perhour.
That yields $2,948 in labor costs for direct audit hours and $15,170 in total costs.
3