NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MONETARY POLICY TRANSMISSION THROUGH ONLINE BANKS
Isil Erel
Jack Liebersohn
Constantine Yannelis
Samuel Earnest
Working Paper 31380
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31380
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2023, Revised 2025
We are thankful to Marco Grotteria, Eduard Inozemtsev, Ralf Meisenzahl, Jungu Myung, Stefan
Nagel, Friederike Niepmann, Lubos Pastor, Carolin Pflueger, Alp Simsek, Dominik Supera,
Kandarp Srinivasan, Rene Stulz, Quentin Vandeweyer, Anne Villamil, Michael Weber, Yufeng
Wu, Kairong Xiao, Yao Zeng, and Anthony Zhang as well as seminar participants at Baruch
College, Berkeley, Chicago, Colorado Finance Summit, Delaware, Federal Reserve Board, Jackson
Hole Finance Group Conference, Ohio State, SMU, the SFS Cavalcade, the New York Fed/NYU
Stern Conference on Financial Intermediation, the UIC Finance Conference and the ECB’s
Inaugural Conference of the ChaMP Research Network for helpful comments. Yannelis gratefully
acknowledges financial support from the Booth School of Business and the Fama Miller Center at
the University of Chicago. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Isil Erel, Jack Liebersohn, Constantine Yannelis, and Samuel Earnest. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Monetary Policy Transmission Through Online Banks
Isil Erel, Jack Liebersohn, Constantine Yannelis, and Samuel Earnest
NBER Working Paper No. 31380
June 2023, Revised 2025
JEL No. E52, E58, G21, G23, G28
ABSTRACT
Financial technology has the potential to alter the transmission of monetary policy by lowering
search costs and expanding banking markets. This paper studies the reaction of online banks to
changes in the federal funds rate. We find that a 100 basis points increase in the federal funds rate
leads to a 30 basis points larger increase in the deposit rates of online banks relative to traditional
banks. Consistent with the rate movements, online bank deposits experience inflows, while
traditional banks experience outflows. Results are similar across markets with differing
competitiveness and demographics, but vary with the stickiness of depositors.
Isil Erel Constantine Yannelis
Fisher College of Business Faculty of Economics
The Ohio State University University of Cambridge
2100 Neil Avenue Austin Robinson Building
Columbus, OH 43210 Cambridge, CB3 9DD
and NBER United Kingdom
erel@fisher.osu.edu cny21@cam.ac.uk
Jack Liebersohn Samuel Earnest
University of California Irvine searnest@mit.edu
cjlieber@uci.edu

1 Introduction
Alargenumberofstudieshavefoundthatmonetarypolicytransmissionisimperfect,andcur-
rent empirical estimates of the effects of monetary policy include these frictions. In particular,
market concentration in deposits (Drechsler et al., 2017), search costs (Duffie and Krishna-
murthy, 2016), lender market power (Scharfstein and Sunderam, 2016), duration (Binsber-
gen and Grotteria, 2023), and human frictions (D’Acunto et al., 2021) have all been shown
to affect how monetary policy is transmitted through market interest rates. Monetary policy
is mainly transmitted through the regulated banking system. However, recent technological
advances that have revolutionized traditional banking services have the potential to radically
alter this transmission process. Individuals can now transfer funds via mobile devices and
compare investments online, which dramatically lowers search costs, weakens banking rela-
tionships, and increases geographic scope and financial market competitiveness. How does
thisunprecedentedgrowthinfinancialtechnology(FinTech)inbankingimpactmonetarypol-
icy transmission?
Standardmodelspredictthattheincreasedrelianceonfinancialtechnologyin21stcentury
banking should dramatically impact how monetary policy is transmitted.1 Consistent with
increasesincompetitionandlowersearchfrictions,onlinebanksoffersignificantlyhigherrates
ondepositsthantraditionalbanksdothroughtheirbranches. Inthispaper,weexplorehowthe
increasing share of online banks affects monetary policy transmission. Specifically, we study
whetheronlinebanks’depositratesresponddifferentlyrelativetotraditionalbrick-and-mortar
banks. We exploit changes in the Federal Funds Rate (FFR) in the U.S., with a rapid increase
fromzeroinMarch2022to5percentinApril2023. Ourmainfindingisthata100basispoint
increase in the federal funds rate leads to an approximate 30 basis points larger increase in
1By 2023, online bank deposits constituted about 13 percent of the total deposits held by commercial banks
in the US. While many regulated commercial banks in the US now start their operations almost exclusively on-
line,offeringonlinedepositsandloans,wealsoobservemanytraditionalbanksswitchingfrombrick-and-mortar
branches to online deposits. In other areas of the world, online banks have a larger market share. This is par-
ticularlytrueinLatinAmerica,where17%ofindividualsusedigitalbanksastheirprimaryfinancialinstitution.
Demographics suggest that this share will continue to grow, as more than half (54%) of Latin American adults
undertheageof35prefertouseonlinebanksastheirprimaryfinancialinstitution.
2

deposit rates offered by online banks, relative to traditional brick-and-mortar lenders.
WebeginbyprovidingastylizedtheoreticalframeworkthatfollowsDrechsleretal.(2017),
wherethekeyinsightisthatdepositorsofonlinebanksadjusttheirdepositholdingsinresponse
tochangesininterestrates,whiledepositorsintraditionalbrick-and-mortarcommercialbanks
aregenerallysticky.2 Comparingratesatonlinebankstothoseattraditionalbanks,weseepar-
alleltrendspriorandsignificantdivergencefollowingthe2022-2023hikesintheFFR.Consis-
tent with the deposit channel, we find that interest-rate passthrough is significantly larger for
online banks relative to traditional brick-and-mortar banks. Using a difference-in-differences
empirical design, we show a 17 to 36 basis points larger increase in rates of various types of
deposits offered by online banks, compared with ones offered by traditional banks, due to a
100 basis points increase in the FFR.3
An implication of our framework is that, along with differential changes in deposit rates,
thereshouldbesignificantdifferencesinlevelsofdepositflowsbetweenonlinebanksandbanks
with brick-and-mortar branches. We show that deposits of online banks have been growing
at a much faster rate (almost 40x) than that of traditional banks (under 10x) over the past
twodecades,withtotaldepositsofonlinebanksreachingabout13%oftotalbankingdeposits.
Moreover,supportingourframework’spredictions,thisgrowthcontinuedandgotsteeperafter
the rate hikes for online banks, while traditional banks experienced net deposit outflows. We
also show that the increase in overall deposits for online banks during interest hikes is due
to inflows to their interest-bearing deposits being larger for them than for traditional banks.
Finally, online bank lending also increased relative to traditional bank lending.
Our paper’s main contribution is to show that monetary policy transmission is distinct for
onlinebanks,whichhavebeengrowingatanenormouspace. Therefore,goingforward,policy
2This is not the only framework which can generate a spread between rates at online and traditional banks
following monetary policy shocks. In section 2.2, we also discuss alternative channels, building on different
theoreticalframeworks,thatleadtodivergentrateadjustmentsforonlinebanks.
3AnimportantimplicationofourresultsisthatonlinebankssharefeatureswithMoneyMarketMutualFunds
(MMMFs). MMMFs passed through Fed funds rate increases nearly one-for-one in 2022 and subsequently saw
largeinvestmentinflows,similartoonlinebanks. Eventhoughonlinebankssharearegulatoryenvironmentwith
traditionalbanks,theireconomicbehaviormaymorecloselyresembleothertypesofinvestments.
3