NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MOONSHOT: PUBLIC R&D AND GROWTH
Shawn Kantor
Alexander T. Whalley
Working Paper 31471
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31471
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2023, Revised March 2024
We thank the coeditors, Emi Nakamura and Stefano DellaVigna, as well as three anonymous
referees for many helpful comments. We also thank David Albouy, Nathaniel Baum-Snow,
Adrien Bilal, Bruno Caprettini, William Collins, Rebecca Diamond, Jonathan Dingel, James
Fenske, Lee Fleming, Andrew Garin, Nicolas Gendron-Carrier, Kirti Gupta, Douglas Hanley,
Caroline Hoxby, Taylor Jaworski, Ben Jones, Larry Katz, Carl Kitchens, Ross Levine, Jeffrey
Lin, Eric Mbakop, Enrico Moretti, Tom Nicholas, Carlianne Patrick, Elisabeth Perlman, Martin
Rotemberg, Michel Serafinelli, Paolo Surico, Fabian Waldinger, Russell Weinstein, Jonathan V.
Winters, and Paolo Zacchia for helpful discussions. We are equally grateful to seminar
participants at Berkeley, Colorado, Harvard, Illinois, Imperial College, Institute of Economics,
London Business School, Montreal, McMaster, Queen’s, Vanderbilt, and Warwick, and to
participants at the All-UC/Caltech Economic History, Economic History Association, Hoover
Institution IP2, Urban Economics Association, World Economic History Congress, and
Conference on Urban and Regional Economics conferences and the NBER DAE meetings. We
gratefully acknowledge financial support from the National Science Foundation under grant
1158794, the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada, and the Westman
Centre for Real Estate Studies. We thank Susan Greco from the IBM archives, Taylor Jaworski,
Carl Kitchens, and Paul Rhode for sharing data. We would like to especially thank Arthur Novaes
de Amorim for outstanding research assistance and also acknowledge valuable assistance from
Daniel Ma, Sam Plaquin, Timothy Rooney, Karen Sondergard, and Connor Valde. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the NSF or
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w31471
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Shawn Kantor and Alexander T. Whalley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Moonshot: Public R&D and Growth
Shawn Kantor and Alexander T. Whalley
NBER Working Paper No. 31471
July 2023, Revised March 2024
JEL No. H54,N12,N72,O32,R11
ABSTRACT
We estimate the long-term effect of public R&D on growth in manufacturing by analyzing new
data from the Cold War era Space Race. We develop a novel empirical strategy that leverages
US-Soviet rivalry in space technology to isolate windfall R&D spending. Our results demonstrate
that public R&D conducted by NASA contractors increased manufacturing value added,
employment, and capital accumulation in space related sectors. While migration responses were
important, they were not sufficient to generate a wedge between local and national effects. The
iconic Moonshot R&D program had only modest economic effects for both the local and national
space-related sectors.
Shawn Kantor
Department of Economics
Florida State University
Tallahassee, FL 32306
and NBER
skantor@fsu.edu
Alexander T. Whalley
Department of Economics
University of Calgary
2500 University Drive
Calgary, AB T2N 1N4
Canada
awhalley@gmail.com
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w31471

Technological progress plays a central role in theories of economic growth
(Solow 1957; Romer 1990; Aghion and Howitt 1992). Because social returns to
research and development may be larger than private returns, firms may
underinvest in innovation, thus reducing the rate of technological progress (Arrow
1962; Griliches 1992; Bloom, Schankerman, and Van Reenen 2013). Can
government-funded R&D fill this gap and generate long-term growth? Despite the
fact that governments expend significant resources on R&D every year – over $158
billion within the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development
(OECD) countries in 2020 (OECD 2022) – the answer remains unclear.
In this paper we provide new evidence on the effects of public R&D on long-term
economic growth by analyzing a unique episode in US history – the race to beat the
Soviet Union to the Moon during the 1960s. The shock of the Soviet launch of the
first satellite Sputnik in 1957 led to a geopolitical crisis that initiated the creation
of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) in 1958 and
launched the race to the Moon in 1961. Figure 1 shows that the ambitious mission
to send (and return) a manned crew to (and from) the Moon led to a massive
expansion of federal investment in R&D – NASA received over 0.7 percent of GDP
in the mid-1960s (Weinzierl 2018) and employed over 400,000 workers at the peak
of the Space Race. To the extent that we hope to uncover the nuances of how public
R&D seeds economic growth, the Cold War era Space Race provides a unique
episode in modern US economic history to examine in depth.
We analyze the effects of this large R&D windfall on growth in manufacturing
in the short- and long-terms. Focusing on manufacturing growth is likely to capture
the indirect effects of space R&D well because getting to the Moon not only
required new ideas and technologies, but also the production of real products.
Innovations of the Space Race era were embodied, for example, in spacecraft,
2

satellites, thrusters, navigation and communications equipment, computer software
and hardware, and launch infrastructure.
To estimate our models we develop a novel empirical approach to isolate the
exogenous variation in NASA contractor R&D. The imperative to win the Space
Race meant that NASA was compelled to rapidly allocate funding to space sector
firms already specialized in the technological building blocks needed to complete
the mission. NASA did not invest in technologies randomly, but sought to harvest
any promising space technologies that American firms could supply to win the race
to the Moon.
We address technology harvesting in two steps. We first utilize the Central
Intelligence Agency’s (CIA) declassified National Intelligence Estimates of Soviet
Space Technology (NIE) from the post-Sputnik era to define the set of technologies
demanded by the space mission. We then search for these technologies in US
patents before 1958 to determine which US industries in which counties specialized
in space-relevant technologies before the Space Race began. We term county-
industries as having “High Space Capability" if their pre-1958 technological
specialization matched post-1958 space technology demand, as seen through the
perspective of the Soviet space program not NASA’s. Isolating variation in NASA
R&D that is virtually independent of location-specific unobservables, our research
design compares changes in outcomes between space industries to other industries,
before and after the Space Race, in county-industries with varying pre-1958 space
technology capabilities.
To carry out our empirical analysis we construct a new panel dataset containing
highly granular data on US manufacturing and NASA activity for large urban
counties from 1947 to 1992. For each county-industry we have digitized the amount
that NASA contractors received. We then match this information to manufacturing
value added, employment, and labor income from the Census of Manufactures at
the county ´ 2-digit industry level to estimate our models. We also utilize newly
3