NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE CREDIT SUPPLY CHANNEL OF MONETARY POLICY TIGHTENING AND
ITS DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS
Joshua Bosshardt
Marco Di Maggio
Ali Kakhbod
Amir Kermani
Working Paper 31464
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31464
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2023, Revised November 2023
We thank Justin Contat, Will Doerner, and seminar participants at the FHFA for comments. This
paper is also an FHFA Working Paper and available here: https://www.fhfa.gov/papers/
wp2303.aspx. Any errors or omissions are the sole responsibility of the authors. The views
expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal
Housing Finance Agency, the U.S. Government, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Any errors or omissions are the sole responsibility of the authors.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Joshua Bosshardt, Marco Di Maggio, Ali Kakhbod, and Amir Kermani. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Credit Supply Channel of Monetary Policy Tightening and its Distributional Impacts
Joshua Bosshardt, Marco Di Maggio, Ali Kakhbod, and Amir Kermani
NBER Working Paper No. 31464
July 2023, Revised November 2023
JEL No. E20,E5,E52,G5,G51
ABSTRACT
This paper studies how tightening monetary policy transmits to the economy through the
mortgage market and sheds new light on the distributional consequences at both individual and
regional levels. We find that credit supply factors, specifically restrictions on the debt-to-income
(DTI) ratio, account for most of the decline in mortgages. These effects are even more
pronounced for minority and middle-income borrowers, who find themselves excluded from the
credit market. Additionally, regions with historically high DTI ratios exhibit greater reductions in
mortgage originations, house prices, and consumption.
Joshua Bosshardt Ali Kakhbod
Federal Housing Finance Agency Haas School of Business
Constitution Center University of California, Berkeley
400 7th Street SW 2220 Piedmont Ave
Washington, DC 20219 Berkeley, CA 94720
joshua.bosshardt@fhfa.gov akakhbod@berkeley.edu
Marco Di Maggio Amir Kermani
Harvard Business School Haas School of Business
Baker Library 265 University of California, Berkeley
Soldiers Field 545 Student Services Building #1900
Boston, MA 02163 Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER and NBER
mdimaggio@hbs.edu kermani@berkeley.edu

1 Introduction
The surge in inflation starting in mid-2021, which reached as much as 8% in the United
States (US), and the ensuing interest rate hike have reignited interest in understanding
the transmission channels of monetary policy tightening to the aggregate economy. As
the Federal Reserve increased short-term interest rates and contracted its balance sheet
starting near the beginning of 2022, mortgage interest rates climbed from around 3% to a
peak within the year of about 7%. During the same time, purchase mortgage originations
contracted by 13% from 2021 to 2022, which raises the question of whether this response
was primarily driven by either demand or supply channels. In conventional macroeco-
nomic frameworks, a rise in interest rates curtails aggregate demand by discouraging
credit and consumption, as illustrated by Smets and Wouters (2007). The potency of this
effect hinges on households’ elasticity of intertemporal substitution. Conversely, raising
interest rates can also influence credit supply, particularly when borrowing constraints
cap a household’s debt-to-income (DTI) ratio — the proportion of monthly debt payments
to income, as highlighted by Greenwald (2018). In this case, the effectiveness is gauged by
the extent to which these constraints bind. Identifying the dominant channel of monetary
policy tightening is also important to understand its distributional implications, includ-
ing the extent to which it may disproportionately impact borrowers with historically low
homeownership rates.
This paper finds that mortgage supply factors, particularly constraints on DTI ratios,
accounted for most of the decline in mortgages during 2022. Specifically, we show that
the interest rate spike heightened the propensity for DTI ratios to surpass underwriting
thresholds, thereby constraining credit availability. Furthermore, borrower groups and
regions with high DTI ratios experienced the greatest reductions in originations. Regions
with high DTI ratios also experienced relative reductions in house prices and spending,
suggesting the transmission of monetary policy to other economic outcomes. We observe
these results using a representative sample of all mortgages originated in 2022 and pre-
1

ceding years, focusing on purchase loans for single-family, owner-occupied properties.
To uncover the different mechanisms at play, we start by considering a hypothetical
scenario in which 2021 borrowers are subjected to 2022 interest rates while maintaining
the same loan, allowing us to compare the resulting distribution of counterfactual DTI
ratios for loans originated in 2021 with the distribution of observed (i.e., actual) DTI ratios
for loans originated in 2022. This initial counterfactual DTI assumes no adjustment for
demand on either the intensive margin (i.e., changing the loan size) or extensive margin
(i.e., changing the decision about purchasing a home). We find that the 13% decline in
the total number of loans from 2021 to 2022 is almost entirely explained by loans with
a counterfactual DTI above a key underwriting limit of 50%. By contrast, we observe
that the counterfactual and observed distributions are much more similar for DTI ratios
below the minimum DTI threshold of 45%. The missing mass of the observed distribution
relative to the counterfactual distribution above the DTI thresholds together with a lack of
bunching beneath them suggest that the response to the supply constraints was primarily
on the extensive margin (i.e., supply-constrained borrowers choosing not to purchase a
home) rather than the intensive margin response (i.e., borrowers changing the loan size to
maintain eligibility).
We then augment this analysis by taking into account the impact of the interest
rate spike as well as concurrent changes in income and house prices on the demand for
loans. We adjust for these factors by employing the demand elasticity to interest rates
in the literature (DeFusco and Paciorek (2017)) and by estimating the predicted changes
in loan amounts associated with changes in income and house prices. We also adjust
for factors that affect the extensive margin of demand for housing by assuming that the
supply constraints have no effect for DTI ratios sufficiently below the DTI thresholds.
Specifically, we scale the counterfactual distribution so that the number of loans with a
DTI ratio of 40% or below matches the actual distribution. We find similar magnitudes
after including these adjustments, observing a decline in the total number of loans from
2