NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
AGGREGATE LENDING AND MODERN FINANCIAL INTERMEDIATION:
WHY BANK BALANCE SHEET MODELS ARE MISCALIBRATED
Greg Buchak
Gregor Matvos
Tomasz Piskorski
Amit Seru
Working Paper 31484
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31484
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2023
Nothing to disclose. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Greg Buchak, Gregor Matvos, Tomasz Piskorski, and Amit Seru. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Aggregate Lending and Modern Financial Intermediation: Why Bank Balance Sheet Models
are Miscalibrated
Greg Buchak, Gregor Matvos, Tomasz Piskorski, and Amit Seru
NBER Working Paper No. 31484
July 2023
JEL No. G01,G2,G50
ABSTRACT
Existing macroeconomic models focused on bank balance sheet lending are deficient because
they do not account for the modern industrial organization of financial intermediation. Utilizing
publicly available micro-level lending data, we investigate two increasingly significant margins
of adjustment in credit markets: banks’ ability to sell loans and shadow bank activity. These
adjustment margins are substantial and vary across time and regions with different incomes. We
examine these margins in a parsimonious dynamic quantitative model featuring banks with
balance sheet adjustment through loan sales and shadow banks. Using the calibrated model, we
illustrate that these margins significantly dampen the immediate contraction following bank
capital shock. Recovery is also faster, because profitable loan sales (e.g., securitization) allow
banks to build capital faster and because shadow banks pick up lending slack. Failure to account
for adjustment margins leads to significant errors when studying policies which rely on financial
intermediation pass-through in the level of aggregate lending, its direction, and composition. Our
model highlights the tension between bank balance sheet models and data. The model, which
forces total lending to depend strongly on bank balance sheet health, must reconcile the weak
correlation between bank capital and aggregate lending. These issues can be reconciled with now
available data from bank balance sheets, overall bank lending, and aggregate lending, in
conjunction with a model of modern financial intermediation.
Greg Buchak Tomasz Piskorski
Graduate School of Business Columbia Business School
Stanford University 3022 Broadway
655 Knight Way Uris Hall 810
Stanford, CA 94305b New York, NY 10027
buchak@stanford.edu and NBER
tp2252@columbia.edu
Gregor Matvos
Kellogg School of Management Amit Seru
Northwestern University Stanford Graduate School of Business
2211 Campus Drive Stanford University
Global Hub 4361 655 Knight Way
Evanston IL, 60208 and NBER
and NBER aseru@stanford.edu
gregor.matvos@kellogg.northwestern.edu

1. Introduction
Macro-prudential, monetary, and fiscal policies, are frequently passed through the financial
intermediation sector, or implemented directly through financial intermediaries (Kashyap and
Stein 2000; Hanson, Kashyap and Stein 2011).2 The modern industrial organization of financial
intermediation differs from the traditional view of bank balance sheet lending in two dimensions
(Buchak et al. 2018 and 2022). Specifically, non-depository institutions, that is, shadow banks,
now account for a substantial share of lending in many markets, and banks now sell a significant
fraction of the loans they originate through securitization. We argue that accounting for the modern
industrial organization of financial intermediation is essential in two respects.
Firstly, using bank data to measure lending can lead to erroneous conclusions about the how
lending responds to economic or policy shocks, and the extent to which they are amplified through
financial intermediaries. We illustrate this point using micro-level lending data on the largest
private credit market in the US. Secondly, failing to account for these features of financial
intermediation in quantitative macro models can result in inaccurate calibrations of how shocks
amplify through financial intermediaries. To study the economics of the problem we develop and
calibrate a parsimonious dynamic quantitative model featuring banks with balance sheet
adjustment and shadow banks.
We begin our empirical analysis with the observation that regulators and academics commonly
employ three different sources for measuring the extent of lending: the data on bank lending
activity from bank balance sheets (e.g., the bank call reports), data on total bank loan origination,
or aggregate lending data. We focus our analysis on the US residential mortgage market, the largest
private credit market in the US, with more than $11 trillion of loans outstanding. The advantage
of this market is that we observe almost all originated loans and know whether they were (i)
originated by a bank or shadow bank, and (ii) whether a financial institution retained a loan on its
balance sheet or sold it.3
We define two empirical multipliers, the “loan sales multiplier” and the “shadow bank lending
multiplier,” to capture the mapping between bank balance sheet lending, total bank lending, and
total lending. These multipliers measure the significance of two key features of modern financial
intermediation described above: the extent to which banks sell a significant portion of loans and
2 For recent papers on pass-through of macro-prudential, monetary, fiscal policies, and other shocks through financial
intermediaries see, He and Krishnamurthy (2013), Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014), Agarwal et al. (2017), Di
Maggio et al. (2017), Drechsler et al. (2017), Greenwood et al. (2017), Beraja et al. (2019), Xiao (2020), Cherry et al,
(2020, 2021), Corbae and D’Erasmo (2021), Elenev et al. (2021), Hachem and Song (2021), Begenau and Landgvoit
(2022), Bianchi and Bigio (2022), Buchak et al. (2022), Eichenbaum et al. (2022) and Wang et al. (2022).
3 While we focus on mortgage market, banks now increasingly sell a significant share of their corporate loans, credit
cards, auto loans, and personal loans and shadow banks now account for a substantial amount of intermediation in
these markets as well (see Buchak et al. 2022 and Seru 2019).
2

the involvement of shadow banks in lending. We demonstrate that these multipliers are large and
vary over time. For instance, banks on average sell more than half of the mortgages they originate,
with this propensity fluctuating between a low of roughly 37% and a high of nearly 80% of annual
bank lending. As a result, bank balance sheet lending data, which is frequently used by regulators
to gauge lending conditions, accounts for less than half of the variation in aggregate lending of
banks, both in terms of their level and growth rates. Even perfect bank data is insufficient to assess
the evolution of aggregate lending activity: total bank lending accounts for only about 70% of
variation over time in total lending. This is because shadow banks originate substantial share of
loans, and their market share significantly varies over time, from a low of roughly 20% during the
Great Recession and a high of 60% in 2021. In fact, the growth in bank balance sheet lending and
aggregate lending can occasionally be negatively correlated, especially, as we argue below, in
times when bank balance sheets are stressed.
We document a significant correlation between regional income and the composition of financial
intermediation, which has a significant impact on the magnitude of both the “loan sales multiplier”
and the “shadow bank lending multiplier”. Both multipliers are smallest in highest income
counties, which primarily rely on bank balance sheet lending. Conversely, in lower to mid-income
regions, which may be of particular interest to regulators due to their typically higher share of risky
lending, the multipliers are found to be largest. These results imply that the propagation of shocks
in high and low-income areas differ, as these households are situated in markets with distinct
industrial organizations of financial intermediation.
Buchak et al. (2018, 2022) identify three underlying drivers that influence the two margins of
substitution: bank balance sheet strength, the relative attractiveness of the loan sale market, and
the regulatory burden on banks. First, banks switch away from traditional bank balance sheet
lending and toward selling loans as their capitalization declines. The extent of that switching is
determined in equilibrium. Second, the availability and relative attractiveness of the loan sale
market affects both margins of substitution. Because shadow banks sell almost all loans they
originate, the shadow bank lending margin is crucially affected by the conditions in the secondary-
loan market.4 Finally, changes in the regulatory environment also play a role in determining the
market share of shadow banks, with Buchak et al. (2018) finding that a substantial part of the
increase in shadow bank market share after the Great Recession can be attributed to increased
regulatory burden on banks. Our paper provides further evidence of the importance of bank balance
sheet strength in shaping the aggregate loan sale multiplier.
To understand whether modifying existing models to account for contemporary financial
intermediation frictions is quantitively important, we develop a parsimonious dynamic quantitative
4 There are other forces that can affect shadow bank sector like deposit outflows from traditional banking sector
towards non-bank sector during times of higher interest rates (see Xiao 2020 and Dreschler et al. 2022).
3