NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
POLICY UNCERTAINTY REDUCES GREEN INVESTMENT
Mengyu Wang
Jeffrey Wurgler
Hong Zhang
Working Paper 31401
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31401
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2023
We are grateful to Yakov Amihud, Nick Barberis, Sanjiv Das, David Hirshleifer, Mohammed
Shehub Bin Hasan, Sabrina Howell, Holger Mueller, Lasse Pedersen, Andrei Shleifer, Meir
Statman, and seminar participants at Florida International University, NYU Stern, and the
Universities of Edinburgh, Miami, Reading, and Santa Clara for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Mengyu Wang, Jeffrey Wurgler, and Hong Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Policy Uncertainty Reduces Green Investment
Mengyu Wang, Jeffrey Wurgler, and Hong Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 31401
June 2023
JEL No. D8,O13,O3
ABSTRACT
Government subsidies are often used to stimulate environment-friendly investment. We find that
Chinese firms reduce green investment as the uncertainty of subsidies rises. This effect is
identified from weather-driven fluctuations in air pollution that lead to fluctuations in subsidy
allocations: Firms in cities where weather-driven subsidy uncertainty is high engage in less green
R&D investment, patent applications, and research staff. Industries that are heavy emitters and
those focused on environmental technologies are more affected. The results suggest that policy
uncertainty may originate not only from political and macroeconomic shocks but from behavioral
mechanisms that link policy to salient recent conditions.
Mengyu Wang Hong Zhang
PBCSF Tsinghua Unversity Singapore Management University
43 Chengfu Road, Haidian District hongzhang@smu.edu.sg
Beijing 100083
China
wangmy@pbcsf.tsinghua.edu.cn
Jeffrey Wurgler
Stern School of Business, Suite 9-190
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
jwurgler@stern.nyu.edu

I. Introduction
On November 19, 2010, the Air Quality Index (AQI) measured at the U.S. Embassy in
Beijing reached 562. The cheeky programmer who set up the Embassy’s automatic Twitter report
apparently never imagined that air pollution would reach the level of a forest fire, and air quality
was broadcast as “crazy bad.” “An official said there was insufficient research to explain why the
pollution haze has been so murky this week. The culprit is likely to be a combination of weather,
traffic and coal-burning power stations.”1 Although the cause of the pollution spike could not be
isolated, the government increased environment-related subsidies to Beijing firms by 78% the
next year.2
Air pollution control efforts are so important because airborne particulates have broad
health and economic impacts. They shorten human lifespans by an average of two years, and
they reduce the healthfulness of the remaining years in many ways.3 The list of negative
economic consequences of particulate matter is also growing rapidly, including reduced
productivity, human capital formation, and economic growth, and even altered investor behavior
and stock prices.4
1 https://www.theguardian.com/environment/blog/2010/nov/19/crazy-bad-beijing-air-pollution.
2 Data and calculations described herein.
3 https://aqli.epic.uchicago.edu/pollution-facts/. For methodological underpinnings, see Chen, Ebenstein,
Greenstone, and li., 2013 and Ebenstein et al., 2017).
4 For an overview of health effects, see Fonken et al., 2011; Mohai, Kweon, Lee, and Ard., 2011; Weuve et al.,
2012. For economic effects, see human capital measures related to education (e.g., Currie et al., 2009; Mohai et al.,
2011), labor supply (Hanna and Oliva, 2015), productivity (Graff Zivin and Neidell, 2012; Chang, Graff Zivin,
Gross, Neidell, 2016, 2019; Isen, Rossin-Slater, and Walker, 2017; He, Wang, and Zhang, 2020), growth (Ebenstein
et al. 2015), happiness (Zheng et al. 2019), neighborhood sorting (Heblich, Trew, and Zylberberg., 2021), investor
2

In addition to air pollution being a problem worth attention in its own right, it shares a
feature with other policy settings: It can manifest as an immediate, salient problem that requires a
response despite an imperfect understanding of its causes. In this sense, combating air pollution
has similarities with fiscal and monetary policy decisions that must react to shocks whose nature
is not fully clear in the moment; climate policy decisions in the absence of a sharp breakdown
between manmade and natural sources of temperature rise; or, financial market regulation in a
complex meltdown. Economic policy made under such conditions is at greater risk of having
unintended consequences.
In this paper, we study how environmental subsidies to Chinese firms are allocated and
how effective they are in terms of the “green” investment that they are intended to stimulate. Our
evidence suggests that policymakers who allocate the subsidies may be prone to react to current,
salient circumstances, even though the causes may be beyond the reach of policy; these
reactions, in turn, create policy uncertainty, which is known to discourage firm investment when
investments are costly to reverse (e.g., Bernanke, 1983; McDonald and Siegel, 1986; Dixit and
Pindyck, 1994; Julio and Yook, 2012; Gulen and Ion, 2016). Our evidence confirms that policy
uncertainty discourages the green investment that the subsidies were intended to stimulate, and
we speculate about new and potentially behavioral mechanisms that give rise to the policy
uncertainty in the first place.
behavior (Li, Massa, Zhang, and Zhang 2021), and financial markets (e.g., Heyes, Neidell, and Saberian, 2016;
Huang, Xu, and Yu, 2020).
3