NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE PERVASIVE INFLUENCE OF IDEOLOGY AT THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT COURTS
Alma Cohen
Working Paper 31509
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31509
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2023
For valuable comments and discussions, I would like to thank Oren Bar-Gil, Lucian Bebchuk,
Yochai Benkler, Jared Ellias, Thomas Beall Griffith, Kobi Kastiel, Shay Lavie, Richard Lazarus,
Andrew Mergem, Martha Minow, Gerald Neuman, Kathy Spier, Roberto Tallarita, and workshop
participants at Harvard Law School and the TAU Reason and Decision Forum. I am also grateful
to Alon Bebchuk, Haggai Porat, Ariel Rava, and Tarik Samman for their excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Alma Cohen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The Pervasive Influence of Ideology at the Federal Circuit Courts
Alma Cohen
NBER Working Paper No. 31509
July 2023
JEL No. D72,J15,J16,K0
ABSTRACT
This paper seeks to contribute to the long-standing debate on the extent to which the ideology of
federal circuit court judges, as proxied by the party of the president nominating them, can help to
predict case outcomes. To this end, I combine and analyze a novel dataset containing about
670,000 circuit court cases from 1985 to 2020. I show that the political affiliation of judges is
associated with outcomes, and thus can help to predict them, throughout the vast universe of
circuit court cases – and not only in the ideologically contested cases on which prior empirical
research has focused.
In particular, I find an association between political affiliation and outcomes in each of six
categories of cases in which the two litigating parties could be perceived by judges to have
unequal power. In each of these six case categories, which together add up to more than 550,000
cases, the more Democratic judges a panel has, the higher the odds of the panel siding with the
seemingly weaker party.
Furthermore, I identify evidence of polarization over time in circuit court decisions. Consistent
with such growing polarization, in the important subset of published cases, the identified patterns
are more pronounced in the last two decades of the examined period than earlier.
Going beyond the very large sample of cases with parties of seemingly of unequal power, I
identify how political affiliation can help to predict outcomes in most of the cases outside this
sample. In particular, I show that panels with more Democratic judges are less likely than panels
with less Democratic judges to defer to the lower-court decision in civil cases between private
parties that seem to be of equal power. Altogether, my analysis shows that political affiliation can
help to predict outcomes in over 90% of circuit court cases.
Overall, my results highlight the pervasiveness with which – and the array of ways through which
–the political affiliation of judges can help to predict the outcome of circuit court cases.
Alma Cohen
Harvard Law School
1525 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
alcohen@law.harvard.edu

I. Introduction
Using a large sample of about 670,000 circuit court cases from the period 1985–2020, this
paper investigates the extent to which the ideological inclinations of circuit court judges, as proxied
by the party of the U.S. president nominating them, can help to predict the outcomes of circuit
court cases. My analysis shows that political appointment can help to predict outcomes in a vastly
larger universe of cases than has been suggested by prior research. Also, consistent with growing
polarization, my analysis shows a strengthening of the identified patterns over time.
There is a large empirical literature on circuit court decisions, and much of it has examined
whether judges appointed by Democratic and Republican presidents (hereafter “Democratic
judges” and “Republican judges,” respectively) systematically differ in their decisions.1 However,
the literature has generally focused on documenting such differences in small sets of published
cases on subjects that are ideologically contested or salient. For example, one early influential
study documented “party effects” in a set of cases involving the First Amendment, civil rights,
labor relations, and criminal appeals (Songer and Sue (1990)), and another influential early study
(Revesz (1997)) documented such effects in a set of cases reviewing decisions by the
Environmental Protection Agency. Similarly, the subsequent seminal works of Sunstein et al.
(2004, 2006) identified sets of cases on “controversial issues” – such as abortion, affirmative
action, capital punishment, and sex discrimination – and created a dataset of “ideological cases”
that much subsequent literature used. Although much empirical work has been done in the
intervening years, I am unaware of any prior study that identified pervasive party effects
throughout the vast universe of all circuit court cases.
Explaining the focus on the domains of ideologically contested cases, Sunstein et al. (2004)
explained that “outside of such domains [Republican and Democratic judges] are far less likely to
differ.” Indeed, Sunstein et al. reasoned that the absence of party effects that they found in several
sets of ideologically controversial cases they studied emphasizes “the limited nature of these
effects” and that the forces of “professional discipline and legal consensus” can preclude such
1 See, e.g., Sunstein et al. (2004, 2006), Farhang and Wawro (2004), Cox and Miles (2008), Chew and
Kelley (2009), Boyd et al. (2010), and Hall (2010)). For broad discussions of the subject and the literature,
see Epstein, Landes, and Posner (2013) and Bonica and Sen (2021).
1

effects from showing up in many other areas. The authors remained agnostic on whether
“ideological voting” might be present in “apparently non-ideological cases involving, for example,
bankruptcy, torts, and civil procedure,” and viewed answering this question as an important
challenge for future work.
In this study, I seek to contribute to meeting this challenge. I show that systematic differences
between Democratic and Republican judges can be found in a very broad universe of circuit court
cases. Knowing the political composition of the circuit court panel can help to predict outcomes
in the great majority of circuit court cases. Thus, notwithstanding the forces of “professional
discipline and legal consensus,” how parties fare in cases decided by a circuit court depends
significantly on the “luck of the draw” – the political composition of the panel randomly assigned
to hear the case.
Much of my study focuses on analyzing how political affiliation can help to predict outcomes
in six categories of cases in which one of the parties has characteristics that could lead to its being
perceived by judges to be weaker. These six categories of cases add up to more than half a million
cases, or over 80% of circuit court cases. I hypothesize that Democratic judges and Republican
judges systematically differ in their tendency to side with the seemingly weaker party. Consistent
with this Pro-weak hypothesis, I find that panels with more Democratic judges are more likely to
side with:
(i) non-institutional private parties in civil litigation against institutional private parties;
(ii) private parties in civil litigation against the U.S. government;
(iii) convicted offenders in criminal appeals litigated with the U.S. government;
(iv) immigrants in litigation against immigration agencies;
(v) prisoners serving a sentence in litigation with the government and prisons; and
(vi) petitioners in habeas corpus and other petitions against public officials for which the circuit
courts have original jurisdiction.2
2 To the best of my knowledge, prior research has not examined whether political affiliation can help to
predict outcomes in five of my six categories of cases. With respect to the sixth category of criminal appeals,
Sunstein et al. (2004, 2006) and Hall (2010), used a sample of about 1,000 such appeals to examine whether
Democratic and Republican judges systematically differ in their decisions in such cases. Sunstein et al.
(2004, 2006) report that they do not, but Hall (2010) suggested that they do.
2