NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
USING LOTTERIES TO ATTRACT DEPOSITS
Paul Gertler
Sean Higgins
Aisling Scott
Enrique Seira
Working Paper 31529
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31529
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2023
We would like to thank the Consortium on Financial Systems and Poverty, Inter-American
Development Bank, Northwestern Kellogg’s Financial Institutions and Markets Research Center,
and UC Berkeley Institute for Business & Social Impact’s Lab for Inclusive FinTech for generous
financial support. The authors declare that they have no financial or material interests in the
results of this research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Paul Gertler, Sean Higgins, Aisling Scott, and Enrique Seira. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Using Lotteries to Attract Deposits
Paul Gertler, Sean Higgins, Aisling Scott, and Enrique Seira
NBER Working Paper No. 31529
August 2023
JEL No. G29,G41,O16
ABSTRACT
Despite the importance of deposit financing for lending, banks in developing countries struggle to
attract deposits. In a randomized experiment across 110 bank branches throughout Mexico, a
lottery incentive based on net monthly deposits caused a 40% increase in the number of accounts
opened and a 21% increase in the number of deposits during the lottery months. Nearly all new
accounts (96%) were opened by households previously unbanked at any bank. The temporary
two-month incentive had a persistent 2-3 year impact on the flow of deposits and stock of
savings, and increased the present value of branch profits by 6%.
Paul Gertler Aisling Scott
Haas School of Business Indeed.com
University of California, Berkeley aisling scott@berkeley.edu
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER Enrique Seira
gertler@haas.berkeley.edu Michigan State University
Department of Economics
Sean Higgins 486 W. Circle Drive 110
Kellogg School of Management Marshall-Adams Hall
Northwestern University E. Lansing, MI 48824
2211 Campus Drive seiraenr@msu.edu
Evanston, IL 60208
sean.higgins@kellogg.northwestern.edu
A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at Trial # 11852: trials/11852
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/

1 Introduction
Banks finance three-quarters of their assets with deposits (Hanson, Shleifer, Stein and
Vishny, 2015), which are a more stable source of funding than short-term debt (Ivashina
and Scharfstein, 2010). Not only do banks compete for deposits, but variation in banks’
productivity of attracting deposits explains the majority of the variation in bank value
(Egan, Lewellen and Sunderam, 2022). In developing countries, however, banks struggle
to attract deposits: the fraction of households that are unbanked remains high, and con-
ditional on having a bank account most households do not deposit significant amounts
(Demirgu¨c¸-Kunt, Klapper, Singer and Ansar, 2022; Dupas, Karlan, Robinson and Ubfal,
2018). This is true even though access to formal bank accounts leads low-income house-
holds to accumulate more wealth, to better cope with income shocks, and—since addi-
tional earnings can be safely saved—to increase labor supply and income (Bruhn and
Love, 2014; Callen, De Mel, McIntosh and Woodruff, 2019; Ce´le´rier and Matray, 2019;
SteinandYannelis,2020).
Prize-linked savings (PLS) accounts are a potential solution (Cole, Tufano, Schneider
andCollins,2007;Kearney,Tufano,GuryanandHurst,2011). Theseaccountsofferlottery
tickets for cash prizes as an incentive to save, often in lieu of paying a fixed interest rate.
The number of lottery tickets received is typically a function of the amount of new sav-
ings accumulated. Like a traditional lottery, PLS offers a small chance at winning a large
prize. Unlike a traditional lottery, PLS customers keep the principal that they deposit
into their account. Households seeking skewness might therefore open a PLS account if
offered, and might substitute from gambling to saving in the PLS account (Cole, Iverson
and Tufano, 2021; Cookson, 2018). Once opened, PLS accounts may lead to more persis-
tentsavingssincelotteriestendtobehabit-forming(GuryanandKearney,2010).
There are several reasons that people might seek skewness in returns and thus be
drawn to gambling or, in our case, PLS. First, they may overweight small probabilities
(Kahneman and Tversky, 1979), perhaps due to a tendency to have optimistic beliefs
(Brunnermeier,GollierandParker,2007). EvidencefromlabexperimentsshowsthatPLS
accounts are indeed appealing to those who overweight the small probability of receiv-
ingalargereturn(Filiz-Ozbayetal.,2015;DizonandLybbert,2021). Alternatively,people
mayhavenonconcavitiesintheirutilityfunction(FriedmanandSavage,1948),whichcan
arise from demand for indivisible assets in the presence of financial constraints (Kwang,
1965; Hartley and Farrell, 2002). In the context of sports betting, Moskowitz and Vasude-
van (2023) find evidence consistent with the latter mechanism rather than the former.
1

Peoplemightalsoexperienceutilityfromdreamingaboutwinningthelotteryprizeeven
whentheydonotwin(Bhatia,2010).
PLS products are prolific. They were introduced in the 1690s in Great Britain (Cohen,
1953)andremainapopularproductintheUKtoday,withaboutone-fifthtoone-fourthof
households participating in a PLS product (Tufano, 2008). Since then, PLS products have
been introduced by both public and private financial institutions in more than 40 coun-
tries across six continents (Figure A1a and Table AI). PLS products were illegal in the US
until 2014, when Congress passed the American Savings and Promotion Act, which per-
mittedstatestolegalizePLS.Manystatesdid: today,32statesallowfinancialinstitutions
toofferPLSproducts(FigureA1b). InnearlyallstateswherePLSislegal,thereareexam-
ples of PLS products offered by credit unions and/or banks (Table AII).1 Although PLS
products are common around the world, there is limited evidence on whether they are
effectiveatinducingpeopletoopenaccountsandsave.
We worked with a bank in Mexico to conduct a randomized controlled trial (RCT) of
prize-linked savings. We randomly assigned 40 out of 110 bank branches across 19 states
to offer PLS over a two-month period, and measured the effects on account openings,
deposits,andsavingsoverthesubsequentfiveyears.
To participate in the lottery for the cash prizes, people had to open or already have
an account at one of the treatment branches and had to save in the account over the
two-month period. Each 50 pesos (US$4) of new savings earned one lottery ticket; our
partner bank awarded one thousand small prizes of 400 pesos (US$31) and two large
prizes of 10,000 pesos (US$777) at the end of each of the two lottery months. While the
expected return was unknown ex ante to potential savers since it depended on other
account holders’ savings responses to the incentive, ex post it was equivalent to a 1.4%
annualinterestrate.
The branch-level randomization makes our estimates relevant for a bank consider-
ing offering PLS to attract deposits, as we measure the effect of PLS on the branch-level
flow of deposits, stock of savings, and present value of profits. We also decompose these
branch-level effects into the extensive margin effect on new account openings, the stock
1Innumerouscountries,regulatorshavestifledPLS,oftenbecausestate-runlotteriesprefertomaintain
rentsfromhavingamonopolyoverstate-sanctionedgambling.Forexample,inSouthAfrica,FirstNational
Bank was sued by the National Lotteries Board and the Supreme Court deemed their PLS product to be
a violation of the country’s Lottery Act (Cole, Iverson and Tufano, 2021). Now that PLS is legal in the
US,whilenationalbankstypicallydonotofferPLSproducts—possiblybecausetheydonotviewittobe
worthwhiletoofferaproductthattheycanonlyofferincertainstates—WalmartandGreenDotofferaPLS
product,asdoanumberofFinTechapps.
2