NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RESEARCH AND/OR DEVELOPMENT?
FINANCIAL FRICTIONS AND INNOVATION INVESTMENT
Filippo Mezzanotti
Timothy Simcoe
Working Paper 31521
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31521
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
We thank Frank Limehouse, Lanwei Yang and Shahin Davoudpour for their help and advices
working with the Census data. We thank Davin Wang and Anoushka Nalwa for the excellent
research assistance. We also thank the seminar participants at Rice University, Erasmus
Rotterdam, Hong Kong University, Simon Business School (University of Rochester), Kellogg
School of Management and Yeshiva University, FGV (Sao Paolo), and the conference
participants at NBER Productivity (2023), CICF (2023), FIRS (2023), MFA (2023), Booth
Empirical Finance Conference (2023), HEC Paris (2022) for the useful comments. In particular,
we want to thank for their feedbacks Ramin Baghai (discussant), Bo Bian (discussant), Sharon
Belenzon (discussant), Max Maksimovic (discussant), Jamie Brown, Yael Hochberg, Johan
Hombert, Sabrina Howell, Kilian Huber, David Matsa, Christian Opp, Dimitris Papanikolaou, K.
Ramesh, Kunal Sachdeva, Paola Sapienza, Tarik Umar, Jonathan Wallen, Pavel Zryumov. Any
views expressed are those of the authors and not those of the U.S. Census Bureau. The Census
Bureau’s Disclosure Review Board and Disclosure Avoidance Officers have reviewed this
information product for unauthorized disclosure of confidential information and have approved
the disclosure avoidance practices applied to this release. This research was performed at a
Federal Statistical Research Data Center under FSRDC Project Number 1874. (CBDRB-FY22-
P1874-R9607, CBDRB-FY23-P1874-R10456). The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w31521
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Filippo Mezzanotti and Timothy Simcoe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Research and/or Development? Financial Frictions and Innovation Investment
Filippo Mezzanotti and Timothy Simcoe
NBER Working Paper No. 31521
August 2023
JEL No. G30,L20,O31,O32
ABSTRACT
Abstract U.S. firms have reduced their investment in scientific research (“R”) compared to
product development (“D”), raising questions about the returns to each type of investment, and
about the reasons for this shift. We use Census data that disaggregates “R” from “D” to study
how US firms adjust their innovation investments in response to an external increase in funding
cost. Companies with greater demand for refinancing during the 2008 financial crisis made larger
cuts to R&D investment. This reduction in R&D is achieved almost entirely by reducing
investments in basic and applied research. Development remains essentially unchanged. Although
patenting is more strongly correlated with development than research investments, the impact of
the crisis appears in citation-weighted patent output after 3 to 5 years. Finally, we show that if
other firms patenting similar technologies are exposed to the crisis, then a focal firm's
Development investment declines. We consider several mechanisms that could explain these
results, and without ruling out every alternative, conclude that the overall pattern is consistent
with an important role for technological competition in R&D financing decisions.
Filippo Mezzanotti
Kellogg School of Management
4389 Global Hub
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60201
filippo.mezzanotti@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Timothy Simcoe
Boston University
Questrom School of Business
595 Commonwealth Avenue
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
tsimcoe@bu.edu

1 Introduction
The National Science Foundation (NSF) estimates that businesses were responsible
for 75% of total U.S. domestic investment in Research and Development (R&D) in 2019.1
While this share has grown in recent years, several scholars have voiced concerns about
thecompositionofprivateR&D(Aroraetal.,2018,Akcigitetal.,2021). Inparticular,there
isevidencethat￿rmshavereducedtheirinvestmentinscienti￿cresearchrelativetolater
stages of the technology commercialization process. In simple terms, U.S. ￿rms seem be
todoingless“R”foreachdollarof“D.”
To date, most of the evidence that ￿rms are shifting the composition of their
R&D investments comes from either aggregate statistics or studies that use corporate
publishing activity as a proxy for the output of basic research investments. While those
two approaches can yield many insights, it remains di￿cult to study factors that shift
the ￿rm-level composition of R&D investments without observing them directly. In this
study, we use Census data from two surveys that dis-aggregate basic research, applied
research, and development expenditures to examine how a change in the cost of capital
impactseachcomponentofa￿rm’sR&Dportfolioforalargesetofpubliccompanies.
Our empirical context is the 2008 ￿nancial crisis. The research design is partially
borrowed from earlier studies (e.g., Almeida et al., 2009; Benmelech et al., 2019; Costello,
2020;GranjaandMoreira,2022;Kalemli-Özcanetal.,2022)thatexploitvariationin￿rms’
re￿nancing needs during a ￿nancial crisis to construct a measure of short-run ￿nancial
constraint. In particular, our main treatment variable measures a ￿rm’s pre-determined
amountoflong-termdebtcomingduein2008relativetoitscashholdings. Thebasicidea
is that companies forced to access ￿nancial markets in 2008 found their funding options
tobescarceandexpensive(Santos,2011),andarethereforemorelikelytoreduceinternal
spendinginordertominimizere￿nancingneeds.
Our baseline estimates show that a one standard deviation increase in re￿nancing
needs leads to an 8% decline in domestic R&D performed by a ￿rm. This drop in R&D
investment is explained almost entirely by a reduction in basic and applied research, as
opposedtodevelopment. Furthermore,approximatelytwo-thirdsofthereductioninR&D
can be attributed to R&D-speci￿c labor costs. Using panel data, we show that exposure
1Theamountspentwasestimatedat$498billion.Seehttps://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsf22330.
1

to the 2008 crisis is not correlated with pre-existing trends in R&D investment, and that
￿rms exposed to the shock did not simply postpone their investment to the following
year. Indeed,￿rmsthatexperiencedmore￿nancialconstraintin2008exhibitedarelative
declineincitation-weightedcumulativepatentcountsoverthenextthreeto￿veyears.
After establishing that ￿rms cut research more than development in response to
￿nancialpressures,andthatthesecutsledtoreductionsininnovationoutput,weconsider
why development investments are “stickier.” The set of potential explanations includes
di￿erences in investment duration, risk, competitive pressure, and adjustment costs.
Although each of these mechanisms may play some role in explaining our ￿ndings,
technologicalcompetitionisespeciallyconsistentwiththefullsetofresults. Inparticular,
we show that whereas research investment is sensitive to a ￿rm’s own re￿nancing
needs, development investment declines when other technologically similar ￿rms are
exposed to an increase in the cost of re￿nancing. We interpret this ￿nding as evidence
that development investments are in￿uenced by strategic interactions (e.g., Benoit, 1984;
Bolton and Scharfstein, 1990; Fudenberg and Tirole, 1986), and speci￿cally a desire to
keepupwithrivals(HarrisandVickers,1987). Altogether,our￿ndingsshowthatperiods
of crisis can alter the innovation trajectory of an economy by reducing overall R&D
investment,andalsobychangingthetypesofprojectsthatget￿nanced.
Studying the relationship between ￿nancial constraints and R&D investments is
important for several reasons. First, R&D investments are a key input to the knowledge
production function. However, because research outputs are mostly intangible (Eisfeldt
and Papanikolaou 2014), this activity is generally harder to ￿nance externally, and there
is still much uncertainty about the overall elasticity of R&D to the costs of ￿nance (Hall
and Lerner, 2010; Kerr and Nanda, 2015).2 Second, previous studies have suggested
that the allocation of resources between research and development can impact a ￿rm’s
growth dynamics and shape the overall pattern of innovation (e.g. Akcigit et al. 2021;
Griliches 1988; Link et al. 1981; Mans￿eld 1980, 1981). There are very few other papers,
however, that examine how the composition of R&D investment responds to changing
market conditions. And third, despite the large array of studies on the impact of the
2008 ￿nancial crisis on the real economy (e.g. Campello et al., 2010; Cingano et al., 2016;
2Forinstance,afewstudiesexaminedtheimpactoftheGreatDepressiononinnovation(Babinaetal.,
2023;NandaandNicholas,2014),buttheycouldonlylookatpatentingoutcomes,giventhelackofdata.
2