NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE IMPACT OF CRIMINAL FINANCIAL SANCTIONS:
A MULTI-STATE ANALYSIS OF SURVEY AND ADMINISTRATIVE DATA
Keith Finlay
Matthew Gross
Carl Lieberman
Elizabeth Luh
Michael G. Mueller-Smith
Working Paper 31581
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31581
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2023
We are grateful to Amanda Agan, Charlie Brown, Jennifer Doleac, Katie Genadek, Tyler Giles,
Sara Heller, Brian Jacob, Mark Klee, Michael Makowsky, Carla Medalia, Steve Mello, Jordan
Papp, Paolo Pinotti, Benjamin Pyle, James Reeves, Kevin Schnepel, Megan Stevenson, Christian
Traxler, and Caroline Walker for their thoughtful and constructive comments as well as seminar
participants at the CLEAN seminar at Bocconi University, the Texas Economics of Crime
Workshop, University of Wisconsin IRP, WEA Annual Meeting, and APPAM Annual Meeting.
We thank Jay Choi, Brian Miller, Tyler Shea, Diana Sutton, and Konstantine Wade for their
excellent research assistance. This research would not be possible without the financial support
from the University of Michigan Poverty Solutions and the National Science Foundation. Any
opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not represent the views
of the U.S. Census Bureau. The Census Bureau has ensured appropriate access and use of
confidential data and has reviewed these results for disclosure protection (Project P-7512453:
CBDRB-FY22-ERD002-011, CBDRB-FY-ERD002-015, CBDRB-FY23-CES014-006, CBDRB-
FY23-0374). This manuscript fully subsumes two previously circulated working papers:
“Criminal court fees, earnings, and expenditures: A multi-state RD analysis of survey and
administrative data” (Lieberman, Luh, and Mueller-Smith) and “The Impact of Financial
Sanctions: Regression Discontinuity Evidence from Driver Responsibility Fee Programs in
Michigan and Texas” (Finlay, Gross, Luh, and Mueller-Smith). The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Keith Finlay, Matthew Gross, Carl Lieberman, Elizabeth Luh, and Michael G.
Mueller-Smith. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

The Impact of Criminal Financial Sanctions: A Multi-State Analysis of Survey and
Administrative Data
Keith Finlay, Matthew Gross, Carl Lieberman, Elizabeth Luh, and Michael G. Mueller-Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 31581
August 2023
JEL No. H72,J24,K42
ABSTRACT
We estimate the impact of financial sanctions in the U.S. criminal justice system using nine
distinct natural experiments across five states. These regression discontinuity designs capture a
range of enforcement levels ($17–$6,000) and institutional environments, providing robust
causal evidence and external validity. We leverage survey and administrative data to consider a
variety of short and long-term outcomes including employment, recidivism, household
expenditures, spousal spillovers, and other self-reported measures of well-being. We find
consistent, robust evidence of precise null effects on the population, including ruling out long-
run impacts larger than -$347–$168 in annual earnings and -0.002–0.01 in annual convictions.
Keith Finlay Elizabeth Luh
U.S. Census Bureau University of Michigan
4600 Silver Hill Road eluh@uh.edu
Washington, DC 20233
United States Michael G. Mueller-Smith
keith.ferguson.finlay@census.gov Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Matthew Gross 365C Lorch Hall
New York Mets 611 Tappan Ave.
mbgross@umich.edu Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
Carl Lieberman mgms@umich.edu
U.S. Census Bureau
nber@me.carl.ac

1 Introduction
Recentdecadeshaveseenasteadyexpansionintheuseandmagnitudeoflegalfinancialobligations
(LFO)owedbycriminaldefendantsintheUnitedStates(Bannon,Mitali,andDiller2010;Harris,
Pattillo,andSykes2022). Thesejustice-relatedfeesandfinancialsanctionsrangefromminortraf-
ficticketstomoresubstantialrestitutionandcorrectionalsupervisionfees. LFOsarecomprisedof
threemaincategories: (1)paymentsfromconvicteddefendantstovictimsintheformofrestitution,
(2)sanction-orientedfinestodiscouragefurthercriminalactivityandencouragecourtappearances
(Emanuel and Ho 2022), and (3) service-based fees to cover the cost of trials or punishment and
supervision. Many state and local governments have come to rely on the revenue generated from
thesefinesandfeestofundcourtsandothergovernmentservices(Makowsky2019;Maciag2020).
According to the Survey of Inmates in State and Federal Correctional Facilities, the share of in-
mates with LFOs increased from 25% in 1991 to 66% in 2007 (Harris, Evans, and Beckett 2010);
the Fines and Fees Justice Center estimates that recent national court debt exceeded $27 billion
(Hammons2021).
From 2003 to 2014, Florida, Michigan, North Carolina, Texas, and Wisconsin each passed laws
sharply increasing the financial obligations imposed upon conviction. We leverage these differ-
ent jurisdiction-specific policy changes (nine in total) in a regression discontinuity design (RDD)
frameworktomeasurethecausalimpactoftheincreasedmonetarysanctionsonindividualcriminal
andlabormarkettrajectoriesalongwithspilloversonthehousehold. Themarginalincreaseinlegal
financial obligations across our considered natural experiments range from $17 to $6,000, provid-
ing important exogenous variation across the distribution of potential LFO levels. This breadth of
settings also strengthens both the precision and external validity of our results; our final sample
draws from five states that together represent 24% of the U.S. population. Finally, the variation
in institutional rules and contexts across states allows for a rich exploration of important policy
mechanisms(e.g.,consequencesofnon-payment,considerationsforabilitytopay,etc.).1
In each of the natural experiments, fine increases were strictly applied based on whether the event
date, typically the case disposition, was after the policy implementation date. We utilize these
institutionalfeaturestopresentbothpolicy-specificandcombined-sampleregressiondiscontinuity
findingsthattogetherexplorethepossibilityfortreatmenteffectheterogeneityacrossjurisdictional
1Tothebestofourknowledge,eightoutoftheninenaturalexperimentsstudiedinthispaperhavenotbeenprevi-
ouslyexploredintheliterature. WeoverlapwithGiles(2021),whostudiestheimpactonrecidivismofWisconsin’s
universal $200 DNA fee introduced in 2015 for misdemeanor cases (see Section 3 for details). While we extend
the analysis of this natural experiment to non-recidivism outcomes and longer follow-up windows, we also come to
differentsubstantiveconclusionsregardingtheeffectoftheDNAfeesonrecidivismcomparedtoGiles(2021). Our
reasoningisdiscussedindetailinOnlineAppendixA.
1

boundaries and strengthen precision in pooled regressions. When pooling sub-experiments in re-
gression and graphical exercises, we apply a strategy to reweight observations to ensure that each
policyexperimentcontributesequallytothecombinedestimatestoavoidoveremphasizingnatural
experimentswithmoresampleobservations.
We find that criminal financial sanctions have no economically meaningful impact on short- or
long-term recidivism or labor market outcomes. Given the size of our research sample, these are
precise null effects. Specifically, we can rule out effects greater than -2.3 percent to 1.1 percent
with 95% confidence on total earnings reported on W-2 tax returns for the first 10 years after the
cutoff(-$347–$168peryear)andeffectslargerthan-0.9percentto4.8percentontotalrecidivism
(-.001–.01 number of convictions per year) 10 years after the focal event. A parallel analysis
arrives at the same conclusions regarding potential spillovers of fines and fees onto the romantic
partnersofourfocaldefendants.
Theimpactsoffinesandfees,however,mightmanifestinwaysmissedintraditionaladministrative
data sources (e.g., informal labor supply, consumption, stress, or expenditures). In addition, many
criminalfinesusethethreatofdriver’slicensesuspensiontoenforcepayment,whichcoulddisrupt
commutingpatternsevenifemploymentremainsunchanged. Toexaminetheseissues,weestimate
theimpactsoftheLFOsonself-reportedearnings,housingcosts,commutingpatterns,andmental
well-beingusingindividualresponsestotheAmericanCommunitySurvey(ACS).Consistentwith
our administrative data results, we do not find any changes in self-reported total income, which
rules out potential responses in either informal income or earnings from self-employment that
wouldbemissedinouradministrativedata. Wealsodonotfindanysignificantchangesinmonthly
housing costs, rent, or mortgages. Specifically, we can rule out effects larger than -3 to 2 percent
(-7 to 1 percent) with 95% confidence on monthly housing costs (self-reported monthly income).
Similarly, we find no significant impact on whether the respondent commutes to work by car or
theirself-reportedlikelihoodofdifficultyconcentratingorrememberingduetoamental,physical,
oremotionalcondition,indicatingnoperceptiblechangeindrivingbehaviororinmentalhealth.
Although the sub-experiments in our study represent diverse institutional and demographic con-
texts,ourlong-runresultsarelargelyconsistent. Thissuggestsournullfindingsarenotsimplythe
consequence of the LFOs being too high, too low, or relying on a specific punishment mechanism
thatmightnotgeneralizetoothercontexts.
Our findings contrast with descriptive research, which has largely found strong correlational evi-
dence linking fines and fees with financial instability, criminal recidivism, and poor labor market
2