NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE VALUE OF INTERMEDIARIES FOR GSE LOANS
Joshua Bosshardt
Ali Kakhbod
Amir Kermani
Working Paper 31575
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31575
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2023, Revised May 2024
We thank Darren Aiello, Bob Avery, Matteo Benetton, Greg Buchak, Justin Contat, Len Costa,
Will Doerner, Robert Dunsky, Mehran Ebrahimian, Ben Hébert, Erica Jiang, Dmitry Livdan,
Karen Pence, David Sraer, Constantine Yannelis, and numerous seminar and conference
participants for their helpful comments. The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Housing Finance Agency, the U.S. Government,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Any errors or omissions are the sole responsibility
of the authors.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Joshua Bosshardt, Ali Kakhbod, and Amir Kermani. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Value of Intermediaries for GSE Loans
Joshua Bosshardt, Ali Kakhbod, and Amir Kermani
NBER Working Paper No. 31575
August 2023, Revised May 2024
JEL No. G21,G23,G5
ABSTRACT
We analyze the costs and benefits of intermediaries for government-sponsored enterprise (GSE)
mortgages using regulatory data. We find evidence of lenders pricing for observable and
unobservable default risk independently from the GSEs. We then develop and estimate a model
of competitive lending in which lenders have skin-in-the-game. Lenders reduce costs by
acquiring information beyond the GSEs’ criteria but charge markups. On net, interest rates are
higher compared to a counterfactual in which the GSEs’ criteria are implemented passively. In an
extension, the observed differences between banks and nonbanks are more consistent with
differences in their skin-in-the-game rather than screening quality.
Joshua Bosshardt Amir Kermani
Federal Housing Finance Agency Haas School of Business
Constitution Center University of California, Berkeley
400 7th Street SW 545 Student Services Building #1900
Washington, DC 20219 Berkeley, CA 94720
joshua.bosshardt@fhfa.gov and NBER
kermani@berkeley.edu
Ali Kakhbod
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
2220 Piedmont Ave
Berkeley, CA 94720
akakhbod@berkeley.edu
A internet appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w31575

1 Introduction
Mortgage debt is by far the largest component of household debt in the U.S., accounting
for more than 70% of the $16.5 trillion in household liabilities (Federal Reserve Bank of
NewYork(2022)). Accesstomortgagecreditsignificantlydependsontheprevailingcredit
profiles in the mortgage market segment supported by the government-sponsored enter-
prises (GSEs) Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, which comprises the majority of originations
since the financial crisis.1 In this market segment, access to credit depends on two fac-
tors: the GSEs’ underwriting criteria as implemented through their respective automated
underwritingsystems(DesktopUnderwriterforFannieMaeandLoanProspectorforFred-
die Mac) and potential additional restrictions or “overlays” imposed by private mortgage
lenders, which serve as intermediaries by originating the loans that the GSEs eventually
securitize.2
Considering that the GSEs provide insurance against mortgage default risk and the
progress made on the automated underwriting systems, a critical question arises: What
extra value do intermediaries’ discretionary overlays and pricing of mortgages offer? We
specifically focus on a trade-off in which intermediaries can reduce the cost of lending by
screeningoutborrowerswhoaremorelikelytodefaultrelativetotheireasilyobservedrisk
characteristics (such as credit score, loan-to-value (LTV) ratio, and debt-to-income (DTI)
ratio), but they also charge markups. We study the welfare of different types of borrowers
under the current arrangement versus a counterfactual setting in which the discretionary
behaviorofintermediariesiseliminated.
We study the trade-off between better screening and lenders’ market power using
proprietary regulatory data on all loans acquired by the GSEs during 2016-2017, a period
duringwhichwecanpreciselyobservetheguaranteefees,org-fees,thattheGSEschargeto
1Inthispaper,“theGSEs”referstoFannieMaeandFreddieMacandnotanyothergovernment-sponsored
enterprises.
2Wefocusontheroleofintermediariesatloanoriginationandnotsubsequentservicingorotherinvestor
activity.
1

insurealoan. Wefirstprovidereduced-formevidencethatintermediariespriceobservable
and unobservable risk independently of the GSEs. These facts collectively suggest that
intermediaries have some skin-in-the-game and perform additional screening. However,
we also find evidence of significant markups charged by the lenders. We then develop a
modelofcompetitivelendingbyintermediariesinwhichlendersperformcostlyscreening
but also have market power. We estimate the parameters based on the moments from the
reduced form observations and use the model to study the interest rates and denial rates
thatdifferenttypeofhouseholdswouldfaceifwechangedthecurrentsystemtoanewone
inwhichGSEs’underwritingcriteriaareimplementedpassively.
We start our reduced form analysis by showing that interest rates increase with mea-
suresofex-anteobservabledefaultrisk. Wedefineobservableriskastheprobabilityofde-
fault predicted by a borrower’s credit score, LTV ratio, and DTI ratio. We rely on variation
of interest rates net of g-fees for loans offered by the same lender and within the same ZIP
code and show that a one percentage point increase in observable risk is associated with a
4.2 basis point increase in interest rates net of g-fees. This result is consistent with lenders
having skin-in-the-game, or a positive loss given default, due to the threat of repurchases
andexclusionfromtheGSEs.3 Wealsolookatthedistributionofinterestratesasafunction
ofobservableriskandfindthatthegapbetweentheaverageandthe10thpercentile(orbe-
tween the 90th percentile and the 10th percentile) of interest rates for the safest borrowers
is23(49)basispoints. ThisgapsuggeststhatGSEintermediariesexploitsignificantmarket
power. Moreover, we find that the 10th (90th) percentile increases by 1.4 (5.1) basis points
foreachonepercentagepointincreaseinobservablerisk. Thedifferencebetweentheslope
of the average versus the 10th percentile of interest rates as a function of observable risk
disciplines the parameters of the model to disentangle between lenders’ skin-in-the-game
3A “repurchase”, sometimes also referred to as a “put-back”, refers to when a GSE requires a lender to
repurchase a loan based on charges of violating representations and warranties, which can be interpreted
as errors in the underwriting process required for delivering a loan to the GSEs. The rate of repurchases
increasedduringthefinancialcrisisbuthassinceremainedlow. Nevertheless,Goodman(2017)presentsev-
idencethatlendershaveincreasedtheirinvestmentincarefulunderwritingandimposedoverlaystoprotect
themselvesagainstrepurchases.
2