FORWARD RETURN EXPECTATIONS
Mihir Gandhi
Niels Joachim Gormsen
Eben Lazarus
WORKING PAPER 31687

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FORWARD RETURN EXPECTATIONS
Mihir Gandhi
Niels Joachim Gormsen
Eben Lazarus
Working Paper 31687
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31687
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2023
We are grateful to the Fama-Miller Center, the Fama Faculty Fellowship, Asness Junior Faculty
Fellowship, and the Fischer Black Doctoral Fellowship at the University of Chicago for financial
support. We acknowledge use of the high-performance computing cluster at Chicago Booth. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Mihir Gandhi, Niels Joachim Gormsen, and Eben Lazarus. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Forward Return Expectations
Mihir Gandhi, Niels Joachim Gormsen, and Eben Lazarus
NBER Working Paper No. 31687
September 2023
JEL No. G0,G01,G1,G10,G11,G12,G13,G14,G17,G4
ABSTRACT
We measure investors’ short- and long-term stock-return expectations using both options and
survey data. These expectations at different horizons reveal what investors think their own short-
term expectations will be in the future, or forward return expectations. While contemporaneous
short-term expectations are not countercyclical across all data sources, we find that forward
expectations are consistently countercyclical, and excessively so: in bad times, forward
expectations are higher than justified by investors’ own subsequent short-term return
expectations. This excess volatility in forward expectations helps account for excess volatility
in prices, inelastic demand for equities, and stylized facts about the equity term structure.
Mihir Gandhi Eben Lazarus
Booth School of Business University of California, Berkeley
University of Chicago 545 Student Services Building #1900
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
Chicago, IL 60637 lazarus@berkeley.edu
mihir.a.gandhi@gmail.com
Niels Joachim Gormsen
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
niels.gormsen@chicagobooth.edu
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w31687

1 Introduction
One of the organizing facts in asset pricing is that expected returns on equities vary over
time. A key question is how investors perceive this variation ex ante. One aspect of this
question, which has been studied extensively, is how investors perceive the contemporaneous
level of the equity premium. Another aspect, which is the focus of this paper, is how investors
perceive the term structure dynamics of expected returns. In particular, what do investors, at
a given point in time, expect the equity premium to be in the future? Studying such forward
expectations of returns is important for understanding stock-price formation — prices depend
on expectations about all future equity premia — and it helps strengthen our understanding
of the dynamics of expectations.
We study forward return expectations using both option prices and survey data. First,
using a global sample of equity index options, we extract the equity premium at multiple
horizons as perceived by the “representative agent,” by which we mean any investor willing to
hold the market portfolio. Once we have long- and short-term expectations, we can construct
forward expectations of returns, as detailed below. We provide theoretical results showing
that we can identify time-series changes in these expectations, which is our main focus,
under much weaker assumptions than those usually used to estimate the level of expected
returns at any given time. The option prices thus provide a powerful lab for testing the
intertemporal consistency of return expectations in a rich data set covering 20 equity indices
over 30 years. We complement the options data with return expectations from surveys
of professional forecasters and CFOs. These surveys elicit return expectations at multiple
horizons, again allowing us to extract forward expectations, but in a more model-free setting.
Our main empirical finding is that forward expectations are excessively countercyclical:
in bad times, investors believe that expected returns will be highly elevated in the future,
but these forward expectations are too high relative to investors’ own subsequent beliefs
about short-term returns. (The reverse applies in good times.) During the 2008 financial
crisis and the 2020 Covid crisis, for instance, investors believed that equity premia would be
substantially elevated in the future; ex post, however, their realized short-term expectations
were only mildly elevated, and they reverted to their usual levels relatively quickly. This
pattern applies consistently over time, and across all the settings we study, in both options
and survey data. This consistency contrasts with results on contemporaneous short-run
return expectations; in some surveys, contemporaneous short-run return expectations are not
countercyclical, but we consistently find that forward expectations are not just countercyclical
but excessively so.
The excess cyclicality in forward expectations represents a new source of excess volatility
1