NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
VOTING CHOICE
Andrey Malenko
Nadya Malenko
Working Paper 31636
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31636
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2023
We have nothing to disclose. We are grateful to Tim Baldenius, Sugato Bhattacharyya, Erik
Gordon, Ali Lazrak, Uday Rajan, Tobias Tröger, Kostas Zachariadis, Jeff Zwiebel, Jonathon
Zytnick, participants of the Fourth BI Conference on Corporate Governance, UBC Summer
Finance Conference, NYU-LawFin/SAFE-ESCP BS Law & Banking/Finance Conference,
Research Symposium on Finance and Economics, Aarhus Workshop on Strategic Interaction in
Corporate Finance, Vienna Festival of Finance Theory, and seminar participants at the University
of Michigan for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Andrey Malenko and Nadya Malenko. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Voting Choice
Andrey Malenko and Nadya Malenko
NBER Working Paper No. 31636
August 2023
JEL No. D74,G34
ABSTRACT
Traditionally, fund managers cast votes on behalf of investors whose capital they manage.
Recently, this system has come under intense debate given the growing concentration of voting
power among a few asset managers and disagreements over environmental and social issues.
Major fund managers now offer their investors a choice: delegate their votes to the fund or cast
votes themselves ("voting choice"). This paper develops a theory of delegation of voting rights
and studies the implications of voting choice for investor welfare. If the reason for offering voting
choice is that investors have different preferences, then investors may retain their voting rights
excessively, inefficiently prioritizing their private preferences over information. As a result,
investors on aggregate are not always better off if voting choice is offered to them. In contrast, if
the reason for offering voting choice is that investors have information about the proposal that the
fund manager does not have, then voting choice is generally efficient, increasing investor welfare.
However, if information collection is costly, voting choice may lead to coordination failure,
resulting in less informed voting outcomes.
Andrey Malenko
140 Commonwealth Ave
Carroll School of Management,
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
malenkoa@bc.edu
Nadya Malenko
Boston College
124 Hartman Rd
Newton, MA 02459
and CEPR, and ECGI
and also NBER
malenko@bc.edu

1 Introduction
The tremendous growth of institutional investors, particularly large passive funds, has drawn
attention to their increasingly important role in corporate governance. Major investment ad-
visors such as BlackRock, Vanguard, and State Street have become among the largest share-
holders in many publicly traded …rms (Lewellen and Lewellen, 2022). In this role, they cast
votes on behalf of millions of investors and have substantial voting power, making them piv-
otal in important corporate votes (Bebchuk and Hirst, 2019; Brav et al., 2023). At the same
time, shareholder disagreements over voting issues are becoming increasingly prevalent given
the growth in environmental and social (E&S) issues that appear on companies’agendas.
Thesetrendshavegeneratedanintensedebateaboutwhetherassetmanagersareinthebest
position to vote their investors’shares.1 Do funds’votes represent their investors’preferences?
Are their votes su¢ ciently informed? This debate has become especially heated in the context
of E&S issues and has led to several important institutional and regulatory developments. In
October 2021, BlackRock announced the “Voting Choice”program, which gives its investors
the choice: delegate their votes to BlackRock, as had been the default before, or exercise their
voting rights themselves (so-called “pass-through voting”). As of September 2022, investors
representing 25% of BlackRock’s eligible assets had chosen to cast their own votes. Vanguard,
State Street, and other asset managers have followed suit.2 While BlackRock initially o¤ered
this choice only to institutional clients, in July 2023 it expanded the program to its retail
investors through iShares Core S&P 500 ETF (IVV), its largest ETF with $305 billion in
AUM. Regulators have been considering a more drastic change: The INvestor Democracy is
EXpected (INDEX) Act, introduced in the Senate in May 2022, aims to require passively
managed funds to collect voting instructions from all of their individual investors and vote
according to them.3
1See “BlackRock Walks a Political Tightrope on Climate Issues,”The Wall Street Journal, Oct. 9, 2022.
AccordingtoReuters (May22, 2023), largeassetmanagers’“in‡uentialvoteshavedrawnmuchcriticism,both
from activists urging them to push portfolio companies harder on issues such as climate change or workforce
diversity and, this year, from right-wing U.S. politicians who say the …rms focus too much on ESG matters.”
SeeLund(2018)andFischandSchwartz(2023)forthelegaldebateabouttheroleofassetmanagersinvoting.
2For BlackRock, see https://www.blackrock.com/corporate/about-us/investment-
stewardship/blackrock-voting-choice/proxy-voting-power-of-choice; for Vanguard, see
https://advisors.vanguard.com/insights/article/empoweringeverydayinvestorsthroughproxyvotingchoice;
and for State Street, see https://newsroom.statestreet.com/press-releases/press-release-details/2022/State-
Street-Global-Advisors-Extends-Proxy-Voting-Choice-to-More-Investors/default.aspx. In June 2023, the …rst
UK asset manager CIRCA5000 introduced voting choice for its clients.
3Speci…cally, the Act proposes that the fund “cannot vote without instructions from
fund investors, except for routine matters” if it holds more than 1% of a …rm’s shares
1

Motivated by this ongoing debate and important institutional changes, our paper develops
a theory of delegation of voting rights and explores the following questions. When is delegating
voting to the fund manager bene…cial for a fund’s investor, and when will the investor prefer to
cast his own vote? Do investors bene…t from having the choice between delegating and voting
themselves? Does such “voting choice”dominate the two other alternatives –the fund voting
all its investors’shares and all investors voting themselves?
In our model, the fund manager owns the …rm on behalf of the fund’s investors. There is a
proposal up for a vote, whose value depends on the unknown state. The fund manager gets a
signal about the state and casts the votes that are delegated to her. Under complete delegation
(which corresponds to the system that has been in place until recently), all investors delegate
their voting rights to the fund manager, so she votes all the shares and e¤ectively controls
the voting outcome. Under mandatory pass-through voting (which corresponds to the system
proposed by the INDEX Act), all investors cast their own votes. Finally, under voting choice,
all investors independently decide whether to delegate their votes to the fund manager or to
votethemselves.4 Investorsmayprefertoretaintheirvotesfortworeasons: tovoteaccordingto
their own preferences (rather than the preferences of the fund manager) or to use their private
information about the proposal (rather than to rely on the fund manager’s information).
Our analysis demonstrates that whether voting choice increases investor welfare crucially
depends on whether investors retain their votes because of their private preferences or their
private information. To show this, we consider two scenarios: in the …rst, fund investors have
heterogeneous preferences but no private information, whereas in the second, investors have
aligned preferences but receive conditionally independent private signals about the proposal.
In the setting with heterogeneous preferences, the value of the proposal to each investor
depends on an uncertain common value and on an investor-speci…c private value. The fund
manager gets a private signal about the common value and votes to maximize the expected
welfare of her investors, knowing that their private values are drawn from some distribution
centered around zero. Each fund investor faces the following trade-o¤when deciding whether
to delegate his vote to the fund manager. On the one hand, delegation is valuable because the
(https://www.sullivan.senate.gov/download/indexact_051722). An identical bill was introduced in the
House of Representatives in July 2022.
4Morespeci…cally,underthe“VotingChoice”program,thefund’sinvestorshaveachoicebetweendelegating
their vote to the fund manager, casting their own vote, and voting according to a custom policy o¤ered by
a proxy advisor that best aligns with their preferences. In our paper, for simplicity, we analyze the last two
options together and treat both of them as the investor casting his own vote (since for both options, the
investor’s vote closely represents the investor’s preferences).
2