NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
JUDGING BANKS’ RISK BY THE PROFITS THEY REPORT
Ben S. Meiselman
Stefan Nagel
Amiyatosh Purnanandam
Working Paper 31635
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31635
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2023
This research was conducted while Meiselman was an employee of the U.S. Department of the
Treasury. The findings, opinions, and conclusions expressed here are entirely those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views or the official positions of the U.S. Department of the
Treasury. We are grateful for comments from Viral Acharya, Matthew Baron, Murillo Campello,
John Cochrane, Ken French, Robin Greenwood, Randy Krozsner, Daniel Paravisini, Philip
Strahan, Raghuram Rajan, Uday Rajan, David Sraer, Jeremy Stein, Rene Stulz, Pietro Veronesi,
Vikrant Vig, Vijay Yerramilli, and seminar and conference participants at the AFA meetings,
Federal Reserve Bank, Imperial College, LBS Summer Finance Symposium, NBER Summer
Institute (Corporate Finance), Office of the Comptroller of Currency, Securities and Exchange
Commission, SITE Summer Workshop, SUNY Buffalo, University of California at San Diego,
University College London, University of Iowa, Vanderbilt, and Wharton Liquidity Conference.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w31635
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Ben S. Meiselman, Stefan Nagel, and Amiyatosh Purnanandam. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Judging Banks’ Risk by the Profits They Report
Ben S. Meiselman, Stefan Nagel, and Amiyatosh Purnanandam
NBER Working Paper No. 31635
August 2023
JEL No. G20,G30
ABSTRACT
In competitive capital markets, risky debt claims that offer high yields in good times have high
systematic risk exposure in bad times. We apply this idea to bank risk measurement. We find that
banks with high accounting return on equity (ROE) prior to a crisis have higher systematic tail
risk exposure during the crisis. Proximate causes of crises differ, but the predictive power of ROE
is pervasive, including during the financial crisis of 2007–2010 and the recent crisis triggered by
the collapse of Silicon Valley Bank. ROE predicts systematic tail risk much better than
conventional measures based on risk-weighted assets.
Ben S. Meiselman Amiyatosh Purnanandam
U.S. Department of the Treasury University of Michigan
1500 Pennsylvania Avenue NW Ross School of Business
Washington, DC 20220 R5453, 701 Tappan Street
benmeiselman@gmail.com Ann Arbor, MI 48109
amiyatos@umich.edu
Stefan Nagel
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
stefan.nagel@chicagobooth.edu

1 Introduction
Accurate and timely measurement of risk is a fundamental problem in bank regulation. Of
particular concern are tail risk and systemic risk exposures of financial institutions, which can
impose severe negative externalities on the rest of the economy. Equity capital requirements and
deposit insurance premiums depend crucially on the regulator’s assessment of the level of risk taken
by a regulated bank. The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and central banks around the
world have devoted considerable resources to improving risk measurement over the years.
While details may vary, there is considerable commonality in the broad philosophy behind risk
measurement across asset classes (such as trading book versus loan book) and across regulators
(such as Federal Reserve Banks and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation)—they all rely on
“models” of risk measurement. The process typically starts with a classification of di↵erent assets
and activities into various risk categories based on a model approved by the regulator, followed by
an aggregation exercise that again depends on a model. For example, a bank’s trading book risk is
measured with a Value-at-Risk model of di↵erent asset classes and the final aggregation allows for
some model-implied diversification benefits across asset classes. Similarly, for the lending portfolio,
risk-assessment is done based on external or internal credit rating models of loans and corporate
bonds. The aggregated risk measure, in turn, dictates the level of equity capital or liquid assets
a bank must keep in order to meet regulatory capital or liquidity requirements. We call such an
approach to risk assessment and regulation the “model-based” approach.
Unfortunately, model-based regulation su↵ers from at least two problems. First, models can only
capture risks that they are designed to capture. Models are necessarily imperfect and incomplete.
Built to capture risks that were relevant according to historical experience, they may not be able to
capture the risks relevant in future crises. Second, model-based regulation can be susceptible to
manipulation by the regulated entities. Since it is prohibitively expensive to devise models that
can capture all aspects of risk-taking behavior, model-based regulation ends up leaving substantial
discretion in modeling choices with the regulated entities themselves. As a consequence, regulated
entities have not only a private incentive, but also considerable ability to understate risk exposures.1
Understatement of systematic risk is particularly worrisome, as this type of risk is closely related
1Empirical evidence in Behn, Haselmann, and Vig (2014) and Begley, Purnanandam, and Zheng (2017) suggests
that banks make use of this ability to manipulate.
1

to systemic risk, which is of central relevance for optimal bank regulation (Acharya, 2009).2 We
therefore focus on the measurement of systematic rather than bank-specific risk in this paper.
We go back to first principles of risk and return analysis to propose an approach that is simpler,
less vulnerable to manipulation, and hence a potentially useful complement to the established model-
based approach. We start in the simplest possible setting in which banks operate in a competitive
frictionless environment. The asset risk and return of a bank resembles the risk and return of a
diversified portfolio of high-quality marketable risky debt such as, for example, investment-grade
corporate bonds: In most periods (“good times”), default rates are low, while default losses are
concentrated in occasional recessions and crises (“bad times”). The higher the portfolio’s expected
payo↵ in good times, the higher must be the portfolio’s systematic risk. A similar logic should
then apply to banks: High profits in good times should be indicative of a systematically risky asset
portfolio that is likely to su↵er in bad times.
To implement this idea, we would ideally like to measure the expected payo↵ of a bank’s assets
in good times. While this variable is not directly observable, accounting profits should be a useful
proxy. In good times, the expected payo↵ of a risky bond portfolio is the promised yield less a
small amount of expected default losses that are largely idiosyncratic. Similarly, the accounting
profit on a bank’s loan portfolio is roughly the promised yield on the loans less an adjustment for
expected loan losses. In contrast, realized rates of return on the bank’s stock at an annual or a
quarterly frequency would not be good proxies because they are influenced by unexpected shocks to
market values. For example, if the assets of a bank unexpectedly become less risky (e.g., because
borrowers’ collateral values improve), this generates a positive unexpected return, obscuring the
positive relationship between risk and return. In analogy, the yield of a corporate bond portfolio in
good times, possibly adjusted for the portfolio’s average rates of default losses, would be a better
indicator of its systematic risk than its realized return over a short time window.
A similar reasoning also applies to interest-rate risk. A bank that tilts towards long-duration
assets in times of low interest rates and an upward-sloping yield curve will earn high rates of
accounting profit as long as rates stay low, but with a risk of substantial losses in the event of
a sharp rise in interest rates. Higher accounting profits are indicative of higher interest-rate risk
2Many commonly used empirical proxies of systemic risk are actually measures of co-movement with risk factors
and hence measures of systematic risk rather than direct measures of systemic risk.
2