NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BIASED SURVEYS
Luca Gemmi
Rosen Valchev
Working Paper 31607
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31607
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2023
We thank Ryan Chahrour, Olivier Coibion, Andreas Fuster, Tarek Hassan, Julio Ortiz for
insightful and helpful comments. All remaining mistakes are ours. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Luca Gemmi and Rosen Valchev. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Biased Surveys
Luca Gemmi and Rosen Valchev
NBER Working Paper No. 31607
August 2023
JEL No. C53,D84,E31,E37,E70
ABSTRACT
We find evidence suggesting that surveys of professional forecasters are biased by strategic
incentives. First, we find that individual forecasts overreact to idiosyncratic information but
underreact to common information. Second, we show that this bias is not present in forecasts data
that is not subject to strategic incentives. We show that our evidence is consistent with a model of
strategic diversification incentives in forecast reporting. Our results caution against the use of
surveys of forecasts as a direct measure of expectations, as this would overestimate the likely
deviations from rational expectations, the information precision and the degree of disagreement.
Luca Gemmi
University of Lausanne - HEC Lausanne
luca.gemmi@unil.ch
Rosen Valchev
Department of Economics
Boston College
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
valchevr@gmail.com

1 Introduction
Expectations play a pivotal role in macroeconomic models, and as a result, the process
through which agents form their expectation has been a central, and often hotly debated,
topic. An important and influential recent advance in the literature is the use of data on
surveys of forecasts, which hold the promise of providing direct, micro-level measurement
of agent expectations. A key emerging finding of this growing body of work is a bevy of
apparent violations of the full information rational expectations (FIRE) paradigm, which
has otherwise been the bedrock of macroeconomic models for decades. On the one hand,
CoibionandGorodnichenko(2015)documentthataggregate(“consensus”)forecasts,typ-
icallydefinedasthemeanacrosssurveyparticipants,are“sticky”inawaythatimpliesthat
the forecasters are operating under imperfect and noisy information. On the other hand,
Bordalo et al. (2020) document that individual-level forecast “overreact” to new informa-
tion, indicating a violation of rational expectations.
This recent literature, however, often assumes that surveys of forecasts provide an un-
biased measure of the respondents true beliefs and expectations. This is at odds with an
older literature (e.g. Laster et al. (1999), Ottaviani and Sørensen (2006)) that posits the
possibility of survey participants, and specifically professional forecasters, to be influenced
by strategic considerations in their responses – for example a desire to “stand out” or al-
ternatively “herd” with the crowd, depending on the broader economic environment. The
macro literature’s argument against this possibility has mostly centered on indirect evi-
dence, primarilyconsideringthepossibilityofstrategiccoordinationacrossforecasters, but
notthealternativeofanenvironmentwhereagentsfacestrategicdiversificationincentives.
Inthispaper,wedeviseadirectempiricaltestofthestrategicconsiderationshypothesis
whichallowsforbothstrategiccoordinationanddiversificationincentives. Ourkeyinsight
is that if strategic considerations are empirically relevant, then forecast errors will react in
a systematically different way to the arrival of new “public” information that is commonly
observed by all survey participants, such as the latest GDP data release, as compared to
new forecaster-specific information, such as an update in the forecaster’s own model. We
formally show the intuitive result that if survey respondents have incentives to coordinate
with one another, and thus “herd”, then they would optimally overweight such common
signalsintheirreportedforecasts. Ontheotherhand,ifforecastersinsteadhaveastrategic
1

incentive to “stand out” from the crowd, then public information will be underweighted in
reported forecasts, as agents try to differentiate themselves.
Ourmainempiricalfindingisthatwhileindividualforecasterstendtooverreacttonew
information on average (inline with the previous findings of Bordalo et al. (2020)), the re-
ported forecasts actually underreact to newly released publicly available information. This
finding is broadly inconsistent with various models of behavioral overextrapolation that
are typically used to address the Bordalo et al. (2020) results, because in those frame-
works overreaction would be uniform across all types of new information. Instead, we
show that our results are consistent with a model of strategic diversification, where survey
respondents have a strategic incentive to stand out from the crowd.
We use data from the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF), the most commonly
used forecast survey dataset, in order to cleanly frame our new empirical results in the
context of the existing literature.1 As a first step in our analysis, we document that com-
mon noisy signals are indeed a quantitatively important feature of the information sets
underlying the SPF forecasts. We do so by exploiting the fact that the methodology in
Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015) displays an omitted variable bias which attenuates
the estimated coefficient in the presence of common noise terms (as also noted in their
Appendix).2 Correcting for this bias we find that it is quite significant, indicating that
forecasters indeed rely substantially on noisy signals that are common across agents.3
Next, we present a model of strategic interactions in reporting forecasts, which encom-
passes both strategic settings discussed by Ottaviani and Sørensen (2006) – both settings
of strategic substitutability where agents want to stand out (e.g. winner-take all games)
andsettingsofstrategiccoordination(e.g. reputationalgames). Withinourgeneralframe-
work, we prove analytically that for the model to be simultaneously consistent with both
seminalstylizedfactsofunderreactioninconsensusforecasts(CoibionandGorodnichenko
(2015)) and the overreaction in individual forecasts (Bordalo et al. (2020)), the model
must feature incentives for strategic diversification specifically. Intuitively, in that setting a
1TheSPFisanonymous,however,itsrespondentsalsoparticipateinmanyother,non-anonymoussurveys. As
we discuss in detail and also provide direct evidence to this effect, out of convenience the SPF respondents
providethesameforecasttotheSPFastheydototheother,non-anonymousoutletstheyparticipatein. Thus
anystrategicconsiderationsthattheyfaceintheirpublicinteractionsarealsopresentintheirSPFresponses.
2ThisbiasdoesnotimpactthekeyconclusionsofCoibionandGorodnichenko(2015),becausethebiasworks
againsttheirmainhypothesis. Hence,theirestimatesandconclusionsareconservative.
3Todoso,wefollowanempiricalmethodologyinspiredbyGoldstein(2023).
2