NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LONG-TERM CARE IN THE NETHERLANDS
Pieter Bakx
Eddy Van Doorslaer
Bram Wouterse
Working Paper 31823
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31823
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2023
Results based on calculations by Erasmus University using non-public microdata from Statistics
Netherlands. We thank the Community Health Services, Statistics Netherlands & National
Institute for Public Health and the Environment for access to survey data from the Public Health
Monitor (Gezondheidsmonitor). Furthermore, we thank SCP Netherlands Institute for Social
Research for access to the SCP informal care survey and Mirjam de Klerk for providing advice
on using these data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w31823
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Pieter Bakx, Eddy Van Doorslaer, and Bram Wouterse. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Long-term care in the Netherlands
Pieter Bakx, Eddy Van Doorslaer, and Bram Wouterse
NBER Working Paper No. 31823
November 2023
JEL No. I10,I13,I18
ABSTRACT
We describe the financing and use of long-term care in the Netherlands. Public long-term care
insurance is universal and comprehensive; user fees are low compared to other countries. We use
linked survey and administrative data to document the distribution of the need for long-term care
in the 65+ population, long-term care costs and how they are paid for. The findings reveal that no
other country spends more per capita on publicly financed formal care than The Netherlands. A
potential reason is that the threshold to receive formal care appears to be lower in the Netherlands
than in other countries. Still, a considerable share of the adult population provides informal care.
Caregiving is concentrated in specific demographic groups. The costs of informal care provision
are considerable, but as a share of total spending on long term care they are smaller than in most
developed countries. Adding the costs of informal care to formal care expenditures changes the
view on who bears the costs of long-term care.
Pieter Bakx Bram Wouterse
Erasmus University Rotterdam Erasmus University Rotterdam
The Netherlands The Netherlands
bakx@eshpm.eur.nl wouterse@eshpm.eur.nl
Eddy Van Doorslaer
Erasmus University Rotterdam
The Netherlands
vandoorslaer@ese.eur.nl

Long-term care in the Netherlands
Pieter Bakx (bakx@eshpm.eur.nl)
Eddy van Doorslaer (vandoorslaer@ese.eur.nl)
Bram Wouterse (wouterse@eshpm.eur.nl)
Erasmus University Rotterdam
Acknowledgement
Results based on calculations by Erasmus University using non-public microdata from Statistics
Netherlands. We thank the Community Health Services, Statistics Netherlands & National Institute for
Public Health and the Environment for access to survey data from the Public Health Monitor
(Gezondheidsmonitor). Furthermore, we thank SCP Netherlands Institute for Social Research for
access to the SCP informal care survey and Mirjam de Klerk for providing advice on using these data.
Introduction
The Dutch population is aging rapidly (Figure 1). The share of the population over age 65 has grown
from 12% in 1990 to 22% in 2020 and is expected to be around 25% by 2050. This trend is similar to
trends in other European countries, including Germany and Denmark, and to the trend in the United
States (Gruber and McGarry 2023; Geyer et al. 2023; Gørtz et al. 2023). The share of the oldest old
has increased from about 1.5% in 1990 to currently about 2.5% and is expected to rise to nearly 6%
by 2050, which is a fourfold increase in just 60 years. Consequently, among the over 65, the share of
over 85 is expected to rise from 9% in 1990 to around 22% in 2050 (Figure 2). The growing share of
the oldest part of the population is, together with other – related – trends, likely to generate a rapid
rise in the need for assistance and care (De Meijer et al. 2013).
Will the public programs be able to keep funding most of the care for those increased needs when the
share of the working population is declining at the same time? The current public long-term care
insurance system in The Netherlands is more generous than in most other countries. The Netherlands
provides universal public long-term care insurance to its population, which is more comprehensive
than in many other OECD countries. This means broad access to good-quality home care and nursing
home care (Tenand et al. 2020, 2020a), while out-of-pocket costs are relatively low (Bakx et al. 2015),
and relatives may be better shielded against the burden of informal caregiving than in other countries
(Rellstab et al. 2020). But it also comes at the cost of having the highest public expenditures on long-
term care of all countries when expressed as the share of the gross domestic product (OECD 2022).
In this paper, we provide an overview of the long-term care use in The Netherlands and highlight
differences and similarities with other countries. We go beyond the care provided by professionals
and consider informal care provided by relatives, friends and others. While long-term care in the
Netherlands is available for everyone with chronic health problems that require care or support, we
focus on the 65+ population, which is the largest group of care recipients.
The remainder of this chapter is structured as follows. Part 1 discusses the care needs, well-being, and
costs of care for the 65+ population. Part 2 discusses how long-term care is financed and organized in
The Netherlands. Furthermore, Part 3 discusses the total costs of long-term care for the 65+
population.
1
Classification: Internal

Figure 1: Share of population ages 65 or older
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050
Source: CBS 2020a, 2021
Figure 2: Share of 65+ population that is age 85 or older
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050
Source: CBS 2020a, 2021
Part I: Aging, Disability and Well-Being
Sample and definitions
For this chapter, we use two sets of data. First, we use aggregate-level statistics when these were
available. These aggregate-level statistics have been generated by the OECD and Statistics
Netherlands (CBS), among others, and these sources are cited in the respective footnotes to the tables
and figures in which they are used.
Second, we use linked administrative and survey data for the year 2016. We use administrative
registers for the full Dutch population. These administrative registers are linked at the individual level
and include demographic information, information on income and wealth, and long-term care
eligibility and use. Where needed, we link these administrative records to data from the Public Health
Monitor survey of the Community Health Services, Statistics Netherlands and the National Institute
for Public Health and the Environment (Dutch Health Monitor 2016). From these survey data, we use
information on informal care provision and use, functional limitations, and measures of well-being.
Nursing home residents are undersampled in the Public Health Monitor. To deal with this, we apply
probability weights by gender and 5-year age groups to the analyses in which these data are used.
Appendix A contains a full list of all datasets used.
Long-term care use is defined as follows. Informal care receipt is measured over the 12-month period
prior to the interview, while formal care use is measured during the calendar year that we study (i.e.
2
Classification: Internal