NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE DEPOSIT BUSINESS AT LARGE VS. SMALL BANKS
Adrien d'Avernas
Andrea L. Eisfeldt
Can Huang
Richard Stanton
Nancy Wallace
Working Paper 31865
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31865
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2023, revised January 2026
We are grateful for financial support from the Fisher Center for Real Estate and Urban Economics
at the Haas School of Business. This paper originally circulated as Chapter 3 of Huang’s
dissertation, entitled “Bank Size and Deposit Market Competition,” submitted in May 2023
(Huang, 2023). We thank our conference discussants and participants at the UCLA Anderson
Macro Finance lunch, Fall 2021; the Wabash Finance Conference, Summer 2023; the UCLA
Anderson Finance Lunch, Fall 2023; NBER Financial Market Frictions and Systemic Risks, March
2024; Rethinking Optimal Deposit Insurance Conference at Yale; the 2024 European Finance
Association meetings; the 2025 Jackson Hole Finance Group Conference; the 2024 Western
Finance Association meetings; the 2024 FDIC Bank Research Conference; the 2024 Northern
Finance Association meetings; the 2024 SITE workshop on Climate Finance and Banking; the
2025 Financial Intermediation Research Society Conference; the San Francisco Fed; the
Conference on Frontier Risks, Financial Innovation and Prudential Regulation of Banks; the
Stockholm School of Economics; the Sveriges Riksbank; HEC Paris Business School; UNC;
Harvard; MIT; the Bank of Italy; and Northwestern Kellogg, for helpful comments and
suggestions. Eisfeldt has consulted on matters involving banks.The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Adrien d'Avernas, Andrea L. Eisfeldt, Can Huang, Richard Stanton, and Nancy Wallace.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Deposit Business at Large vs. Small Banks
Adrien d'Avernas, Andrea L. Eisfeldt, Can Huang, Richard Stanton, and Nancy Wallace
NBER Working Paper No. 31865
November 2023, revised January 2026
JEL No. E0, E40, E44, G0, G2, G21, G28
ABSTRACT
The deposit business differs at large versus small banks. We provide a parsimonious model and
extensive empirical evidence supporting the idea that much of the variation in deposit-pricing
behavior between large and small banks reflects differences in preferences and technologies. Large
banks offer superior liquidity services but lower deposit rates, and locate where customers value
their services. In addition to receiving a lower level of deposit rates on average, customers of large
banks also exhibit lower rate elasticities. As a result, despite the fact that the locations of large-bank
branches have demographics typically associated with greater financial sophistication, large-bank
customers earn lower average deposit rates. Our explanation for deposit pricing behavior
challenges the idea that deposit pricing is mainly driven by pricing power derived from the large
observed degree of concentration in the banking industry.
Adrien d'Avernas Richard Stanton
Stockholm School of Economics University of California, Berkeley
adrien.davernas@gmail.com Haas School of Business
stanton@haas.berkeley.edu
Andrea L. Eisfeldt
University of California, Los Angeles Nancy Wallace
Anderson School of Management University of California, Berkeley
and NBER Haas School of Business
andrea.eisfeldt@anderson.ucla.edu newallace@berkeley.edu
Can Huang
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
canhuang@illinois.edu

1 Introduction
The business of creating and maintaining a deposit franchise is different for large vs. small
banks. We document contrasting location, technology, and pricing decisions for large vs.
small banks, and show how banks’ different deposit-business models arise naturally from
variation in the preferences of depositors across deposit markets. Our study builds on the
classic idea in industrial organization that product-market competition is heavily influenced
by product differentiation and customer preferences. For deposits, we find that such differ-
entiation depends largely on bank size.
Compared with small banks, large banks offer lower, and uniform, deposit rates across
their branches. They cover different geographies, locating their branches in areas with high
population density, high incomes, high house prices, and younger populations: all attributes
of customers with higher financial sophistication (e.g., Campbell, 2006). In addition, small
banks that operate in markets with a higher market share of large-bank deposits offer lower
rates than other small banks, suggesting that local consumer preferences play a pivotal role
in shaping deposit-market competition.
We present a simple model of the deposit business at large and small banks.1 Consistent
withourownempiricalfindingsandtheliteratureonuniformdepositratesinbanking, weas-
sume that large banks set uniform rates.2 Banks decide whether to provide superior liquidity
services at a fixed cost, while strategically deciding which markets to enter.3 The scalabil-
ity of this technology makes operating across multiple markets profitable but introduces a
trade-off: because banks are required to set uniform rates across all markets, they cannot
tailor interest rates to maximize profits locally in each market. The free-entry conditions
establish the type and quantity of banks entering each market. In equilibrium, two bank
types emerge: large banks, which enter multiple markets, pay the required fixed cost, and
provide superior liquidity services; and small banks, which do not pay the required fixed cost
and enter only a single market.4 Because of uniform pricing, large banks maximize profits
by locating in areas with customers who display similar demand curves and neglecting areas
1Forquantitativeindustryequilibriummodelsofbanking, seetheimportantcontributionsofCorbaeand
D’Erasmo (2021, 2025); Wang, Whited, Wu, and Xiao (2022); Bianchi and Bigio (2022).
2See, for example, Calem and Nakamura (1998); Radecki (1998, 2000); Biehl (2002); Heitfield (1999);
Heitfield and Prager (2004); Park (2009); Park and Pennacchi (2009); Begenau and Stafford (2025); Yankov
(2024); Granja and Paix˜ao (2024).
3TheseliquidityservicesincludelargerbranchandATMnetworks,customizedonlinebanking,orabroad
array of financial services.
4Liquidity services include the number of branches as well as the quality of ATM, web, and mobile
applications. Haendler(2023)examinestheimplicationsofsmallbanks’sluggishadoptionofmobile-banking
services and Koont (2023) and Sarkisyan (2025) document the recency of improvements in liquidity services
by small banks and the resulting balance sheet growth.
1

with extreme preferences, while small banks enter in all areas.
The fundamental difference in preferences across geographies and demographies served
by large vs. small bank depositors is a central contribution of our study. We extend the
methodology of Egan, Horta¸csu, and Matvos (2017); Xiao (2020); and Wang et al. (2022)
to structurally estimate banks and market-level rate elasticities, focusing on bank size and
heterogeneity in depositors’ price sensitivities and willingness to pay for superior liquidity
services. Banks choose deposit spreads based on their customers’ preferences, and we allow
depositors’ value of liquidity services to depend on income. Assuming households choose
from available local-market banks, we estimate the deposit-demand system at the bank-
market level. After estimating the model’s demand parameters, we calculate each bank’s
rate elasticity in each local market. We find that large banks are more likely to be located in
markets with less-elastic customers and that depositors’ rate-elasticities decline with income.
This supports the results in Egan et al. (2017), who focus specifically on large banks and
report low average deposit-rate elasticities.
Large-bank customers have higher incomes and are likely to be more financially sophis-
ticated, but they both receive lower rates on average and are less rate-sensitive. Our finding
that more financially sophisticated depositors receive lower rates and execute their deposit-
withdrawal option “less optimally” is consistent with such depositors having a higher will-
ingness to pay for superior liquidity services. Large-bank depositors can garner superior
liquidity services by keeping a small fraction of wealth in large-bank deposits, while also par-
ticipating in higher-yield assets with their remaining wealth (see Vissing-Jørgensen, 2002;
Smith, Zidar, and Zwick, 2023). Rural, lower-income, lower house-price, and older customers
value the yield generation of small-bank deposits, while their large-bank counterparts place
a higher value on deposits’ payments and liquidity attributes.
The model offers key insights into the deposit-rate strategies of large and small banks,
with a particularly robust prediction: large banks consistently pay lower rates than small
banks, because large banks cater to markets with lower rate elasticities and higher prefer-
enceforliquidityservices. Ourempiricalanalysisrevealsthatthepredominantrateelasticity
among U.S. depositors is relatively low, with a fat right tail representing more price-sensitive
individuals. Because of uniform rates, large banks locate in markets with similar rate elas-
ticities, which are predominantly low in the U.S., and therefore set low rates. In contrast,
small banks operate in all markets, which includes the more dispersed higher end of the
price-sensitivity distribution. Consequently, across markets, large banks offer lower rates
because of the more common, lower average elasticity of the depositors in the markets they
serve. Within markets with both large and small banks, small banks pay higher rates than
large banks in order to attract depositors without offering superior liquidity services.
2