NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DAILY MOMENTUM AND NEW INVESTORS IN AN EMERGING STOCK MARKET
Zhenyu Gao
Wenxi Jiang
Wei A. Xiong
Wei Xiong
Working Paper 31839
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31839
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2023
We thank seminar participants at CUHK, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Baptist
University, University of Notre Dame, CKGSB, CICF, CFRC, and Miami Behavioral Finance
Conference for helpful comments. We also thank Kun Yang from the Shenzhen Stock Exchange
for excellent assistance. Jiang acknowledges financial support from General Research Fund of the
Research Grants Council of Hong Kong (Project Number 14506218). Wei A. Xiong
acknowledges financial support from the NSFC, China (Project Number 72273092). This paper
represents the views of the authors, which are not necessarily the views of the Shenzhen Stock
Exchange. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Zhenyu Gao, Wenxi Jiang, Wei A. Xiong, and Wei Xiong. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Daily Momentum and New Investors in an Emerging Stock Market
Zhenyu Gao, Wenxi Jiang, Wei A. Xiong, and Wei Xiong
NBER Working Paper No. 31839
November 2023
JEL No. G02,G4,G40
ABSTRACT
Despite the dominance of retail investors in the Chinese stock market, there’s a conspicuous
absence of price momentum in weekly and monthly returns. This study uncovers the presence of
price momentum in daily returns and, through a systematic analysis of trading heterogeneity
among investors, links daily momentum to the attention and trading activities of new investors—
a phenomenon particularly significant in emerging stock markets. Furthermore, our findings
indicate the existence of daily price momentum in various other emerging markets, contrasting
with its relative scarcity in developed ones.
Zhenyu Gao Wei A. Xiong
Chinese University of Hong Kong Shenzhen Stock Exchange
Hong Kong 2012 Shennan Blvd.
gaozhenyu@baf.cuhk.edu.hk Shenzhen
China
Wenxi Jiang wxiong@szse.cn
Chinese University of Hong Kong
Room 1250, 12/F. Wei Xiong
Cheng Yu Tung Building Princeton University
12 Chak Cheung Street Department of Economics
Shatin, N.T. Bendheim Center for Finance
Hong Kong Princeton, NJ 08450
jiangwenxi@gmail.com and NBER
wxiong@princeton.edu

The joint presence of medium-term price momentum at the horizons of 1-12 months
(e.g., Jegadeesh and Titman (1993)) and long-term price reversals at the horizons of 2-5
years (e.g., De Bondt and Thaler (1985)) in the U.S. stock market had precipitated the
development of a series of behavioral finance theories, e.g., Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny
(1998), Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam (1998), and Hong and Stein (1999). These
theories highlight various cognitive biases that may influence retail investors and lead to the
occurrenceofmedium-termpricemomentumandlong-termpricereversals. Thesebehavioral
finance theories are, however, challenged by the lack of medium-term price momentum in the
Chinese stock market. As recently reviewed by Song and Xiong (2018), Hu, Pan, and Wang
(2021), and Allen, Qian, Shan, and Zhu (2020), the Chinese stock market, despite being the
second-largest stock market in the world and listing over 4,700 stocks, is dominated by retail
investors and thus most relevant for behavioral finance theories. However, as documented
by Chui, Titman, and Wei (2010) and Du, Huang, Liu, Shi, Subrahmanyam, and Zhang
(2022), medium-term price momentum does not exist in China and, instead, the past six-
and twelve-month returns are negatively correlated with future returns. More generally,
Liu, Stambaugh, and Yuan (2019) show that the Chinese stock market features a powerful
reversal effect that is robust at the horizons ranging from one, three, six, twelve months to
five years.
The noted absence of medium-term price momentum prompts us to examine price dy-
namics at differing intervals in the Chinese stock market. Our examination reveals reversal
patterns in both weekly and monthly returns, reinforcing the nonexistence of medium-term
momentum. Contrastingly, we discern a pronounced phenomenon of significant daily price
momentum—stocks exhibiting strong performance today are likely to maintain this outper-
formancetomorrow. Thismomentumpersistsforonetotwodaysbeforeexhibitingareversal
within a week and is resilient to both equal/value weighting and the exclusion of stocks en-
countering daily price limits. Notably, this effect displays asymmetry under varying market
conditions, intensifying during bullish markets and diminishing in bearish ones.
1

Why does price momentum exist in daily, but not weekly/monthly, returns in the Chi-
nese stock market? We address this question by analyzing the reactions of various investor
groups to past stock returns and understanding how their trading activities contribute to
the observed daily price momentum. By leveraging granular account-level transaction data
from the Shenzhen Stock Exchange (SZSE) from 2005 to 2019, we are able to dissect trad-
ing activities across all SZSE-listed stocks according to different investor categories. Unlike
many stock exchanges around the world, Chinese stock exchanges have a distinct feature:
they can track all trading activities of an individual—across various brokerage firms—using
the individual’s unique national ID.
A key group of interest in our study is the “new investors.” Having been established in
theearly1990s,theChinesestockmarkethaswitnessedregularinfluxesofnew,inexperienced
investors. Such investors, due to their inexperience and potential cognitive biases, are often
more reactive to daily market gyrations. This particular trait is not unique to China; it is a
phenomenon common across emerging markets, underscoring the importance of investigating
the trading behaviors of new investors. For the purpose of this study, we define new investors
as those who initiated their accounts within the last three months and executed at least one
stock trade during the period.
Beyond new investors, our study also categorizesretail investors into two additional
groups based on their account balances: “experienced retail investors” with balances under
three million RMB and “large retail investors” with balances exceeding three million RMB.
On the institutional side, we delineate between mutual funds and other institutions. To
obtain a holistic view, we track the net buying of these five distinct groups for every SZSE-
listed stock, every trading day.
Bothnewinvestorsandexperiencedretailinvestorsstandoutwithstrikingdailyturnover
rates of 18.12% and 8.03%, respectively. Furthermore, their monthly net buying of a stock
tends to negatively predict stock returns in subsequent months. This combination of high
tradingintensityandpoorstockselectionmakesthesetwogroupsnoisetradersintheChinese
2