NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TRADE UNCERTAINTY AND U.S. BANK LENDING
Ricardo Correa
Julian di Giovanni
Linda S. Goldberg
Camelia Minoiu
Working Paper 31860
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31860
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2023, Revised May 2024
We are grateful to Michelle Alexopoulos, Chris Boehm, Nick Bloom, Valentina Bruno, Steven
Davis, Lorenzo Garlappi, Kristine Hankins, Tarek Hassan, Dalida Kadyrzhanova, Peter Karadi,
Matteo Iacovellio, Abel Iglesias, Seung Lee, Ralf Meisenzahl (discussant), Lubos Pastor, Diane
Pierret (discussant), Andrea Polo (discussant), Andrea Presbitero, Veronica Rappoport
(discussant), Brad Setser (discussant), Bo Sun, Eugene Tan, Lena Tonzer (discussant), Liliana
Varela (discussant), Frank Warnock, and participants at IBRN workshops and meetings, the
Global Risk, Uncertainty, and Volatility (GRUV) workshop at the Federal Reserve Board, 29th
CEPR European Summer Symposium in International Macroeconomics (ESSIM), IFABS annual
conference, European Finance Association (EFA) Annual Meeting, FRB Dallas Conference on
Supply Chains in a Changing Global Landscape, FRB New York Global Research Forum on
International Macroeconomics and Finance, 5th EBRD-CEPR Research Symposium, IMF
Conference on Geoeconomic Fragmentation, Spring 2023 NBER Conference on “International
Fragmentation, Supply Chains, and Financial Frictions,” Swedish House of Finance Conference
on “The Effects of New Geopolitical Risks on Financial Markets and Firms,” 2023 European
Economic Association Annual Meeting, Stanford University 2023 SITE Conference “The
Macroeconomics of Uncertainty and Volatility,” and seminars at the Norges Bank, Bank of
Canada, Bank of England, and Bank of Italy for useful suggestions. We thank Stephanie Sezen,
Diego Silva, and Kelsey Shipman for research assistance. The views expressed in this paper are
those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, the
Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Ricardo Correa, Julian di Giovanni, Linda S. Goldberg, and Camelia Minoiu. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Trade Uncertainty and U.S. Bank Lending
Ricardo Correa, Julian di Giovanni, Linda S. Goldberg, and Camelia Minoiu
NBER Working Paper No. 31860
November 2023
JEL No. F34,F42,G21
ABSTRACT
This paper uses U.S. credit register data and the 2018–2019 Trade War to study the effects of
uncertainty on domestic credit supply. Exploiting differences in banks’ ex-ante exposure to trade
uncertainty, we find that increased uncertainty is associated with a broad lending contraction
across their customer firms. This result is consistent with banks responding to uncertainty with
wait-and-see behaviors, where more exposed banks curtail risky exposures, reduce loan
maturities, and adjust loan supply along both intensive and extensive margins. The lending
contraction is larger for more capital-constrained banks and has significant real effects, especially
for bank-dependent firms.
Ricardo Correa Linda S. Goldberg
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Bank-New York
Federal Reserve System 33 Liberty Street
Division of International Finance New York, NY 10045
Washington DC 20551 and NBER
ricardo.correa@frb.gov linda.goldberg@ny.frb.org
Julian di Giovanni Camelia Minoiu
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
Research and Statistics Group Research Department
33 Liberty Street 1000 Peachtree St NE
New York, NY 10045 Atlanta, GA 30309
and CEPR United States
juliandigiovanni@gmail.com minoiu.camelia@gmail.com
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w31860

1 Introduction
Concerns about trade uncertainty have been on the rise given events such as Brexit, the Covid-19
pandemic, and recent trade tensions. Whereas it is well understood that a rise in uncertainty
increases the spread of project returns faced by firms, which in turn affects their investment be-
havior,1 the effects of uncertainty, and trade uncertainty specifically, on financial intermediaries is
less clear. In particular, the channels through which uncertainty shocks affect bank lending may
differ from how first-moment shocks to borrowers or bank balance sheets operate, on which the
literature traditionally focuses.2 Against this backdrop, we ask if and how international trade un-
certainty is propagated by banks to the domestic economy. Additionally, we seek to understand
the mechanisms through which uncertainty more broadly affects credit supply.
We assess the effects of uncertainty on U.S. banks’ credit supply by exploiting the sharp rise in
trade uncertainty that occurred during the 2018–2019 escalation of trade tensions between the U.S.
and some of its trading partners, which has been referred to as a “Trade War.” Unlike a negative
sectoral shock that could lead banks to shift credit away from that sector,3 an uncertainty shock
widens the distribution of loan returns within and across sectors and may lead banks to curtail
lending more broadly. We investigate this possibility utilizing a measure of bank-specific exposure
touncertaintythatcombinesfirm-levelinformationontradeuncertaintywithdetaileddataonU.S.
banks’ loan exposures to domestic borrowers. We exploit the cross-sectional bank heterogeneity in
this exposure to test for the credit supply effect of an increase in uncertainty and hypothesize that
banks’ lending decisions might be driven by a “wait-and-see” strategy, whereby the exposed banks
are more prone to pull back from risk-taking. The size of this response might also be driven by a
financial frictions channel by which banks’ credit supply depends on their capital levels. Finally,
we ask whether the estimated changes in credit supply have real effects on firms.
Our first novel finding is that an increase in uncertainty is associated with a larger credit
contraction at the bank-firm level for more exposed banks, that is, those banks with a larger ex-
1For example, see a textbook treatment by Dixit and Pindyck (1994).
2See,forexample,PeekandRosengren(2000);KhwajaandMian(2008);IvashinaandScharfstein(2010);Cornett
et al. (2011); Puri et al. (2011); Giannetti and Laeven (2012); De Haas and Van Horen (2013); Chodorow-Reich
(2014);Iyeretal.(2014);PopovandVanHoren(2015);Giljeetal.(2016);AmitiandWeinstein(2018a);Ongenaet
al. (2018); Galaasen et al. (2021); Bidder et al. (2021); Mayordomo and Rachedi (2022); Federico et al. (2023a,b).
3This reallocation would depend, among others, on bank capital constraints and cross-correlations of sectoral
returns (Holmstrom and Tirole, 1997; Froot and Stein, 1998; DeYoung et al., 2015).
1

ante share of loans to firms in sectors facing a greater increase in trade uncertainty. This result
holdsevenwhenwerestrictthesampletoborrowersthatarerelativelylessexposedtoanincreasein
trade uncertainty. Second, the contraction in credit supply is not driven by realized losses in banks’
portfolios,butratherbydifficultiespredictingfutureloanreturnsduetotheriseinuncertainty,and
is stronger for banks with lower capital buffers. The findings are consistent with banks responding
to uncertainty with wait-and-see behaviors, where more exposed banks curtail risky exposures,
charge higher spreads, and reduce loan maturities. Third, the real outcomes for firms are worse
when they borrow from the more exposed banks and when they are more reliant on bank credit.
Our analysis uses a comprehensive loan-level data set collected through the Federal Reserve
(FR) Y-14Q form (known as the “U.S. credit register”). The data comprise of quarterly bank-firm
loan commitments to domestic (public and private) firms by large U.S. banks. We use this data set
to examine a wide range of lending outcomes and to construct our key measure of bank exposure
to trade uncertainty, which combines loan exposures with firm-level measures of trade uncertainty.
Firm-leveltradeuncertaintymeasuresaresourcedfromHassanetal.(2019,2020a,b)andarebased
on textual analysis of the transcripts of listed firms’ quarterly earnings calls. Given that the firms
in the credit register and those spanned by the transcript data do not overlap perfectly, we take a
three-step approach in constructing our measure of bank exposure to trade uncertainty. First, we
aggregatethefirm-leveluncertaintymeasurestothe3-digitNAICSsector-level.4 Second, weassign
these sector-level uncertainty measures to borrowers in the credit register based on their sectoral
classification. Finally, we aggregate this information at the bank level by taking the average change
in uncertainty between 2016–2017 and 2018–2019 across sectors, weighted by initial loan shares in
a given sector. The loan shares are taken to be averages over 2014–2015 so they are lagged relative
to the start of the sample and hence unlikely affected by the 2018–2019 Trade War. This approach
makes the bank exposure measure more likely predetermined with respect to economic conditions
during the sample period.
Weuseadifference-in-differencesestimationframework. Ourbaselinespecificationregressesthe
growth rate in outstanding loans at the bank-firm loan level on the measure of bank exposure to
4We do this to maximize coverage of firms within the Y-14Q data as the firm-level uncertainty measures are
constructed from a more limited set of publicly listed firms. We check whether our baseline results are robust in
a weighted-least square regression that controls for the underlying size of the firm sample used in constructing the
sector-level measure.
2