NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CONTINGENT CREDIT UNDER STRESS
Viral V. Acharya
Maximilian Jager
Sascha Steffen
Working Paper 31909
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31909
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2023
We are grateful to Sophie Rotermund and Felix Martini for research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Viral V. Acharya, Maximilian Jager, and Sascha Steffen. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Contingent Credit Under Stress
Viral V. Acharya, Maximilian Jager, and Sascha Steffen
NBER Working Paper No. 31909
November 2023
JEL No. G01,G21,G23,G32
ABSTRACT
Over the past two decades, banks have increasingly focused on offering contingent credit in the
form of credit lines as a primary means of corporate borrowing. We review the existing body of
research regarding the rationales for banks’ provision of liquidity insurance in the form of credit
lines, their significance in managing corporate liquidity, and the reasons and circumstances under
which firms opt to utilize them. We emphasize that the options for firms to both draw down and
repay credit lines are put options issued by banks, which are exercised by firms in a correlated
manner during periods of widespread stress, with adverse affects on bank intermediation
thereafter. We discuss the bank capital and the bank funding channels that can drive these effects,
contrasting their roles during the Global Financial Crisis and the Covid-19 outbreak. We
conclude by discussing the increasing extension of bank credit lines to non-bank financial
intermediaries, as well as the role of stress tests and monetary policy in managing the risks of
contingent credit under stress.
Viral V. Acharya Sascha Steffen
Stern School of Business Frankfurt School of Finance & Management
New York University Adickesallee 32-34
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-65 60322 Frankfurt
New York, NY 10012 Germany
and CEPR s.steffen@fs.de
and also NBER
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu
Maximilian Jager
Frankfurt School of Finance & Management
Adickesallee 32-34
60322 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
m.jager@fs.de

1 Introduction
In the last two decades, there has been a significant transformation in corporate bor-
rowing, along with notable shifts in the behaviors and interactions of firms, banks,
and capital markets. Figure 1 shows the time-series development of the debt structure
of publicly listed firms in the U.S. Several discernible trends emerge. Credit lines and
bonds (both as % of GDP) have increased significantly after the Global Financial Crisis
(GFC), while bank term-lending has somewhat declined. A substantial part of term
loans is now provided by institutional investors (such as Collateralized Loan Obliga-
tions (CLOs) or mutual funds) and not banks (Berg, Saunders, and Steffen, 2021). In
essence, the primary function of banks in corporate borrowing has significantly transi-
tioned towards offering credit lines.
Credit lines, however, are a form of contingent credit in that they represent put
options issued by banks, granting firms the flexibility to draw down and repay funds
at their discretion, viz., the GFC and the Covid-19 outbreak. In recent years, amidst
two profound economic crises, credit lines have been heavily drawn down by firms
under stress and yet have gained increasing prominence. This trend prompts a crucial
question: how does the exposure of banks to credit lines influence their role as financial
intermediaries during times of widespread economic stress? This is a key question that
we try to address in this paper. To answer this, we conduct a thorough review of the
existing body of research regarding the rationales for banks’ provision of credit lines,
their significance in managing corporate liquidity, and the reasons and circumstances
under which firms opt to utilize them. We gather new data, and perform additional
analyses.
In Section 2, we first describe important institutional details associated with credit
lines. Inparticular,weshowhowtheyaffectbankandfirmbalance-sheetsatorigination
and in contingencies when they are drawn. We then discuss the motives why banks
issue credit lines and rationalize banks – as they simultaneously issue credit lines as
well as demand deposits – as being special in their role of liquidity insurance provision
in this market. We summarize the literature that discusses how the exercise of draw-
down options by firms affects the pricing structure of credit lines (vis-a-vis regular term
1

loans) and provide some more recent data to support earlier results.
Figure 1: Overview of the corporate debt structure in the US
This figure shows the debt structure of public non-financial US corporations over the period 2002-2022. Loans and
bonds (as a percentage of GDP) (grey bars, left) and the loan:bond ratio (red line, right) are shown. The sample is
based on the intersection of data from Capital IQ and Compustat. All variables refer to outstanding amounts at the
end of the fiscal year and are collected from Capital IQ. All ratios are defined as the sum of the numerator variable
divided by the sum of the denominator variable (instead of an average of the firm-level ratios), thus effectively giving
largerfirmsgreaterweight. ThisfigureistheupdatedFigure1inBergetal.(2021)
PDG
fo
noitcarF
52.
2.
51.
1.
50.
0
2002 3002 4002 5002 6002 7002 8002 9002 0102 1102 2102 3102 4102 5102 6102 7102 8102 9102 0202 1202 2202
54.
4.
53.
3.
52.
2.
51.
1.
50.
0
oitar-dnoB/naoL
Year
Loans (term loans + drawn credit lines)
Loans (undrawn credit lines)
Bonds
Loan/Bond-ratio (loans include undrawn credit lines)
In Section 3, we explore the reasons firms use credit lines instead of other instru-
ments such as cash, commercial paper or term loans. Firms mainly use credit lines as
insurance against either cash-flow shocks or in order to invest in (short-lived) profitable
business opportunities. The literature highlights that credit lines and cash are more
often complements than substitutes, fulfilling distinct purposes in corporate liquidity
management. We further describe the empirical literature that highlights credit line
drawdowns as a response to idiosyncratic shocks, but use recent data to show the in-
creasing use of credit lines under stress including the most recent crisis periods, viz.,
the global financial crisis of 2007-2008 (GFC) and the COVID-19 pandemic. Our data
suggest that junk-rated (or speculative-grade) firms draw down, on average, twice as
much in percentage of outstanding credit lines compared to investment-grade rated
firms. Both types of firms, however, substantially increase credit line usage during pe-
2