NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
AMERICAN DISCLOSURE OPTIONS
Kerry Back
Bruce I. Carlin
Seyed Mohammad Kazempour
Chloe L. Xie
Working Paper 31935
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31935
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2023
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Kerry Back, Bruce I. Carlin, Seyed Mohammad Kazempour, and Chloe L. Xie. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

American Disclosure Options
Kerry Back, Bruce I. Carlin, Seyed Mohammad Kazempour, and Chloe L. Xie
NBER Working Paper No. 31935
December 2023
JEL No. D83,G12,G14
ABSTRACT
We study strategic disclosure timing by correlated firms in the presence of risk-averse investors.
Firms delay disclosures in the hope that positively correlated firms will announce especially good
news and lift their own price. Risk premia rise before disclosures, drop when disclosures occur,
and then rise again. Conditional risk premia can be much larger than unconditional risk premia.
Disclosures are always good news, but disclosures that are only moderately good news induce
clustering of disclosures by other positively correlated firms. We present evidence of strategic
behavior in earnings announcement timing as predicted by the model.
Kerry Back Seyed Mohammad Kazempour
Jones Graduate School of Business E.J. Ourso College of Business
Rice University Louisiana State University
P.O. Box 2932 501 South Quad Drive
Houston, TX 77252 Baton Rouge, LA 70803
kerry.e.back@rice.edu skazempour@lsu.edu
Bruce I. Carlin Chloe L. Xie
Jones Graduate School of Business Sloan School of Management
Rice University Massachusetts Institute of Technology
1900 Rice Boulevard 100 Main St
Houston, TX 77005 Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER chloexie@mit.edu
carlin@rice.edu

We investigate how companies choose when to make information public
and study the asset pricing implications of discretion over disclosure timing.
Discretion gives rise to an American disclosure option, which firms opti-
mally exercise based on strategic actions of peer firms. So, the model we
study is both dynamic and game-theoretic, which distinguishes it from the
previous literature, and yields novel implications that we test in the setting
of corporate earnings announcements.
We show that the presence of disclosure options causes risk premia to
rise prior to disclosures, and conditional risk premia can be much higher
than unconditional risk premia. The pattern of returns is similar to that
documented by Kapadia and Zekhnini (2019), who empirically show that
firms’ returns are earned almost entirely on positive jump days and that
stocks experience negative drifts prior to positive jumps. Indeed, in our
model, strategic disclosure induces the same negative drift and positive
jump pattern (the positive jumps occur even when the firms’ news is
bad from an ex ante perspective). Additionally, the jump risks have
positive risk premia, because firms’ information has both systematic and
idiosyncratic components (Savor and Wilson, 2016; Ben-Rephael et al.,
2020).
When a firm discloses its information, it exchanges one price stream (its
valuation by uninformed risk-averse investors) for another (its valuation
by informed investors). The option to disclose is an American exchange
option, in which the price streams play the role of dividend streams in the
usual set-up. An important aspect of our model is that the pre-disclosure
price of a firm is not static. Instead, it fluctuates based on the disclosures
made by other firms that are correlated with it. Therefore, each firm’s
optimal timing for disclosure is influenced by the disclosure strategies of
other firms. This dynamic interaction forms a specific type of option game,
which has not been studied before.
Equilibrium policies are threshold policies with stochastic thresholds,
meaning that at each point in time there is a minimum signal value
1

(threshold), depending on prior disclosures or nondisclosures by other
firms, such that it is optimal to disclose if and only if one’s signal is above
the threshold. Like other American options, the option to disclose must be
sufficiently far in the money before it is optimal to exercise. This means
that firms continue to delay disclosing (up to a point) even when they
could increase their price by disclosing.
Dye and Hughes (2018) – hereafter DH – add risk aversion to a static,
single-firm model that is usually studied under risk neutrality (Grossman,
1981; Milgrom, 1981; Dye, 1985; Jung and Kwon, 1988). DH show that
nondisclosure is variance increasing when investors are risk averse and
also variance increasing for positively correlated uninformed firms. In our
model, risk premia depend on covariances with the stochastic discount
factor, so our result that nondisclosure increases risk premia means that
nondisclosure increases covariances (in absolute value). As DH note, it is
somewhat surprising that nondisclosure is variance increasing – and it is
equally surprising that it increases covariances – because nondisclosure is
itself information, and information “should” reduce variances and covari-
ances.
Acharya, DeMarzo, and Kremer (2011) – herafter ADK – introduce
the concept of disclosure as an American option but with only a single
firm and with risk neutrality. In their model, the option value arises
from an exogenous public announcement. They show that there is a
clustering of disclosures following a negative announcement, in the sense
that a range of firm types would disclose immediately following such an
announcement. A key question in our model is whether there can be
endogenous announcements that are sufficiently negative as to induce
clustering. A firm only discloses when it is in its own interest to do so, and
in fact a firm that discloses always has a strictly positive return. Thus,
endogenous announcements are always good news for the disclosing firm,
and they are also good news for positively correlated firms. Nevertheless,
we show, for the case of two firms, that disclosures sufficiently close to
2