NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CEO COMPENSATION AND CASH-FLOW SHOCKS:
EVIDENCE FROM CHANGES IN ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS
Seungho Choi
Ross Levine
Raphael Jonghyeon Park
Simon Xu
Working Paper 32101
http://www.nber.org/papers/w32101
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2024
We greatly appreciate the comments of Sudipto Dasgupta, Jungmin Kim, Pureum Kim, Ulrike
Malmendier, Joseph Shapiro and seminar participants at UC Berkeley Haas School of Business,
Hanyang University, Financial Information Society of Korea 2023, Boca Corporate Finance and
Governance Conference 2023, CAFM 2023, BAR Annual Conference (Harvard) 2023, and
Haskell & White Academic Conference 2023. We also thank the EPA for helpful discussions on
data. All remaining errors are our own. This work was supported by the research fund of
Hanyang University. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2024 by Seungho Choi, Ross Levine, Raphael Jonghyeon Park, and Simon Xu. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

CEO Compensation and Cash-Flow Shocks: Evidence from Changes in Environmental Regulations
Seungho Choi, Ross Levine, Raphael Jonghyeon Park, and Simon Xu
NBER Working Paper No. 32101
February 2024
JEL No. G34,G38,M52,Q53,Q58
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates how shocks to expected cash flows influence CEO incentive
compensation. Exploiting changes in compliance with environmental regulations as shocks to
expected future cash flows, we find that adverse shocks typically prompt corporate boards to
recalibrate CEO compensation to reduce risk-taking incentives. However, this pattern is not
uniform. Financially distressed firms exhibit milder reductions in compensation convexity, with
some even increasing it, suggesting a “gambling for resurrection” strategy. Moreover, the
strength of corporate governance influences shareholders’ capacity to align executive incentives
with shareholder risk preferences following unanticipated changes in the stringency of
environmental regulations.
Seungho Choi Raphael Jonghyeon Park
Department of Finance University of Technology Sydney
Hanyang University jonghyeon.park@uts.edu.au
Seoul 04763
South Korea Simon Xu
seunghochoi@hanyang.ac.kr Harvard Business School
117 Western Avenue
Ross Levine Boston, MA 02163
Hoover Institution (HHMB 313) sxu@hbs.edu
Stanford University
434 Galvez Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
rosslevine@stanford.edu

1. Introduction
Foundational theories of the firm suggest that shocks to expected cash flows influence share-
holder preferences toward corporate risk-taking and the structure of executive compensation
(e.g., Jensen & Meckling, 1976; Myers, 1977; Myers & Majluf, 1984; Pindyck, 1988). For
example, adverse shocks might lead shareholders to prefer less risky corporate investments
to mitigate bankruptcy risk and, therefore, offer their executives convex compensation pack-
ages with reduced risk-taking incentives, i.e., less convex compensation packages. However,
shareholders of financially distressed firms might react oppositely, preferring their firms to
shift toward higher-risk strategies to generate the returns necessary to avert bankruptcy. The
relationship between cash-flow shocks and executive compensation is further complicated by
the effectiveness of corporate governance, as the effect of shareholder preferences on executive
compensation depends on each firm’s governance structure (e.g., Chhaochharia & Grinstein,
2009; Dai, Rau, Stouraitis, & Tan, 2020; Hoi, Wu, & Zhang, 2019; Humphery-Jenner, Lisic,
Nanda, & Silveri, 2016). Thus, the impact of expected cash flows on executive compensation
is an empirical question that may depend on firms’ financial conditions and governance
structures.
Despite the importance of understanding how firms respond to shocks, few researchers
have empirically examined the impact of expected cash flows on the convexity of executive
compensation. Gormley, Matsa, and Milbourn (2013) address critical aspects of this question
by examining the link between increased corporate liability risk and the convexity of new equity
grants. Yet, there is a lack of evidence on how different financial conditions and governance
structures modulate the response of executive compensation to expected cash-flow shocks,
which theory highlights as crucial to understanding this relationship.
To address this gap, we examine the impact of changes in environmental regulations
that alter expected net cash flows on executive compensation while differentiating by pre-
existing corporate financial conditions and governance effectiveness. Research demonstrates
that environmental regulations significantly affect firms’ expected cash flows, forming the
basis of this study (e.g., Choi, Levine, Park, & Xu, 2023; Hsu, Li, & Tsou, 2023; Karpoff,
Lott, & Wehrly, 2005; Krueger, Sautner, & Starks, 2020; Seltzer, Starks, & Zhu, 2022; Xu
& Kim, 2022). However, researchers have not explored how these regulations influence
shareholder preferences toward their firm’s risk-taking or the compensation packages they
offer executives. Thus, besides exploiting changes in environmental regulation to provide
new evidence on how (1) shocks to expected cash flows influence executive compensation and
2

(2) firms’ pre-existing financial conditions and governance structures shape the response of
executive compensation to those shocks, we provide novel information on potentially significant
consequences of environmental regulations: shareholders’ preferences toward risk-taking and
executive compensation.
We leverage a unique feature of the U.S. Clean Air Act (CAA) to evaluate the effect
of environmental regulations on executive compensation. The CAA requires the annual
designation of counties as either in attainment or nonattainment with National Ambient Air
Quality Standards (NAAQS) for ground-level ozone. Nonattainment designations lead to more
stringent environmental regulations, increasing production costs and reducing expected cash
flows on ozone-emitting facilities in “treated” counties (Becker, 2005; Becker & Henderson,
2000, 2001; Greenstone, 2002). This regulatory policy yields considerable heterogeneity in the
environmental regulations affecting firms, as the attainment status of counties changes over
time, only ozone-emitting plants within treated counties experience shocks to production costs,
and otherwise identical firms may experience different environmental regulations depending on
the cross-county locations of their ozone-emitting plants. We exploit this regulatory setting to
explore the effects of adverse cash flow shocks on the design of managerial incentive contracts.
We construct annual, firm-specific measures of environmental regulations and executive
compensation. To gauge firm-year exposure to environmental regulations, we construct NA
exposure, which is based on ozone emissions from firms’ facilities in nonattainment counties. We
focusonozoneemissionsbecauseviolatingozoneNAAQSistheprincipalreasoncountiesreceive
a nonattainment designation. To measure the risk-taking incentives of CEO’s compensation
packages, we primarily use Vega—the sensitivity of CEO wealth to stock return volatility.
Vega is commonly employed to gauge the convexity of executive compensation. A large body
of research suggests that Vega is positively associated with increases in corporate risk-taking
(e.g., Armstrong & Vashishtha, 2012; Bakke, Mahmudi, Fernando, & Salas, 2016; Chava &
Purnanandam, 2010; Coles, Daniel, & Naveen, 2006; Edmans, Gabaix, & Jenter, 2017; Guay,
1999; Hayes, Lemmon, & Qiu, 2012; Liu & Mauer, 2011; Low, 2009; Mao & Zhang, 2018;
Rajgopal & Shevlin, 2002; Shue & Townsend, 2017). In contrast to this literature, we explore
how environmental regulatory shocks reshape Vega.
We employ difference-in-differences (DiD) analyses with continuous treatment to evaluate
theimpactofNA exposure onVega. Oursamplecoversthe1993-2019periodandcomprisesover
2,700 publicly listed U.S. firms with over 30,000 firm-year observations. Besides conditioning
on firm- and year-fixed effects, the analyses control for an array of time-varying firm and CEO
3