NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CENTRAL BANKING POST CRISES
Michael Kiley
Frederic S. Mishkin
Working Paper 32237
http://www.nber.org/papers/w32237
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2024
Prepared for The Oxford Handbook of Banking, Fourth Edition. The authors would like to thank
Jane Krohn for her research assistance. The views expressed here are our own and are not
necessarily those of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Columbia University,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Disclosure of Mishkin’s outside compensated
activities can be found on his website at http://www0.gsb.columbia.edu/faculty/fmishkin/
At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w32237
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2024 by Michael Kiley and Frederic S. Mishkin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Central Banking Post Crises
Michael Kiley and Frederic S. Mishkin
NBER Working Paper No. 32237
March 2024
JEL No. E4,E5,E52,E58
ABSTRACT
The world economy has experienced the largest financial crisis in generations, a global pandemic,
and a resurgence in inflation during the first quarter of the 21st century, yielding important
insights for central banking. Price stability has important benefits and is the responsibility of a
central bank. Achieving price stability in a complex and uncertain environment involves a
credible commitment to a nominal anchor with a strong response to inflation and pre-emptive
leaning against an overheating economy. Associated challenges imply that central bank
communication and transparency are key elements of monetary policy strategies and tactics.
Crises have emphasized the role of central banks in promoting financial stability, as financial
stability is key to achieving price and economic stability, but this role increases risks to
independence. Goals for central banks other than price and economic stability, complemented by
financial stability, can make it more difficult for them to stabilize both inflation and economic
activity.
Michael Kiley
Federal Reserve Board
20th and Constitution Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20551
United States
michael.t.kiley@frb.gov
Frederic S. Mishkin
GSB, Columbia University
Kravis Hall, Room 534
665 West 130th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
fsm3@columbia.edu

23.1 Introduction
Central banks are experiencing the apocryphal curse that they are living through interesting
times.1 In the last twenty years, they have faced the global financial crisis of 2007-2009, the
Covid pandemic of 2020, and a surge in inflation in 2022-2023. This chapter examines the
challenges that central banks face in the wake of these crises. We focus on how governance,
monetary policy and financial stability policy at central banks has evolved in recent years.
A central bank is a unit of government that controls monetary policy. The policy goals of central
banks focus on price stability, stability in economic activity, and financial stability—goals that
have evolved over centuries of practice (Bordo, 2007). To promote these goals, a central bank
controls the quantity and/or pricing of the government’s monetary liabilities, currency and
reserves, and the terms of lender-of-last-resort facilities.
Because the preeminent role of central banks is the stabilization of prices and economic activity
through the setting of monetary policy, we start by discussing the core economics of central
banking, and then discuss how this analysis impacts the tools and design of monetary policy. The
broad effects of central bank’s actions on macroeconomic and financial conditions are primary
channels through which a central bank’s activities impact the banking system.
The role of central banks in promoting financial stability stems from a least two factors. First,
financial stability promotes price and economic stability. Second, the tools of monetary policy
include lender-of-last-resort activities that stem from central banks control of the government’s
monetary liabilities. These tools can be used to combat financial instability and contribute to a
role for central banks in supervising the banking sector. We review these issues in our discussion
1 The curse, “May you live in interesting times” has often been attributed to ancient China, but source for such
attribution is not clear. Among the early published uses of this phrase is a memoir of Sir Hughe Knatchbull-
Hugessen, who served as the British ambassador to China in the mid-1930s (Knatchbull-Hugessen, Hughe (1949).
Diplomat in Peace and War. John Murray).
2

of central bank mandates. Our discussion also touches on potential additional mandates for
central banks that have been discussed recently.
To illustrate the macroeconomic and financial challenges faced by central banks as they pursue
their mandates, we discuss challenges created by low interest rates following the global financial
crisis and the Covid pandemic and by the inflation surge in 2021-22. Finally, we conclude with a
summary of the lessons we have learned for central bank strategies and tactics, including issues
for further research.
23.2 The Core Economics of Central Banking
Over the last six decades, economists have derived from theory and empirical evidence a core of
economic analysis that guides central bank’s in setting monetary policy. We discuss this
economic analysis, which is often referred to as the “science of central banking” (Clarida, Gali
and Gertler, 1999) by discussing the following core economic principles:
• Price stability has important benefits and is primarily the responsibility of a central bank.
• There is no long-run tradeoff between unemployment and inflation, but a short-run
tradeoff exists.
• Expectations play a crucial role in the macro economy and the role of expectations can
create time-inconsistency problems that impair achievement of price stability. A
transparent policy framework for monetary policy can constrain discretionary behavior
and alleviate some of the time-inconsistency problems.
• Central bank independence promotes price stability and economic performance, in part
by addressing time-inconsistency challenges.
3