NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
IS THERE INFORMATION IN CORPORATE ACQUISITION PLANS?
Sinan Gokkaya
Xi Liu
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 32201
http://www.nber.org/papers/w32201
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2024, Revised June 2025
We are grateful to Christopher Nason and the research team at Mergermarket Ltd. for providing us
the acquisition plan data used in this paper. We are grateful for comments from participants at the
2024 European Finance Association Meeting, 2024 Financial Management Association Meeting,
8th Bayes Annual M&A Research Center Conference, 2024 Southern Finance Association
Meeting, as well as comments from Nihat Aktas, Kelly Bergsma, Rebecca De Simone (discussant),
François Derrien (discussant), Oleg Gredil (discussant), and seminar participants at Ohio
University and McMaster University. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2024 by Sinan Gokkaya, Xi Liu, and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Is There Information in Corporate Acquisition Plans?
Sinan Gokkaya, Xi Liu, and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 32201
March 2024, Revised June 2025
JEL No. G14, G24, G30, G34
ABSTRACT
For many firms, the acquisition process begins with the development of an acquisition plan that is
communicated to investors. Using a novel dataset, we provide the first study of acquisition plans
and offer new perspectives on the acquisition process. We find that acquisition plan announcements
are informative and incrementally predict subsequent acquisition activity. These results are more
pronounced for firms announcing commitment to acquisitions from an internal pipeline.
Acquisition plans improve acquisition performance due to learning from market feedback and
reduce acquisition-related uncertainty. Communication of acquisition plans does not increase
takeover premiums but is less common in more competitive industries.
Sinan Gokkaya René M. Stulz
Ohio University The Ohio State University
Department of Finance and NBER
gokkaya@ohio.edu stulz@cob.osu.edu
Xi Liu
Miami University
Department of Finance
liux60@miamioh.edu

1. Introduction
As discussed in Graham (2022), corporate planning is the foundation of many corporate
decisions. Nevertheless, academic research on the corporate planning process is scant, resulting in
a significant gap between academic research and real-world finance. In this paper, we focus on
what corporations say to market participants about their corporate planning concerning merger and
acquisitions (M&As or acquisitions for simplicity) to better understand the nature of such planning
and its implications for corporate decisions. Acquisitions are among the largest and most important
events in the lifecycle of firms. They shape the boundaries of firms and have implications for a
wide range of stakeholders. Due to data availability, the vast body of academic research on
acquisitions typically focuses on the acquisition process starting with the public announcement of
an agreement between an acquirer and a specific target firm.2 However, as indicated by KPMG
(2011), DePamphilis (2010) and Sherman (2018), firms often develop detailed acquisition plans
to implement a corporate strategy of growth through acquisitions before they initiate an acquisition
process with a specific target firm.
Notwithstanding the common use of acquisition planning, to the best of our knowledge,
academic research has not examined the role and implications of acquisition planning for
acquisition transactions. In this paper, we manually construct a novel sample of 13,137 firm
announcements of acquisition plans by 3,536 unique US firms from 2003 to 2015 using data
provided to us by Mergermarket Ltd. We call these firms acquisition-planning firms. We use this
sample to examine the information content of acquisition plan announcements for capital markets,
whether acquisition plans and their unique characteristics have implications for real corporate
outcomes, why firms announce such acquisition plans, and whether acquisition-planning firms
make better acquisitions.
We find that the number and percentage of acquisition-planning firms represents an
economically important fraction of U.S. listed firms. For U.S. listed firms, every year (except
2003), at least 13% of these firms announce acquisition plans to capital markets and acquisition-
planning firms represent 32.99% of the total market capitalization of these firms. Further, over
2 Spurred by the recent availability of SEC filings detailing the “background” of takeovers, a relatively new literature
focuses on the private takeover process that starts with deal initiation. See Aktas and Boone (2024) for an excellent
summary of this literature.
1

23.57% of acquisition transactions follow the announcement of an acquisition plan and 22.75% of
unique acquirers communicate acquisition plans before executing a transaction, suggesting that
the announcement of acquisition plans is an intrinsic component of the U.S. acquisition deal-
making process for many firms.
We next document institutional details of acquisition plans since little is known about such
plans. First, acquisition plans are generally non-numeric and comprised of soft information
announced in a wide range of institutional settings (e.g., industry/product market conferences,
analyst/investor/capital market days, interviews with media/financial press, and earnings calls).
Second, acquisition plans have unique characteristics that vary greatly based on the forward-
looking strategic information announced by acquisition-planning firms. More specifically, firms
delineate target selection strategies (internal M&A pipeline versus opportunistic), level of
commitment to acquisitions as a means of executing strategic corporate growth plans, as well as
the size of potential targets they intend to pursue. Third, firms announce acquisition plans mostly
on days without other material firm-specific news disclosures and other forward-looking
information, providing a unique opportunity to isolate the information content of acquisition plans
for market participants.
There is no theoretical presumption that investors are expected to react positively or negatively
to acquisition plan announcements. For instance, an acquisition-planning firm could signal that it
has a strategic plan to acquire market share quickly to accommodate an unexpected positive shock
to its productivity. If so, the acquisition plan announcement would be expected to generate a
positive market reaction. Alternatively, a firm’s acquisition plan announcement could convey that
a firm has poor internal growth opportunities, resulting in a negative stock price reaction. In sum,
acquisition plan announcements could be informative to investors even if, on average, the signed
abnormal market reaction is insignificantly different from zero. Therefore, we conduct our analysis
of the informativeness of acquisition plan announcements by focusing on measures of absolute
abnormal stock return and abnormal stock turnover. Our findings show economically and
statistically significant abnormal market reactions. For instance, the average absolute cumulative
characteristics-adjusted abnormal stock return (stock turnover) is 1.05% (0.29%) over a three-day
event window period surrounding acquisition plan announcements after we exclude acquisition
plans announced contemporaneously with other firm-specific news disclosures.
2