NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EFFECTS OF THE TAX REFORM ACT OF 1986 ON CORPORATE FINANCIAL POLICY
AND ORGANIZATIONAL FORM
Roger H. Cordon
Jeffrey MacKie-Mason
Working Paper No. 3222
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Caabridge, MA 02138
January 1990
We are grateful for helpful comments from Glenn Hubbard and Joel Slearod.
Brian Erard of the IRS provided us with some summary statistics that have not
yet been published, based on individual returns. MacKie-Maaon gratefully
acknowledges financial support from a Rackham Faculty Research Grant. This
paper is part of NBER's research program in Taxation. Any opinions expreased
are those of the authors not thoae of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER Working Paper #3222
January 1990
EFFECTS OF THE TAX REFORM ACT OF 1986 ON CORPORATE FINANCIAL POLICY
AND ORGANIZATIONAL FORM
ABSTRACT
We examine the effects of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 on the financial decisions
made by firms. We review the theory and empirical predictions of prior literature for
corporate debt policy, for dividend and equity repurchase payouts to shareholders, and
for the choice of organizational form. We then compare the predictions to post-1986
experience. The change in debt/value ratios has been substantially smaller than expected.
Dividend payouts increased as predicted, but stock repurchases increased even more rapidly
which was unexpected and is difficult to understand. Based on very scant data, it appears
that some activities have shuffled among organizational forms; in particular, loss activities
may have been moved into corporate form where they are deducted at a higher tax rate,
while gain activities may have shifted towards noncorporate form, to be taxed at the
lower personal rates. In addition, several interesting new issues are raised. One concerns
previously neglected implications for the effective tax on retained erarnings that follow
from optimal trading strategies when long- and short-term capital gains are taxed at
different rates. Also, new interest allocation rules for multinational corporations provide
a substantial incentive for many firms to shift their borrowing abroad.
Roger H. Gordon Jeffrey MacKie-Mason
Department of Economics Department of Economics
University of Michigan University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220 Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220

The Tax Reform Act of 1986 (hereafter TRA86) included the most extensive changes
in the U.S. tax law since the dramatic increase in corporate and personal tax rates during
World War II. For many years tax economists have found that it is difficult to estimate
the effect of taxes on corporate behavior because there has been so little variation in
corporate tax policy. The major changes introduced by the TRA86 offer an opportunity
to assess how well previous analyses succeeded in predicting the effects of tax changes, and
an opportunity to obtain new understanding about taxes and corporate behavior.
The objective of this paper is to examine the effects of the tax reform on the financial
decisions made by firms. Taking as given its real decisions, a firm has substantial flexibility
in deciding on the source of finance for its operations, and even on the legal form of
ownership. To begin with, corporations can finance themselves through both debt and
equity. Additional equity finance can be obtained either through retained earnings or
through new share issues. When payments get made to equity holders, they can take the
form of dividends or share repurchases. Shares of other firms as well as of one's own firm
can be repurchased. More fundamentally, a firm need not necessarily set itself up as a
corporation for both legal and tax purposes. By becoming a subchaper S corporation,
its income is taxed solely under the personal income tax, even though it retains many of
the others benefits of the corporate form of organization. In addition, it can become a
partnership or proprietorship for tax or legal reasons.1
Past work has presumed that taxes play an important role in these decisions. If so,
then the extensive changes in the tax law that were enacted in 1986 should have led to
Firms can make choices about organizational form when they are first formed, but later in life they
can also choose to shift between one form and another, with some costs.
1

noticeable changes in these decisions. What was forecasted and what happened?
In section 1, we focus on a corporation's decision to use debt V3. equity finance. We
present various theoretical models that have been developed to describe a firm's decisions,
then use the models to forecast what should have happened as a result of the 1986 t
reform. We find that the actual change in debt/value ratios has been substantially smaller
than the models predict. We discuss some reasons for the surprise. In addition, we raise
some new issues, including the implications for the effective tax on retained earnings that
follow from optimal trading strategies, and the incentives provided by the new interest
allocation rules for multinational corporations to shift their borrowing abroad.
Section 2 then examines the decision to pay dividends V3. use the same funds to reduce
new share issues or to repurchase existing shares of one's own firm or of other firms. Finally,
section 3 examines the choice of organizational form. Results are summarized briefly in
section 4.
1. DEBT VS. EQUITY FINANCE
A. Forecasts from the traditional theory
During the last decade, there have been a variety of approaches in the theoretical
literature to the determinants of a corporation's debt—equity ratio. To begin with, Miller—
Modigliani (1961) emphasized that interest payments but not dividends are deductible
under the corporate income tax, implying that a shift of a dollar from equity to debt finance
lowers corporate tax payments each year by ri, where r is the corporate tax rate and i is
the nominal interest rate. This tax savings from additional use of corporate debt would
be traded off with the increased risk of costly bankruptcy that results. As the literature
developed, real bankruptcy costs included not only administrative costs,2 but also a variety
of extra monitoring and agency costs arising from the conflicts of interest between different
classes of creditors in bankruptcy, and even in anticipation of the possibility of bankruptcy.3
2 Warner (1977) presented data indicatingthat these were small.
See, for example, Myers (1977), Jensen and Meckling (1976), Bulow and Shoven (1978), and White
(1980, 1989).
2