NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
(PRO-) SOCIAL LEARNING AND STRATEGIC DISCLOSURE
Roland Bénabou
Nikhil Vellodi
Working Paper 32483
http://www.nber.org/papers/w32483
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2024
We thank Aislinn Bohren, Gabriel Carroll, Navin Kartik, Alex Wolitzky and various seminar
participants for useful suggestions. Vellodi acknowledges funding from the EUR grant ANR-17-
EURE-0001, as well as Princeton University, where this research was initiated in 2019. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2024 by Roland Bénabou and Nikhil Vellodi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

(Pro-) Social Learning and Strategic Disclosure
Roland Bénabou and Nikhil Vellodi
NBER Working Paper No. 32483
May 2024
JEL No. D82,D83,D91
ABSTRACT
We study a sequential experimentation model with endogenous feedback. Agents choose between
a safe and risky action, the latter generating stochastic rewards. When making this choice, each
agent is selfishly motivated (myopic). However, agents can disclose their experiences to a public
record, and when doing so are pro-socially motivated (forward-looking). When prior uncertainty
is large, disclosure is both polarized (only extreme signals are disclosed) and positively biased
(no feedback is bad news). When prior uncertainty is small, a novel form of unraveling occurs
and disclosure is complete. Subsidizing disclosure costs can perversely lead to less disclosure but
more experimentation.
Roland Bénabou
Department of Economics &
School of Public and International Affairs
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
rbenabou@princeton.edu
Nikhil Vellodi
PSE - Campus Jourdan
48 Boulevard Jourdan
75014 Paris
France
n.vellodi@gmail.com

(Pro-)Social Learning
and Strategic Disclosure∗
Roland Bénabou† Nikhil Vellodi‡
Current Draft : May 16, 2024
Abstract
We study a sequential experimentation model with endogenous feedback. Agents
choose between a safe and risky action, the latter generating stochastic rewards. When
makingthischoice,eachagentisselfishlymotivated(myopic). However,agentscandis-
closetheirexperiencestoapublicrecord, andwhendoingsoarepro-sociallymotivated
(forward-looking). When prior uncertainty is large, disclosure is both polarized (only
extreme signals are disclosed) and positively biased (no feedback is bad news). When
prior uncertainty is small, a novel form of unraveling occurs and disclosure is complete.
Subsidizing disclosure costs can perversely lead to less disclosure but more experimen-
tation.
Keywords: social learning, experimentation, dynamic disclosure, consumer reviews,
time-inconsistent preferences, motivated beliefs. JEL Classification: D82, L11, L12.
1 Introduction
In many settings, agents face a choice between safe and risky actions, with different individ-
uals facing these choices in sequence. Agents might benefit from the information generated
by those who preceded them. For instance, consider consumers choosing whether or not to
dine at a restaurant with unknown quality, or to watch a new movie. Those who do so can
∗WethankAislinnBohren,GabrielCarroll,NavinKartik,AlexWolitzkyandvariousseminarparticipants
for useful suggestions. Vellodi acknowledges funding from the EUR grant ANR-17-EURE-0001, as well as
Princeton University, where this research was initiated in 2019.
†Princeton University, NBER, CEPR, IZA, BREAD, and briq. rbenabou@princeton.edu
‡Paris School of Economics. n.vellodi@gmail.com
1

then leave feedback, helping later-arriving consumers make more informed choices. Similar
settings include the adoption of new products and technologies, employment choices, and
sequential voting.
A well-known dynamic externality emerges in such settings, namely that agents do not
internalize the benefit to future consumers of taking the risky action, leaving feedback and
thereby generating socially valuable information.
To remedy this inefficient under-exploration, a planner would direct agents to take the
risky action even when it is unprofitable to them provided the informational gain to future
agentsmorethancompensates; oftentimes, directincentivesareeitherabsentorforbidden.1
Thisquestionhasbeenstudiedextensivelyineconomicsandcomputerscienceunderthe
label of “incentivized exploration (IE)” (Kremer et al., 2014; Che and Hörner, 2018), itself
part of the broader literatures on social learning and sequential experimentation (Banerjee,
1992; Bikhchandani et al., 1992; Smith and Sørensen, 2000; Smith et al., 2021).2 Papers in
the IE literature largely take a normative approach to the problem. Namely, they assume
the presence of a benevolent designer who can control the provision of incentives either
via dynamic information provision or through direct recommendations. Furthermore, these
works largely assume that, once generated, individual signals are perfectly observed by the
planner or designer in charge of public information provision.
Such studies are thus silent on a particularly salient issue within the online feedback
setting — why and when do people leave feedback in the first place? For instance, when
leaving feedback regarding their dining experience, consumers might be driven by a desire
to help future consumers make informed choices, or alternatively to reward or punish the
restaurant for a positive or negative experience. Conversely, while the availability of feed-
back is often highly valued by consumers, the vast majority fail to provide it.3 And those
that do provide feedback generate well-known biases such as positive selection (Nosko and
1For instance, the US Consumer Review Fairness Act forbids eliciting reviews for payment. See https:
//tinyurl.com/5v3mt846.
2See Slivkins (2022) and Bikhchandani et al. (2022) for recent surveys on IE and social learning more
generally.
3Recentsurveysreportthatonlyaround10%ofconsumersregularlyleavereviews. Seehttps://tinyurl.
com/mrrsf9v5, https://tinyurl.com/ux3zyuem.
2