BUSINESS AS USUAL:
BANK NET ZERO COMMITMENTS, LENDING, AND ENGAGEMENT
Parinitha R. Sastry
Emil Verner
David Marques Ibanez
WORKING PAPER 32402

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BUSINESS AS USUAL:
BANK NET ZERO COMMITMENTS, LENDING, AND ENGAGEMENT
Parinitha R. Sastry
Emil Verner
David Marques Ibanez
Working Paper 32402
http://www.nber.org/papers/w32402
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2024
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors' only and should not be interpreted as
reflecting the views of, or implying any responsibility for, the European Central Bank or the
Eurosystem. We thank Olivier Darmouni, Arik Levinson, Adair Morse, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh,
Philipp Schnabl, Gita Rao, Catherine Wolfram, and seminar participants at Bocconi University,
Columbia University, the European Central Bank, NYU WAPFIN, Sveriges Riksbank, and the
Federal Reserve Board for valuable comments and feedback. We thank Nikolay Danov,
Francesca Faella, Jan Jakob Krueger, and Christoph Oberthur for outstanding research assistance.
We thank Florian Berg for advice on using ESG ratings data. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2024 by Parinitha R. Sastry, Emil Verner, and David Marques Ibanez. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Business as Usual: Bank Net Zero Commitments, Lending, and Engagement
Parinitha R. Sastry, Emil Verner, and David Marques Ibanez
NBER Working Paper No. 32402
May 2024
JEL No. G2,G21,G3,Q5
ABSTRACT
We use administrative credit registry data from Europe to study the impact of voluntary lender
net zero commitments. We have two sets of findings. First, we find no evidence of lender
divestment. Net zero banks neither reduce credit supply to the sectors they target for
decarbonization nor do they increase financing for renewables projects. Second, we find no
evidence of reduced financed emissions through engagement. Borrowers of net zero banks are not
more likely to set decarbonization targets or reduce their verified emissions. Our estimates rule
out even moderate-sized effects. These results highlight the limits of voluntary commitments for
decarbonization.
Parinitha R. Sastry David Marques Ibanez
Columbia University European Central Bank
665 West 130th Street Sonnemannstrasse 20, South 9.31
New York, NY 10027 60314 Frankfurt am Main,
prs2107@columbia.edu Germany
david.marques@ecb.europa.eu
Emil Verner
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-635
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347 and
NBER
everner@mit.edu

1 Introduction
As the effects of climate change are beginning to be felt, there are increasing calls from
policymakers, activists, and other stakeholders to transition the economy away from
carbon-intensive production. The United States and Europe have set net zero targets
for 2050; China has one for 2060; and India has one for 2070. The net-zero transition
will require a massive mobilization of capital: McKinsey & Co. (2022) estimate that the
net zero transition will require $9.2 trillion per year in investment for energy and land
use systems between 2021 and 2050. This raises the important question: where will the
financing required to transition the global economy come from?
Banks play a central role in capital allocation, so they are key to financing the
green transition. Banks have made ambitious public commitments to reduce financed
emissions and increase financing for sustainable activities. Most prominently, more
than 138 banks, representing over 40% of global banking assets, have made explicit
net zero commitments through the Net Zero Banking Alliance (NZBA). These “net zero
banks” have made a commitment to “align lending and investment portfolios with
net-zero emissions by 2050” with “intermediate targets for 2030 or sooner.” These
targets must be set within 18 months of joining the alliance, and they specify the
sectors that each lender has targeted as high priority for decarbonization.1 In addition
to announcing sectoral targets for reducing financed emissions, net zero banks also
make outright pledges to scale up sustainable finance.2
The announcement of bank net zero commitments has triggered contrasting reac-
tions. Many laud the NZBA initiative as evidence that banks are beginning to seriously
incorporateclimatechangeconcernsintheirlendingandinvestmentdecisions, suggest-
1Forexample,DeutscheBankhassettargetsforreducingfinancedemissionsinoilandgas,power
generation,transportation,andsteelby2030.
2Forexample,DeutscheBankhaspledgedtoscaleupsustainablefinancingandinvestmentvolumes
by500billioneurosbetweenJanuary2020andtheendof2025.
2