NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DEMAND-SIDE AND SUPPLY-SIDE CONSTRAINTS
IN THE MARKET FOR FINANCIAL ADVICE
Jonathan Reuter
Antoinette Schoar
Working Paper 32452
http://www.nber.org/papers/w32452
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2024
Jonathan Reuter is affiliated with Boston College and NBER. Antoinette Schoar is affiliated with
MIT Sloan, ideas42 and NBER. The authors thank Roman Inderst (editor) for helpful comments
and Xin Xiong for helpful research assistance. Neither author has any funding or material and
relevant financial relationships to disclose. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2024 by Jonathan Reuter and Antoinette Schoar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Demand-side and Supply-side Constraints in the Market for Financial Advice
Jonathan Reuter and Antoinette Schoar
NBER Working Paper No. 32452
May 2024
JEL No. G11,G4,G5
ABSTRACT
In this review, we argue that access to financial advice and the quality of this advice is shaped by
a broad array of demand-side and supply-side constraints. While the literature has predominantly
focused on conflicts of interest between advisors and clients, we highlight that the transaction
costs of providing advice, mistaken beliefs on the demand side or supply side, and other factors
can have equally detrimental effects on the quality and access to advice. Moreover, these factors
affect how researchers should assess the impact of financial advice across heterogeneous groups
of households. While households with low levels of financial literacy are more likely to benefit
from advice—potentially including conflicted advice—they are also the least likely to detect
misconduct, and perhaps the least likely to understand the value of paying for advice. Regulators
should consider not only how regulation changes the quality of advice, but also the fraction of
households who are able to receive it and how different groups would have invested without any
advice. Financial innovation has the potential to provide customized advice at low cost, but also
to embed conflicts of interest in algorithms that are opaque to households and regulators.
Jonathan Reuter
Carroll School of Management
Boston College
224B Fulton Hall
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
reuterj@bc.edu
Antoinette Schoar
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-638
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
aschoar@mit.edu

1. Introduction
Retirement savings and portfolio allocation decisions are some of the most important financial decisions
that households are required to make over their lifetimes. As a large academic literature demonstrates, these
are complicated problems that many retail investors are ill prepared to solve on their own (e.g., Calvet,
Campbell and Sodini, 2007; Lusardi and Mitchell, 2014; Lusardi and Mitchell, 2023). Surveys reveal that
households seek advice on these topics from many different sources, including friends and family, but
especially the financial services industry.1 In total, FINRA reports that there were more than 600,000
registered representatives in the US in 2022.
Measuring the net benefit of investment advice, however, is difficult for at least three reasons. First, the
academic literature on optimal portfolio allocation is ever evolving. While the benefits of portfolio
diversification and fee minimization are well understood, many recent papers highlight the importance of
considering heterogeneity in household characteristics and risk exposures, such as (un)employment risk,
depreciation of a person’s human capital, health risks, and many other factors. These underlying risk factors
that in theory should shape a person’s optimal portfolio are often not observable to the econometrician, and
might or might not be observable to the financial advisor. Second, there is significant heterogeneity across
people in the need for financial advice and in their ability to understand or follow advice (even independent
of their risk exposures), and this heterogeneity might limit the type or complexity of advice that is useful
for them to receive. Moreover, this underlying preparedness for advice is difficult to observe and likely
goes beyond simple measures of financial literacy. Third, observing whether a household received “good”
advice is complicated by the fact that most financial advice focuses on long-term problems, such as
retirement savings, for which inference is slow for both households and researchers. While these different
factors are typically difficult for academics (and financial advisors) to observe, they play a first-order role
in determining whether and by how much households benefit from the investment advice that they receive.
The provision of financial advice through a for-profit market typically creates a situation where advice must
be “sold” to retail investors. It is costly to provide well-informed financial advice. But if customers are
unable to differentiate good advice from bad advice, higher quality advisors might not get rewarded for
providing better advice. The less that investors are able to evaluate the quality of the advice they receive,
the more that it can lead to agency distortions between financial advisors and their clients. Much of the
existing literature on financial advice focuses on testing for conflicts of interest (COI) between advisors
and their clients. The standard approach is to test for systematic deviations between client portfolios and
hypothetical benchmark portfolios. In practice, however, deviations between client portfolios and
benchmark portfolios are likely to reflect a combination of demand-side and supply-side constraints, of
which COI are but one. Clients may suffer from low levels of financial literacy, behavioral biases, mistaken
views on how to assess investment quality, and place too much or too little trust in advisors. Advisors may
suffer from limited access to high-quality investment products, limited time to spend with each client, a
limited understanding of their clients’ preferences and goals, and their own mistaken views on how to assess
investment quality. Demand-side constraints likely increase the potential gains from trade between clients
and advisors while supply-side constraints likely work in the opposite direction. For example, when
prospective clients have limited financial literacy, the desire to establish trust with and earn business from
clients may lead advisors to offer very simple investment strategies. Offering more sophisticated but
complex advice could overwhelm clients who do not understand the advice and fear that it will be
impossible for them to monitor the actions of their advisors. Nevertheless, clients still may be better off
with the portfolios recommended by their advisors than if they had invested on their own.
1 Robb, Babiarz, and Woodyard (2012) find that 53% of US households have sought some form of financial advice
over the past five years, with 30% seeking advice on saving or investing. A December 2023 survey by Bankrate
finds that 35% of Americans sought advice during the year from a “financial advisor or other professional.” See:
https://www.bankrate.com/investing/financial-advisors/americans-financial-advice-top-place/
1

In the extreme, when customers have a limited understanding of finance, they might not realize that advice
cannot come for free and, therefore, they might not understand when advisors are charging them via hidden
fees. As a result, advisors who want to present their clients with clear information about how much advice
costs might be forced to shroud their fees as well (Gabaix and Laibson, 2006). In that world, it may be
necessary to accept some distortions in how advice is presented and how it is paid for (e.g., through hidden
fees). If regulators attempt to eliminate hidden fees, the market potentially can potentially unravel, reducing
both the supply of advice and the demand for advice. The fundamental policy question in such a second-
best world is how to improve the quality of investment advice that households receive and follow without
reducing existing gains from trade through decreased access or increased cost.
Our goal in this article is to expand the discussion of investment advice beyond COI to focus on the potential
gains from investment advice in a world with numerous demand-side and supply-side constraints. Taking
a more comprehensive view of the factors that affect the supply of and demand for “good” advice is
important for understanding real-world bottle necks when it comes to improving market outcomes.2 After
describing a framework for evaluating investment advice, we seek to answer four questions. First, what do
existing studies on demand for investment advice imply about selection into advice and the scope for gains
from trade? Second, what do we know about the quality of matches between clients and advisors, the quality
of advice that clients receive, and the extent to which clients update their views on advisor quality? Third,
what do we know about the (potentially heterogeneous) impact of existing regulatory interventions intended
to improve advisor quality and reduce COI? Fourth, what do we know about the ability of financial
innovations, like robo-advice, to deliver high-quality, customized advice at low cost? We conclude by
listing several open research questions.
2. Conceptual Framework
How might we quantify the potential gains from trade between financial advisors (or financial services
firms) and their clients.3 In an ideal world, high quality financial advisors can benefit their clients by helping
them optimize their long-term savings goals and portfolio allocations. In practice, this translates into a series
of different tasks such as constructing portfolios or suggesting products that are well matched to the client’s
financial circumstances and risk preferences, explaining financial concepts to clients, helping them stay the
course when markets turn volatile, and reoptimizing when their clients’ financial circumstances change.
Some financial advisors also provide advice on how to minimize the tax burden of taxable portfolios. These
tasks require some combination of expertise and effort. Even in the absence of any COI the quality of the
advice that clients receive will depend on the expected profits generated from the interaction. For example,
because maintaining an ongoing relationship requires time and effort, richer clients will typically be able
to afford more personalized advice. To the extent that some products require more time to research and
explain, richer clients also may benefit from access to a wider range of products. Importantly, some of these
tasks are subject to more severe potential COI than others. For example, helping clients minimize the tax
burden from trading activities (where legally allowed) is in the interest of both parties under most models
of advisor compensation. In contrast, helping clients minimize commission payments to advisors is not in
the interest of advisors.
Many COI arise from the fact that broker-dealers earn commissions only when their clients buy or sell
assets. It is common for broker-dealers to receive commissions from financial service firms (e.g., mutual
2 Our goal is not to downplay the potential damage from COI that might result from poorly designed products,
excessive fees, or outright financial misconduct, but rather to expand the discussion to incorporate the full set of
constraints that are potentially govern interactions between clients and advisors.
3 See Spatt (2020) for a survey of conflicts of interest in additional financial settings.
2