NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SHORT RATES AND EXPECTED ASSET RETURNS
Kenneth A. Froot
Working Paper No. 3247
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 1990
I thank David Cutler and Larry Summers for helpful discussions and am grateful
to the Ford Foundation and the Division of Research at Harvard Business School
for generous research support. This paper is part of NBER's research program
in International Studies and Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3247
January 1990
SHORT RATES AND EXPECTED ASSET RETURNS
ABSTRACT
We present evidence that short-term inteexrceessst r ertuartnse osn many al-
forecast
ternative assets: foreign exchange, stocks, bonds, and commodities. On average, a one-
percentage-point increase in short rates is associated with three percent lower annualized
excess returns. To test whether this predictability is attributable to time-varying risk, in-
dependent measures of excess returns are formed using survey data on expected returns.
We find similar predictability in these measures, too. Since the surveys don't include
risk premia, the predictable components cannot be attributed to risk. We suggest that
when short rates are high (low) investors are excessively optimistic (pessimistic) about
alternative-asset returns.
Kenneth A. Froot
Graduate School of Business
Harvard University
Field Road
Soldiers
Boston, MA 02163

1. Introduction
It is by now well established that excess returns on many financial assets are partially
predictable. Variables useful for explaining returns have been found in each of a growing
list of asset markets. It is well known that one type of variable in particular seems to
forecast returns across many markets: deviations of asset prices from their fundamental
values. Specifically, prices revert toward measures of their own fundamental values more
rapidly than would be predicted by models with constant risk premia.1
In this paper we focus on another variable that seems to have substantial, but less-
well_known predictive power for excess returns: the short-term interest rate.2 When the
U.S. short rate is high, excess returns on foreign exchange, stocks, bonds, and commodities
all appear simultaneously to be low. This apparent systematic correlation of the short rate
with excess returns across assets is very different from the tendency for individual asset
prices to revert toward their own fundamentals. Whereas mean reversion might be sug-
gestive of idiosyncratic predictable components in prices, the forecastability of alternative-
asset returns using interest rates is evidence of a predictable component that is common
across markets. This common component implies that higher short-term interest rates
are associated either with relatively lower risk of holding other assets, or with excessively
optimistic expectations that these alternative assets will match the high promised return
'Cutler, Poterba, and Summer, (1989) present result. on mean reversion for four different mazks: stock. bond, foreiin
.xcbane and commodities. Flood Ilodrickand Kaplan (1988), K.im and Stambaugh (1986), Campbell and Shiller (1986),
Pokrba and Summer, (1988), and Fame and Fr.nth (1988,., b) document lb. tendency for mean rsver,*on In th. stock market.
HuisInga (1986) investigate, mean reversion in real .xthane rat...
2S.veraI papers hays explored the interest rates predictive power for c.rtarn asset return,. S.., for example, Feraon (1989).
1

on short-term deposits.
This paper first documents the ability of short rates to forecast returns on a number
of assets. We present evidence in the foreign exchange, stock, bond, and commodity
markets that excess returns are low when short rates are high. The magnitude of the effect
appears both substantial and very similar across markets: a one-percentage-point increase
in the (annualized) short rate is associated on average with about a three-percentage-point
reduction in (annualized) excess returns over the same horizon.3
We then go on to report positive cross-market evidence that consistently suggests this
forecastability is not generated by risk. Specifically, we use a variety of survey measures of
unexpected holding returns in the foreign exchange and bond markets as a complement to
the usual approach of studying total holding returns. The survey measures —unlike total
excess returns — do not include a risk premium, and therefore can provide independent
information on the importance of risk as an explanation for the predictability we document.
The results from these data are striking. First, in almost every case in which surveys
are available, we find that the survey expected returns are informative, in that, ceteris
paribus, they are highly positively correlated with short-term interest rates (as would be
suggested by simple models of relative asset pricing). The implication is that when short
rates are high, expected nominal returns on alternative assets also tend to be high. Second,
for explaining predictable excess returns it makes no difference whether the survey unex-
pected returns or total excess holding returns are used: the predictable component in the
two measures is the same. Thus, unless the surveys happen to mismeasure systematically
the market's expectation in such a way that the measurement error is perfectly correlated
with the risk premium, time-variation in risk cannot explain our results.
Taken together, these findings may suggest that waves of optimism and pessimism
can strike numerons speculative markets at one time, rather than merely affecting isolated
* Our r..Wta us strsnthensct by the meny studiss in diff.rtmszk.t.thet d.n,onast. bu, of similar magnitud in the
forecast. Implied by forward rste.. The .jmilarie, betwes, those result, and our. are di,ct.ed in sub.squ.nt section..
2