NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MONETARY TRANSMISSION THROUGH BANK SECURITIES PORTFOLIOS
Daniel Greenwald
John Krainer
Pascal Paul
Working Paper 32449
http://www.nber.org/papers/w32449
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2024
The authors have no relevant material relationships to disclose. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2024 by Daniel Greenwald, John Krainer, and Pascal Paul. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Monetary Transmission Through Bank Securities Portfolios
Daniel Greenwald, John Krainer, and Pascal Paul
NBER Working Paper No. 32449
May 2024
JEL No. E32,E43,E44,E51,E52,E60,G21,G32
ABSTRACT
We study the transmission of monetary policy through bank securities portfolios using granular
supervisory data on U.S. bank securities, hedging positions, and corporate credit. Banks that
experienced larger losses on their securities during the 2022-2023 monetary tightening cycle
extended less credit to firms. This spillover effect was stronger for available-for-sale securities,
unhedged securities, and banks that must include unrealized gains and losses in their regulatory
capital. A structural model, disciplined by our cross-sectional regression estimates, shows that
interest rate transmission is stronger the more banks are required to adjust their regulatory capital
for unrealized value changes of securities.
Daniel Greenwald Pascal Paul
Kaufman Management Center Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
44 West Fourth Street, Office 9-97 101 Market Street
United States San Francisco, CA 94105
New York, NY 10012 United States
and NBER Pascal.Paul@sf.frb.org
dlg340@stern.nyu.edu
John Krainer
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
P.O. Box 7702
San Francisco, CA 94120
john.r.krainer@frb.gov
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w32449

1 Introduction
In March 2023, the United States experienced one of the largest bank failures in decades
asdepositorsranonSiliconValleyBank(SVB).Inthelead-uptoitsfailure,SVBhadmain-
tainedalargeportfoliooflong-termsecurities. Asinterestratesroserapidlyin2022,mar-
ket prices of these securities plummeted, generating unrealized losses that were widely
believedtohavetriggeredtherun.
Theseeventshaveputtheregulatorytreatmentofbanksecuritiesunderthespotlight.
Under U.S. regulation, unrealized losses on SVB’s securities did not pass through to its
regulatory capital, making SVB appear relatively well capitalized from a regulatory per-
spectivedespiteitsfragileposition. Inlightofthis,adiscussionhasbeensparkedamong
academics and policymakers to enlarge the set of securities whose value changes affect
regulatorycapital.1 Withsuchapolicychange,banksexperiencingmarketlossesonsecu-
ritieswouldbepressuredtoimprovetheircapitalratios,forexamplebyraisingadditional
equity,toavoidviolatingtheirregulatorycapitalrequirements. Inturn,animprovedcap-
italpositioncouldlowertheprobabilityofasubsequentbankrunorfailure.2
At the same time, recognizing security market losses in regulatory capital could have
important consequences for the supply of credit. If banks are reluctant to raise capital,
they can instead cut lending to households and firms, thereby reducing risk-weighted
assets and improving their capital ratios. If so, the resulting contraction in credit supply
mayalsoreducefirminvestmentandhouseholdconsumption,affectingoveralleconomic
activity. Asaresult,theaccountingtreatmentofunrealizedgainsandlossescaninfluence
thepass-throughfrombanksecuritiesvaluestotherealeconomy.
Inthispaper,weexplorethischannel,studyinghowtheregulatoryaccountingframe-
workinfluencestransmissionfrominterestrates,throughsecuritiesvaluesandregulatory
capital,intofirmcreditandinvestment. Ourapproachcombinesgranularadministrative
datawithastructuralmodelthatallowsustocomparepolicyregimes. Forourempirical
analysis, we construct a novel data set combining supervisory data on securities portfo-
lios, hedging positions, and corporate credit for large U.S. banks from the Federal Re-
serve’s Y-14Q data set, which is collected for the purpose of stress-testing. These data
1See,forinstance,arecentsurveyconductedbytheKentClarkCenteratChicagoBooth:https://www.
kentclarkcenter.org/surveys/banks-business-model/. Asimilardebateaboutmarkingbankassetsto
market took place after the 2007-09 financial crisis, see, e.g., Allen and Carletti (2008), Heaton, Lucas and
McDonald(2010),andLauxandLeuz(2010).
2Forexample,suchargumentsaremadeintheReviewoftheFederalReserve’sSupervisionandRegu-
lationofSiliconValleyBank(page89)andinarecentspeechbyChairmanoftheFDICMartinJ.Gruenberg,
see: https://www.fdic.gov/news/speeches/2023/spjun2223.html and https://www.federalreserve.
gov/publications/files/svb-review-20230428.pdf
1

give us an unparalleled view, not only into the various credit relationships, but also into
the securities holdings of banks, allowing us to observe the specific securities held, their
gainsandlossesovertime,aswellastheirassociatedaccountinghedges.
To begin, we document differences in the regulatory treatment of the banks within
our data and their influence on investment decisions. The larger banks, labeled AOCI-
Capital (AC) banks, must include unrealized gains and losses on their available-for-sale
(AFS)securitiesintheirregulatorycapital,whilethesmallerbanksinoursample,referred
toasnon-AOCI-Capital(NC)banks,areexemptfromthisrequirement.3 Thisdifferential
regulatory treatment appears to influence banks’ securities choices. During the period of
low interest rates in 2020 and 2021, AC banks increased their security holdings by much
less than NC banks, and sharply raised both the fraction of their securities recorded as
held-to-maturity(HTM)andtheportionoftheirAFSsecuritiesthatwerehedged.4 These
resultsareconsistentwithACbanksmakingeffortstoavoidexposureoftheirregulatory
capitaltosecurityvaluefluctuations.
In our main set of empirical results, we measure the effect of changes in securities
values on bank credit supply, and how this varies with the regulatory treatment of those
securities. We focus on the 2022-2023 monetary tightening episode, which featured large
declines in the value of securities, and the consequences for bank credit to nonfinancial
firms. Using the fixed effects approach of Khwaja and Mian (2008) that allows us to
controlforfirmcreditdemand,wefindthatbanksthatexperiencedlargervaluelosseson
their AFS portfolios extended relatively less credit to firms. The effect is sizable, with a
$1 price decline leading to a relative credit contraction of around 20 cents. However, we
obtainsubstantiallysmallerandinsignificantresultsforvaluechangesofHTMsecurities
that, unlike AFS securities, do not affect regulatory capital at any bank.5 Differentiating
AFS securities by whether they are hedged against interest rate risk, we further find that
our baseline results are driven by unhedged securities, while value changes of hedged
securities,whichalsodonotimpactregulatorycapital,exhibitasmallerandinsignificant
crowdingouteffectonfirmcredit.
Next, we exploit the fact that changes in AFS values at AC banks, but not NC banks,
passthroughintoregulatorycapitaltodirectlytestourregulatorycapitalmechanism. We
3These regulations have evolved in recent years, and the turmoil around SVB reignited a debate on
whethertoenlargethesetofbanksthatneedtorecognizesuchunrealizedgainsandlossesintheirregu-
latorycapital. See,forexample,theReviewoftheFederalReserve’sSupervisionandRegulationofSilicon
ValleyBank(page3)andtheproposedreformstobankcapitalrequirementsbyViceChairforSupervision
Michael Barr: https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/svb-review-20230428.pdf and
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/barr20230710a.htm.
4SeealsorelatedevidencebyFusterandVickery(2018)andKim,KimandRyan(2019).
5Orame,RamcharanandRobatto(2023)findsimilarresultsusingEuropeandata.
2