NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A SHARED INTEREST:
DO BONDS STRENGTHEN EQUITY MONITORING?
Todd A. Gormley
Manish Jha
Working Paper 32530
http://www.nber.org/papers/w32530
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2024
This paper was previously circulated under the title “Bonds Lie in the Portfolio of the Beholder: Do
Bonds Affect Equity Monitoring?” We thank Zhi Da, Alex Edmans, Eli Fich, Peter Iliev, Yelena
Larkin, Tao Li, and seminar participants at the Financial Intermediation Research Society Annual
Meeting, Financial Research Association early ideas session, Florida State University Truist Beach
Conference, Georgia State University, and Washington University in St. Louis, for helpful
comments. This research received no specific grant from funding agencies in the public,
commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2024 by Todd A. Gormley and Manish Jha. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

A Shared Interest: Do Bonds Strengthen Equity Monitoring?
Todd A. Gormley and Manish Jha
NBER Working Paper No. 32530
May 2024
JEL No. G23, G30, G32, G34, K22
ABSTRACT
Institutional investors conduct more governance research and are less likely to follow proxy advisor
vote recommendations when a company’s bonds comprise a larger share of their assets. These
findings are driven by bond holdings, shareholder proposals, and companies where fixed-income
managers are more likely to be attentive and share an interest with equity investors in improving
governance. The findings do not concentrate on companies or shareholder proposals where
creditor-shareholder conflicts are likely. Overall, the findings suggest that corporate bond holdings
influence how actively institutions monitor their equity positions and contribute to institutions’
overall incentive to be engaged stewards.
Todd A. Gormley
Washington University in St. Louis
Olin Business School
and NBER
gormley@wustl.edu
Manish Jha
Georgia State University
mjha@gsu.edu

“[I]t can be challenging for investors to consider how to adopt their stewardship
practices to include fixed income… Yet in many areas of corporate governance, there can
be a significant alignment of interest that supports engagement on behalf of all financial
stakeholders, both creditors and shareholders.”
— George S. Dallas, Policy Director at International Corporate Governance Network
I.Introduction
The increasing size of institutional investors, who now hold around 70% of public US
firms’ outstanding equity, raises questions about whether they are effective stewards for equity
investors. For example, the three largest mutual fund families in total net assets (Vanguard,
Fidelity, and BlackRock) hold equity positions in around 5,000 US companies, casting doubt on
their ability to monitor every company in their massive portfolios. Because these institutions can
be influential (e.g., Appel, Gormley, and Keim (2016), Gormley, Gupta, Matsa, Mortal, and
Yang (2023)), it is essential to understand when they will be attentive owners and engaged
stewards. However, the factors that affect institutional investors’ stewardship activities are
poorly understood, including whether institutional investors prioritize overall portfolio returns or
the returns for individual holdings (e.g., Matvos and Ostrovsky (2008), Harford, Jenter, and Li
(2011)). This paper analyzes whether institutions’ corporate bond holdings affect how actively
they monitor their equity positions.
Institutions offer various mutual fund and exchange-traded fund (ETF) options to
investors (e.g., equity-only, bond-only, and mixed-asset), and corporate bond holdings often
comprise a significant component of institutional investors’ holdings. For example, at the end of
2020, one-fourth of US mutual funds and ETFs held corporate bonds, with more than half of
those funds holding both equity and bonds. Moreover, 36.2% of institutions casting votes on
contentious shareholder proposals between 2008 and 2020 also held a bond position in the
1

underlying firm. That bond position accounted for, on average, 28.9% of the institution’s
exposure to the firm.
Despite corporate bonds’ economic importance for institutional investors, the study of
factors motivating institutional investors’ stewardship activities often ignores their bond
positions. For example, proposed measures of institutional investors’ incentive to be engaged
stewards tend to focus solely on institutions’ equity holdings (e.g., Chen, Harford, and Li (2007),
Fich, Harford, and Tran (2015), Lewellen and Lewellen (2021)). And when considered, the
potential importance of institutions’ bond positions is often limited to their ability to create
conflicts of interest (e.g., Keswani, Tran, and Volpin (2021)).
However, there are several reasons why bond holdings might affect how actively
institutions vote and monitor their equity positions and in ways that do not necessarily conflict
with shareholders’ interests. First, there are many situations where being an engaged steward can
be value-enhancing for both holdings. Hence, institutions with a bond position will have a
greater monitoring motive, all else equal, because engagements that improve a firm’s
fundamental value will improve the value of both its bonds and equity. Second, bondholders
have incentives to encourage active voting by their equity counterparts. Bond holdings are more
sensitive to long-term viability risks and harder to exit, thus increasing the importance of direct
engagement.1 Third, fixed-income managers do research on companies’ default risk. If this
research is shared internally within the fund family and complementary to research conducted by
1 Consistent with this, the lead governance director at a prominent institutional investor described managers with bond
positions as more “paranoid and pessimistic” than equity-only managers. Thus, bond managers’ presence within the
fund family resulted in added pressure for his governance division to monitor firms closely.
2