NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
UNDERSTANDING EXPERT CHOICES USING DECISION TIME
David Card
Stefano DellaVigna
Chenxi Jiang
Dmitry Taubinsky
Working Paper 32515
http://www.nber.org/papers/w32515
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2024
We thank Carlos Alos-Ferrer, Juan Carrillo, Benjamin Enke, Cary Frydman, Ian Krajbich,
Alessandro Lizzeri, Massimo Marinacci, Nick Netzer, Pietro Ortoleva, Philipp Strack, and
participants in seminars at Bocconi, Cornell, Northwestern (Kellogg), NUS, Princeton, the ASSA
2024 conference, the AFE Conference, the University of Chicago, USC, and the University of
Zurich for helpful comments. We are grateful to Rohan Jha and Christopher Lim for outstanding
research assistance. We also thank Raj Chetty, Emmanuel Saez, and Laszlo Sandor for sharing
data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2024 by David Card, Stefano DellaVigna, Chenxi Jiang, and Dmitry Taubinsky. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Understanding Expert Choices Using Decision Time
David Card, Stefano DellaVigna, Chenxi Jiang, and Dmitry Taubinsky
NBER Working Paper No. 32515
May 2024
JEL No. D03,O30
ABSTRACT
Laboratory experiments find a robust relationship between decision times and perceived values
of alternatives. This paper investigates how these findings translate to experts' decision making
and information acquisition in the field. In a stylized model of expert choice between two
alternatives, we show that (i) less-commonly chosen alternatives are more likely to be chosen
later than earlier; (ii) decision time is higher when the likelihood of choosing each alternative is
closer to fifty percent; and (iii) the ultimate quality of the chosen alternative may increase or
decrease with decision time, depending on whether earlier or later signals are more informative.
We test these predictions in the editorial setting, where we observe proxies for paper quality and
signals available to editors. We document that (i) the probability of a positive decision rises with
decision time; (ii) average decision time is higher when our estimated probability of a positive
decision is closer to fifty percent; and (iii) paper quality is positively (negatively) related to
decision time for papers with Reject (R&R) decisions. Structural estimates show that the
additional information acquired in editorial delays is modest, and has little impact on the quality
of decisions.
David Card Chenxi Jiang
Department of Economics University of California, Berkeley
549 Evans Hall, #3880 chenxjiang@berkeley.edu
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880 Dmitry Taubinsky
and NBER University of California, Berkeley
card@econ.berkeley.edu Department of Economics
530 Evans Hall #3880
Stefano DellaVigna Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
University of California, Berkeley and NBER
Department of Economics dmitry.taubinsky@berkeley.edu
549 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
sdellavi@econ.berkeley.edu

A long literature in psychology, going back at least to Dashiell (1937), provides evidence of
a “chronometric effect” in decision-making: in various laboratory tasks, subjects take longer
to choose between items with more similar evaluations, as they introspect to ascertain their
preferences. A related literature in neuroscience models the time to a decision—often involv-
ing the decoding of complex images—using drift-diffusion models (DDMs, e.g., Busemeyer,
1985; Ratcliff and Rouder, 1998; Milosavljevic et al., 2010; Krajbich et al., 2010, 2012). In
these models, faster decisions are more likely to be the ones where subjects received a strong
signal favoring one of the options, and thus the speed of decision provides information on
the subject preferences.
Recent studies by economists have also connected decision times to choices in lab-based
settings (e.g., Krajbich et al., 2014; Chabris et al., 2008; Clithero, 2018a,b; Schotter and
Trevino, 2021; Frydman and Krajbich, 2022; Reshidi et al., 2024; Alós-Ferrer and Garagnani,
forthcoming). It remains an open question, however, whether decision times can contribute
to a better understanding of choices in the field.1 One potential barrier is that while psy-
chologists typically assume that delays reflect subjects using introspection to determine their
preferences for the alternatives, in field settings delays may also reflect more extensive in-
formation gathering, such as calling on additional experts or gathering external information
on a case. Moreover, while the laboratory provides a measure of decision time exclusively
devoted to a particular choice, delays in the field also include the time spent on alternative,
intervening decisions. For example, only a fraction of the decision time of editors and ref-
erees is actively spent on evaluating a paper. Indeed, some cognitive scientists have warned
explicitly about the usefulness of DDM’s outside of contexts with very short decision hori-
zons: “The [drift-diffusion] model should be applied only to relatively fast two-choice decisions
(mean RTs less than about 1000 to 1500 ms)” (Ratcliff and McKoon, 2008).
Inthispaper, weinvestigatewhethertheinsightsfromlab-basedsettingsextendtoexpert
decision making in the field. Guided by a stylized model of optimal information acquisition,
we analyze editorial decisions at four leading economics journals. We provide both reduced-
form and structural estimates of the relationship between decision time and the decisions
and recommendations made by editors and referees.
The intuition of our model is simple. Consider an expert—for example, a journal editor,
a patent officer, or an employer—who is tasked with making an up or down decision on
a prospect such as a submitted paper, a patent filing, or a job application. The expert
performsaninitialevaluation(forexample, readingthefirstrefereereportonthepaper), and
then decides whether to make the decision with only that information, or collect additional
information. Collecting additional information involves costly delays, but allows a more
1AmongthefewotherstudiesofdecisiontimeinfieldbehaviorsaretheanalysisofeBaybiddingtimesin
Cotet and Krajbich (2021) and of chess moves in Sunde et al. (2022). Also related is Canen and Iaryczower
(2024), who study deliberation by committees.
1

informed decision. The value of additional information will be highest when the initial
evaluation is close to the margin. Thus, an early decision implies that the initial information
was strongly positive or strongly negative. In this way, decision time conveys information
on the strength of the case as initially assessed by the expert.
This model makes three main predictions about the relationship between expert choices
and decision time. The first is that the likelihood of choosing each alternative moves toward
fifty percent as more information is acquired, and thus with decision time. Intuitively,
alternatives that are ex-ante estimated to have a lower payoff will not be chosen in the
absence of additional information, but their likelihood of getting chosen increases with more
information. In the editorial setting, where R&R decisions are relatively uncommon, the
prediction is that the likelihood of an R&R decision should increase with time.
A second prediction mirrors the “chronometric effect” that is extensively documented in
laboratory studies (Clithero, 2018b). Building on Alós-Ferrer et al. (2021), who formalize
this effect to concern the ex-post realized utility of each alternative, we use our model of
optimal informationacquisition to derive a micro-foundedvariation thatcan be implemented
infieldsettings,whereex-postedrealizedutilitycannotbeperfectlyobserved. Ourprediction
concerns how decision times are related to the expected quality and likelihood of choosing
each alternative, conditional on the information observed by the analyst. In the context of
our editorial setting, our prediction is that under some regularity conditions, the closer an
analyst’s estimate of the paper receiving an R&R is to fifty percent, the more likely the
expert is to delay to acquire additional information.
The third prediction concerns the relationship between decision time and the ultimate
payoff from each alternative. We show that this depends on two competing forces. The first
is a selection effect that arises from the tendency to make an early decision in cases with
the strongest initial signals (positive or negative). The second is a learning effect that arises
because delayed decisions are made with extra information. We show that the selection effect
dominates if early signals are more informative, while the learning effect dominates if later
signals are more informative. In the former case, the implication for our editorial setting
is that for papers with R&R decisions, quality will decrease with decision times, while for
papers with Reject decisions, quality will increase.
Guided by this stylized model, we analyze expert choices and decision times in the edi-
torial setting, where we observe detailed information on decisions and decision times as well
as a proxy for the quality of each choice. We study decision making at four high-impact
economics journals: the Quarterly Journal of the Economics, the Review of Economic Stud-
ies, the Review of Economics and Statistics, and the Journal of the European Economic
Association. For over 15,000 non-desk-rejected submissions, we observe the following: (i)
recommendations of the referees and the editor’s decision to reject the paper or invite a
2