NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EFFECTS OF SHORT-TERM RENTAL REGULATION:
INSIGHTS FROM CHICAGO
Ginger Zhe Jin
Liad Wagman
Mengyi Zhong
Working Paper 32537
http://www.nber.org/papers/w32537
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2024, Revised July 2024
We are grateful to AirDNA and Smith Travel Research for providing the data, and to our home
universities as well as the Illinois Institute of Technology (Wagman’s former employer while we
conducted part of the research) for financial support. Giacomo Calzolari, Pierre Dubois, Peter
Coles, one anonymous referee, and participants at the 2023 European Association for Research in
Industrial Economics (EARIE) annual conference, the 2023 Conference in Honor of V. Joseph
Hotz at Duke University, and the 2024 International Industrial Organization Conference (IIOC)
have provided constructive comments. We also received useful comments from a number of
Airbnb employees. The content and analyses in this paper reflect the authors’ own work and do
not relate to any institution or organization with whom the authors are affiliated. None of us has a
financial relationship with Airbnb or competing short term rental platforms. All rights reserved.
All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2024 by Ginger Zhe Jin, Liad Wagman, and Mengyi Zhong. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effects of Short-Term Rental Regulation: Insights from Chicago
Ginger Zhe Jin, Liad Wagman, and Mengyi Zhong
NBER Working Paper No. 32537
June 2024, Revised July 2024
JEL No. K23,L51,L86,R12,R31
ABSTRACT
We provide an in-depth study of short-term rental (STR) regulation in Chicago. While many
municipalities choose between outright bans or laissez-faire strategies concerning STR activities,
Chicago pioneered a middle-ground ordinance, enabling the market to exist with limitations and
registrations, and imposing a new tax. We show that compared to three control cities, the number
of active Airbnb listings in Chicago declined 16.4% in the two years after the ordinance, but this
effect is only significant after the city began receiving detailed data feeds from STR platforms.
We further demonstrate (i) localized reductions in burglaries near buildings that prohibit STR
listings as part of a new capability of the ordinance,(ii) Airbnb revenues declined more in zip
codes with above-median hotel revenues, and (iii) Chicago’s middle ground approach generated
different and nuanced effects on different STR stakeholders, including the city itself in terms of
its STR tax revenues.
Ginger Zhe Jin Mengyi Zhong
University of Maryland myzhong6@umd.edu
Department of Economics
College Park, MD 20742-7211
and NBER
ginger@umd.edu
Liad Wagman
Lally School of Management
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
110 8th Street
Troy, NY 12180-3590
wagman@rpi.edu

1 Introduction
Thesurgeinhome-sharingserviceshassparkedvigorousdebateonwhetherandhowtoregulateshort-term
rental(STR)markets. SincethelaunchofVRBOin1995andAirbnbin2008,STRplatformshaveenabled
hosts to list entire homes, private rooms, and shared spaces for short-term stays. Currently, STR platforms
provide more listings than the top 5 hotel brands combined. Airbnb alone had more than 7 million rental
listingsin2022,distributedacross100,000citiesin220countries(Mariotti,2023).
As shown by Farronato and Fradkin (2022), Airbnb, the largest STR platform in the US, enables trav-
elers to access alternative accommodation options that are less expensive and more diverse than hotels,
whileenablinghoststobetterutilizetheirsurpluscapacityandgenerateadditionalrevenues. STRbookings
also provide a revenue source for local governments. According to a report published by Airbnb in April
2023 (Airbnb, 2023), the platform has collected and remitted over $7 billion in tourism taxes around the
world; in the US alone, Airbnb has collected and remitted over $1.9 billion in tourism taxes in the year of
2022.
Despite these benefits, the rapid expansion of STR listings has prompted intensive debates due to the
externalitiestheygenerate. Inparticular,profitableSTRmarketslureinvestorsintoacquiringpropertiesand
dwellingstoavailtoothersforashortterm. Consequently,themarketcomprisesnotonlycasualhoststhat
sharetheirhomesforadditionalincomebutalsocommercialoperatorsthatrunfull-fledgedSTRbusinesses
withmultiplepropertiesinoneormorecities. ThecontentionisthatSTRshavedisruptedtheconventional
lodging industry, diminished the availability of long-term rental (LTR) dwellings, and adversely affected
the accessibility and affordability of LTR housing for local residents (Gurran and Phibbs, 2017). More-
over, residents have complained about increased noise, traffic congestion, parking and waste management
difficulties, and safety concerns because STR listings frequently attract transient visitors to local residen-
tial areas (Gallagher, 2018; Gurran and Phibbs, 2017). Residents in Venice and Barcelona even organized
anti-tourismmarchestovoicetheirangertowardrisingrentsandexcessivetransiencyintheircommunities
(Reed,2017).
TheseconcernshavemotivatedmanylocalgovernmentstoadoptorconsiderSTRregulations,butregu-
latingSTRmarketsturnsouttobeachallengingtask. Manycities,suchasWashingtonD.C.,haveinitiated
thediscussiononSTRregulationrelativelyearly,buttookyearstoenactanewSTRlawbecauseofobjec-
tionsfromplatformsandhosts,aswellasdifficultieswithenforcement. ForcitiesthatdidenactanSTRlaw
andbeganenforcement,itremainsunclearwhethertheregulationiseffectiveandwhetherithasunintended
effectsonhosts,guests,andlocalresidents.
UsingSTRdatafromChicago,thispaperprovidesanin-depthstudyontheimpactofSTRregulation.1
ChicagowasoneofthefirstUScitiesthatattemptedtoregulateSTRactivitiesinacomprehensiveway. The
city’sordinanceaimstoallowamarketforSTRlistingsontheonehandwhileaddressingSTR-relatedcon-
cerns regarding public safety, consumer protection, and affordable housing for local residents on the other.
Thisapproachisnotablydifferentfromotherlargecities,suchasNewYorkCity,withregulationsinplace
that nearly ban STR activities and any corresponding tax revenue collection, yet face severe enforcement
difficulties.2
1WerefertoSTRregulationasordinance,regulationandlegislationinterchangeably.
2NewYorkState,includingNewYorkCity,haspracticallybannedentire-homeSTRlistingsunlessthedwelling’spermanent
1

In particular, Chicago’s STR legislation requires hosts to register and follow strict regulations. These
regulations limit the number of units that can be offered as STR in a multi-unit building and mandate
that STR hosts provide insurance and meet safety standards, such as installing smoke detectors and fire
extinguishers. Chicago also imposes an additional tax surcharge on STR bookings on top of Chicago’s
overall17.4percenthotelaccommodationtax(which, amongothers, alsoincludesstateandcountytaxes).
Besides the citywide regulation, Chicago facilitates locality-specific STR restrictions based on the varying
needs of communities. For example, owners of a residential building may choose to add the building to
the city’s Prohibited Buildings List so that no STR listings are allowed in that building.3 Such a hybrid
approach provides an excellent opportunity to study the effectiveness of different policies concerning STR
activities. Another unique feature of Chicago is its collaboration with STR platforms: as of March 2017,
nine months after its June 2016 STR legislation was enacted, Chicago began receiving direct data feeds
from STR platforms to enhance its enforcement capability. The collaborative and relatively permissive
mentality for STR listings, the city’s hybrid approach, combined with STR-specific tax surcharge and data
feedsfromSTRplatforms, highlightChicago’scommitmenttoprovidingarelativelyflexibleandeffective
STRregulation.
We analyze Chicago’s regulation from three perspectives: First, is the STR regulation effective in con-
trollingthenumberofactiveSTRlistings? IsenactingtheregulationsufficienttoregulateSTRlistings, or
areadditionalstepsneeded? Second,intermsofeconomicperformance,howdoestheregulationaffectthe
price, revenue, and quality of STR listings that remain in the market? How does it affect Airbnb’s Gross
BookValue(GBV)inChicago? HowdoesitaffectthetaxrevenuethatlocalgovernmentscollectfromSTR
bookings in Chicago? Third, for other stakeholders aside from STR platforms, does the STR regulation
boost hotel revenues? Is the regulation effective in reducing local crime rates in Chicago? Due to data
limitations,ourresearchquestionscannotcoverallofthepotentialexternalitiesfromSTRactivities,butthe
above perspectives can provide a balanced view on the effects of STR regulation on different stakeholders
and offer valuable insights to other local jurisdictions as they aim to update and implement their own STR
policies.
By comparing Airbnb listings in Chicago with three other large US cities from January 2016 to May
2018, we show that Chicago’s regulation has led to a 16.4% decline in the total number of active listings,
and this decline is driven by both more exits and fewer entries in Chicago. Conditional on the listings
thathaveexistedasofJanuary2016,wefurtherdistinguishprofessionalandindividualhostsdependingon
whethertheyoperatedthreeormorepropertiesacrossallsampledcitiesbeforetheregulation. Forthelistings
operatedbyindividualhosts,theprobabilityofbeingactivedecreasesassoonasthelegislationwasenacted;
butforlistingsmanagedbyprofessionalhosts, theprobabilityofbeingactivedidnotstartdecreasinguntil
theenforcementwassupplementedbydatafeedsfromSTRplatforms. Moreover,afterAirbnbbegansharing
occupantispresentduringtheguest’sstay.SeeJiaandWagman(2020)forananalysisoftheeffectoftwoenforcementcampaigns
inManhattan.InSeptember2023,NYCbeganenforcingitsJanuary2022STRlaw,whichtheWallStreetJournaldescribesasade
factobanofSTRsduetoanumberofstringentrequirementsinthelaw.SeeWallStreetJournal“NewYorkCity’s’DeFactoBan’
onAirbnb”(2023/9/5)athttps://www.wsj.com/podcasts/the-journal/new-york-citys-de-facto-ban-on-airbnb/
b1ec6fd1-dc6a-4819-b231-9110918b8d85.
3AsdetailedinSection2,domeprecinctsmayalsoapplytobeaRestrictedResidentialZone(RRZ),whichallowsexistingSTR
listingstocontinueoperatingbutprohibitsnewSTRlistings. Thisisstricterthanthecitywiderequirementbutlessstrictthana
prohibitedbuilding.
2