NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MONETARY POLICY ALONG THE YIELD CURVE:
WHY CAN CENTRAL BANKS AFFECT LONG-TERM REAL RATES?
Paul Beaudry
Paolo Cavallino
Tim Willems
Working Paper 32511
http://www.nber.org/papers/w32511
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2024, Revised May 2025
This is a revised version of a paper first circulated under the title \Life-cycle forces make monetary
policy transmission wealth-centric" (NBER WP No. 32511, May 2024). We thank Micha l Brzoza-
Brzezina, Heejeong Kim, Tatiana Kirsanova, Christos Koulovatianos, and Christian Wolf for their
insightful conference discussions. Further thanks to Fernando Boffi, Ricardo Caballero, Mick
Devereux, Wouter den Haan, Mike Joyce, Thijs Knaap, Étienne Latulippe, Jean-Paul L'Huillier,
Ben Moll, Alessandro Rebucci, and various audiences for useful comments. The views expressed in
this paper are those of the authors, and not necessarily those of the BIS, the Bank of England or its
committees, nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2024 Bank for International Settlements, circulated with permission. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Monetary Policy Along the Yield Curve: Why Can Central Banks Affect Long-Term Real
Rates?
Paul Beaudry, Paolo Cavallino, and Tim Willems
NBER Working Paper No. 32511
May 2024, Revised May 2025
JEL No. E21, E43, E52, G51
ABSTRACT
Evidence suggests that monetary policy can affect long-term real interest rates, but it is not clear
what drives this outcome. We argue this occurs because very persistent policy-induced interest rate
changes may have only weak effects on activity. This can arise when consumption-savings
decisions are not primarily driven by intertemporal substitution, but also by life-cycle forces
associated with retirement. Within such an environment, we show that the impact of highly
persistent monetary policy shocks on activity is determined by two forces: an asset valuation effect,
and the response of the average marginal propensity to consume out of financial wealth. Our
quantitative analysis indicates that these forces likely cancel each other out, allowing monetary
policy to (unconsciously) drive trends in long-run real rates. Our findings also imply that very
precise knowledge of r* might not be essential to the successful conduct of monetary policy.
Paul Beaudry Tim Willems
University of British Columbia Bank of England
Vancouver School of Economics and Centre for Macroeconomics
Department of Economics tim.willems@bankofengland.co.uk
and NBER
Paul.Beaudry@ubc.ca
Paolo Cavallino
Bank for International Settlements
paolo.cavallino@bis.org

1 Introduction
Changes in long-term real rates continue to receive considerable attention. This includes
understanding the secular decline observed in the decades prior to Covid, as well as recent
changes in the opposite direction. The main class of explanations for these movements
are also real in nature, such as productivity growth, demographics, income inequality,
and changes in the demand and supply of safe assets. One factor that is often dismissed
is monetary policy – driven by the view that most long-term real economic outcomes are
invariant to monetary policy beyond horizons long enough to allow prices to be reset.
From this perspective, it is puzzling that long-term real rates appear rather sensitive
to changes in a central bank’s policy rate. Cochrane and Piazzesi (2002), Hanson and
Stein (2015), and Nakamura and Steinsson (2018) provide evidence of such sensitivity in
US data, while Hansen, McMahon, and Tong (2019) do so for the UK; earlier evidence
by Skinner and Zettelmeyer (1995) reported similar findings for not only the US and UK,
but also Germany and France.1
An even greater challenge to the standard view is the striking observation that all
of the post-1980 decline in long-term US rates is driven by movements occurring in a
narrow 3-day window around FOMC meetings (Hillenbrand, 2023). One interpretation is
that central banks have superior information on the real determinants of long-term rates
and that its announcements convey this information. This explanation has the appealing
property of being consistent with the standard view that long-term real rates are driven
by real forces. However, it has the less attractive property of relying on central banks
having substantial private information – or rare expertise – which is not directly available
to markets. This, despite the latter having access to much of the same models and data,
whilst also being populated by many former central bank employees.
An alternative, more direct interpretation is that central banks may be able to affect
real rates over long stretches of time. The difficulty with this is in explaining why very
persistent rate changes would not have large effects on activity and inflation.
Within the perspective of New Keynesian models, the main reason central banks are
thought not to be able to affect long-term real rates, relates to their perceived strong
impact on activity. In this class of models, the potency of monetary policy shocks is
increasing in their persistence. Accordingly, if a central bank tried to maintain real rates
away from their “natural” flexible-price level (referred to as r∗) for long periods of time,
1Cochrane and Piazzesi (2002, p.91) nicely summarize the standard view: “Target changes seem to
be accompanied by large changes in long-term interest rates (...) Can the Fed really raise the short rate
1 percent for five years or more, without leading to 1 percent lower inflation that would cancel any effect
on longer yields?”.
2

this would have ever-growing effects on activity and inflation. Recognizing this, monetary
authorities will want to avoid such outcomes, or rapidly correct course when noticing
their long-term stance is away from r∗. As a result, they become de facto constrained to
keeping their long-run policy stance consistent with the real forces determining r∗.
But what if more persistent rate changes are less potent than temporary ones? Could
reduced powers to affect activity in the long run imply greater control over long-term
interest rates? Most importantly, are there reasons to question the notion that more
persistent rate changes are more potent? This paper aims to shed light on these issues.
Tohelpfixideas, letusexpresstherelationshipbetweenpolicy-inducedexcessdemand
and interest rates as follows:
∞
(cid:88)
yˆ = E ψ (r −r∗),
t t j t+1+j
j=0
where yˆ represents deviations in output from its natural level and E (r −r∗) captures
t t t+1+j
expected deviations in real interest rates from the natural rate, r∗. Such a representation
is consistent with – but more general than – that implied by a standard log-linearized New
Keynesian model. Now suppose monetary policy is conducted so that the expected real
ratedeviatesfromr∗ inapersistentfashionaccordingto(r −r∗) = ρ(r −r∗)+(cid:15) . Then,
t t−1 t
the impact effect on excess demand of a unit interest rate shock (denoted Ψ(ρ)) equals the
persistence-weighted sum of horizon j-specific effects ψ , i.e., Ψ(ρ) = (cid:80)∞ ψ ρj. While
j j=0 j
the literature offers many estimates of Ψ(ρ) for low values of ρ, knowing how Ψ(ρ) behaves
as ρ approaches 1 is what is relevant for understanding the effect of persistent deviations
of interest rates from r∗. If Ψ(1) is large, then persistent deviations of r from r∗ create
substantial excess demand and therefore an inflation-targeting central bank would need
to ensure that r converges quickly to r∗. In this sense, r∗ poses a constraint. However,
if Ψ(1) is close to zero, the central bank would have greater ability to keep r persistently
away from r∗ since it would not substantially affect activity and inflation.2
In most infinitely-lived agent models, the potency of monetary policy – as governed
by Ψ(ρ) – strengthens with the shock’s persistence ρ due to the compounded power of
intertemporal substitution.3 However, when thinking about the impact of very persistent
2Very persistent deviations of interest rates from r∗ are most easily conceptualized as changes in the
intercept of a Taylor rule (to the extent that they are not reflecting changes in the true r∗).
3ForthebaselineNewKeynesianmodel,Ψ(1)=−∞. ThishasraisedissuesliketheForwardGuidance
PuzzleandinitiatedapproachesthatleadtoadiscountedEulerequation(DelNegroetal., 2013; McKay
et al., 2016; Gabaix, 2020). However, even with a discounted Euler equation, the potency of a monetary
shock always strengthens with its persistence, i.e., Ψ(cid:48)(ρ) < 0, meaning that Ψ(1) is negative and still
quite sizeable.
3