NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CUSTOM PROXY VOTING ADVICE
Edwin Hu
Nadya Malenko
Jonathon Zytnick
Working Paper 32559
http://www.nber.org/papers/w32559
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2024
We have nothing to disclose. We thank Jill Fisch, Jonathan Kalodimos, Weiling Liu, and
participants at the Clemson ESG and Policy Research Conference, University of Texas Law
School Workshop in Business Law & Economics, UT “Smokey” Mountain Finance Conference,
and 6th Greater Boston Corporate Governance Workshop for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2024 by Edwin Hu, Nadya Malenko, and Jonathon Zytnick. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Custom Proxy Voting Advice
Edwin Hu, Nadya Malenko, and Jonathon Zytnick
NBER Working Paper No. 32559
June 2024
JEL No. D72,G23,G34,G38,K22
ABSTRACT
This paper studies institutional investors’ decision-making using novel data from a major proxy
advisor. We highlight the significant role of customized proxy advice in shaping shareholders’
voting decisions. About 80% of funds receive customized advice, and custom recommendations
differ substantially from benchmark recommendations. We show that customization plays two
key roles. First, it helps shareholders express their ideologies through the vote. Second, it
facilitates shareholders’ decision-making process by reducing the need to pay attention to every
proposal individually and enabling focus on the more important proposals. Customization thus
influences both the aggregation of preferences and the aggregation of information in voting
outcomes. Our findings offer a new perspective on the role of proxy advisors and suggest a shift
away from solely focusing on benchmark recommendations.
Edwin Hu Jonathon Zytnick
University of Virginia School of Law Georgetown University
eddyhu@gmail.com jonathon.zytnick@georgetown.edu
Nadya Malenko
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Carroll School of Management
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and CEPR, ECGI, and FTG
and also NBER
malenko@bc.edu

1. Introduction
How institutional investors arrive at their voting decisions is critical to understanding corporate
stewardship. Yet little is known about shareholders’ decision-making process, as researchers
typically study data on their ex post voting decisions. In this paper, we open the black box of
institutional decision-making by using novel data from a major proxy advisor. We highlight a
previously unexplored role played by proxy advisors in helping institutions arrive at their voting
decisions: the use of custom voting policies. We show that customization can help investors both
express their ideological positions and focus their costly monitoring and governance research on
the proposals that are most important to them.
Institutional investors’ costs of stewardship can be substantial as they face ballots at
thousands of portfolio companies. One way that they can potentially reduce such costs is by hiring
proxy advisors such as ISS or Glass Lewis, which provide research and recommendations as well
as vote execution services. Significant scholarly attention has focused on the influence of proxy
advisors and the concern that many institutions passively follow their recommendations.
Policymakers have taken note, with the SEC going as far as to propose to regulate the use of proxy
advisory services (SEC, 2019).
However, as we highlight in the paper, most institutional investors play an active role in
shaping the voting recommendations they receive from proxy advisors. In particular, they work
with the proxy advisor to develop custom voting policies, i.e., the set of rules and standards to be
applied by the proxy advisor that reflect the shareholder’s voting ideology. These custom policies
allow the proxy advisor to issue custom recommendations, tailored to the client’s preferences and
beliefs. For example, a shareholder may be systematically more or less inclined to consider
environmental and social (ES) issues relative to benchmark recommendations, and this aspect
would then be incorporated into its custom voting policies.1
Using proprietary data from the second largest proxy advisor Glass Lewis, we show that
about 80% of funds use custom voting policies, a departure from the extant literature that focuses
1 As we discuss in Section 3, such custom policies can be either tailored to the individual fund, based, e.g., on the
fund’s voting policies (Couvert, 2021) or be chosen from a menu of pre-determined (which we refer to as “ready-
made”) policies developed by the proxy advisor. For example, Glass Lewis’s ready-made “Climate” policy is to “vote
against the board chair or the chair of the audit committee if a company has not established proper risk oversight of
material environmental and social risks, including those related to climate change”
(https://www.glasslewis.com/voting-policies-current/).
2

on proxy advisors’ benchmark recommendations.2 Funds that customize receive significantly
different recommendations: we estimate that in our sample, custom recommendations differ from
benchmark recommendations in more than 20% of ballots.
Thus, the best way to think about how most institutional investors use proxy advisors is
through a two-stage decision-making process. First, institutions set a custom voting policy, which
helps determine the recommendations they receive from the proxy advisor and translates into the
default votes they cast should they follow these custom recommendations. Second, once the actual
proposals are announced and relevant information is observed, institutions decide whether to
conduct additional research on portfolio companies and whether to deviate from the custom
recommendations.
Given the prevalence of customization it is crucial to understand how it affects voting
outcomes. We argue that customization has implications for two key roles of shareholder voting:
the aggregation of preferences and the aggregation of information. Recent literature shows
substantial heterogeneity among shareholders in their voting ideologies including on
environmental and social issues (e.g., Bolton et al., 2020; Bubb and Catan, 2022; Zytnick, 2023),
which suggests that voting serves a role in aggregating preferences. Our paper is the first to show
that through customization, proxy advisors help shareholders express their preferences and thus
play an important role in preference aggregation. In addition, voting is thought to aggregate
information from multiple shareholders who potentially have access to different signals. Prior
literature focuses on the idea that the proxy advisor provides a common signal and studies how
this signal affects shareholders’ incentives to conduct independent research (e.g., Choi, Fisch, and
Kahan, 2010; Iliev and Lowry, 2015; Malenko and Malenko, 2019). In contrast, our paper argues
that the role of common (benchmark) recommendations may be overemphasized, since proxy
advisors often provide different advice to different shareholders. Moreover, we show that
customization can both increase and decrease shareholders’ incentives for independent research,
further influencing information aggregation.
To formalize these ideas, we build a theoretical framework to study the two-stage decision-
making process of institutions, and then analyze its predictions using proprietary data from Glass
Lewis. In the first stage of our model, a fund whose ideology may differ from that of the proxy
advisor (e.g., the fund is more ESG-friendly), decides whether to pay a cost to customize the
2 While our sample is based on Glass Lewis’s customers, customization is also prevalent among the customers of
another major proxy advisor, ISS. See Section 4 for details.
3