NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FIRMS' PERCEIVED COST OF CAPITAL
Niels Joachim Gormsen
Kilian Huber
Working Paper 32611
http://www.nber.org/papers/w32611
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2024, Revised December 2025
We thank John Campbell, Thummim Cho, Kent Daniel, Joel David, Gene Fama, Xavier Gabaix,
Robin Greenwood, Sam Hanson, Campbell Harvey, Tarek Hassan, John Heaton, Chang-Tai Hsieh,
Ralph Koijen, Eben Lazarus, Christian Leuz, Lira Mota, Tyler Muir, Stefan Nagel, Marina
Niessner, Lasse Pedersen, Mitchell Petersen, Thomas Philippon, Andrei Shleifer, Amir Sufi, Adi
Sunderam, David Thesmar, Rob Vishny, Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, Ivo Welch, and Chen Xue as
well as many seminar and conference participants for useful comments. The research was
supported by the Asness Junior Faculty Fellowship, the Fama Faculty Fellowship, the Fama-Miller
Center, the Lee Economics Program Faculty Fellowship at the University of Chicago, the Danish
Finance Institute, and the Danish National Research Foundation grant no. DNRF167 and
DNRF199. We thank Mary Anderson, Rahul Chauhan, Sonali Mishra, and Esfandiar Rouhani for
outstanding research support. This paper is a substantially revised version of an earlier paper
entitled “Equity Factors and Firms’ Perceived Cost of Capital.” The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2024 by Niels Joachim Gormsen and Kilian Huber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Firms' Perceived Cost of Capital
Niels Joachim Gormsen and Kilian Huber
NBER Working Paper No. 32611
June 2024, Revised December 2025
JEL No. E44, G1, G3, G4, O47
ABSTRACT
We analyze firms’ perceptions of their cost of capital using hand-collected data. We show that firms
with a higher perceived cost of capital invest less and earn higher returns on invested capital,
suggesting that the perceived cost of capital determines the long-run allocation of capital. In
inefficient markets, firms aiming to maximize their current market value should set their perceived
cost of capital equal to the expected returns on their debt and equity. We strongly reject this market-
value maximization benchmark, as little variation in firms’ perceived cost of capital can be
explained by variation in market-based expected returns. Alternatively, firms may aim to maximize
their fair value, which is the value corrected for financial market inefficiencies. We find evidence in
favor of this approach, as a fundamental risk benchmark explains half the variation in the perceived
cost of capital. Most variation in the perceived cost of capital can be explained by firms
incorporating investors’ biased return expectations, which is inconsistent with firms maximizing
their current market value. Using a quantitative model, we find that distortions in the perceived cost
of capital can generate substantial capital misallocation and thereby reduce aggregate productivity.
Niels Joachim Gormsen
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
and NBER
niels.gormsen@chicagobooth.edu
Kilian Huber
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
and NBER
kilianhuber@uchicago.edu

1 Introduction
One of the most important decisions faced by firms is determining how much to invest.
In theory, firms should undertake only projects whose expected return exceeds the
cost of capital. This rule is widespread in academic models, business school teaching,
and corporate practice.
A fundamental challenge with applying this rule is that the cost of capital is
unobserved and there is no unambiguous guidance on how it should be estimated.
For example, one traditional academic recommendation is that firms should use the
expected returns on their debt and equity in financial markets as their cost of capital.
However, to implement this recommendation, firms need to estimate expected returns,
which is difficult to do without bias. Moreover, the traditional recommendation is
often motivated by the idea that financial markets are efficient, which is inconsistent
with empirical evidence. Given that return perceptions are often biased and markets
are inefficient, it is not clear how firms actually set their cost of capital. As a result,
firms’ internally perceived cost of capital—and hence their investment decisions—may
deviate substantially from the benchmarks that have been proposed by researchers.
In this paper, we study firms’ perceptions of their cost of capital based on hand-
collected data. We find that firms with a higher perceived cost of capital have lower
investment rates and higher returns on investment, consistent with firms basing their
investment decisions on their perceived cost of capital. However, firms’ perceived cost
of capital cannot be explained by models in which firms maximize their current value
in financial markets. Instead, the perceived cost of capital is better explained by firms
maximizing their “fair value,” which is the intrinsic value the firm would have absent
mispricing. In addition, firms incorporate analysts’ biased beliefs in their perceived
cost of capital. This leads to deviations between the perceived cost of capital and
benchmarksthatwouldmaximizemarketvaluesorfairvalues. Thedeviationsarelarge
enough to materially influence the allocation of capital. In a general equilibrium model,
the resulting capital misallocation lowers total factor productivity by 5% relative to a
market-value benchmark, but only by 2% relative to a fair-value benchmark based on
the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM).
We start by analyzing how a firm should set its perceived cost of capital. We
use a simple model of inefficient financial markets, in which prices deviate from
intrinsic values because investors have biased beliefs. If a firm wants to maximize
1

its current market value in this setting, the firm’s perceived cost of capital should
equal the “market-based cost of capital,” which is the expected return on the firm’s
debt and equity in financial markets based on full-information rational expectations
(“objective expected returns”). This approach ensures that firms maximize their
current market value, but does not ensure that firms maximize their long-term value
in inefficient markets. Instead, firms may seek to maximize the long-term, fair value
of the company—the value of the firm absent mispricing. Firms can do so by using a
“fair-value cost of capital,” which depends on the fundamental risk of the firm. It may
be calculated using the CAPM or other fundamental risk models, as we discuss below.
We measure firms’ perceptions of their cost of capital using data from corporate
conference calls between firm managers, financial investors, and analysts (see, e.g.,
Hassan et al. 2019 for the use of conference calls in economics). During these calls,
managers sometimes share their internal perceptions of their cost of debt, equity,
and total capital. We collect the data by manually reading call transcripts. The
dataset on the perceived cost of capital contains around 1,500 large firms from 2002
to 2024. The sample is generally representative of the listed firm population except
for a skew toward large firms. The firms for which we observe at least one perceived
cost of capital account for roughly 40% of the total capital stock of Compustat firms
in advanced economies.
The perceived cost of capital observed in our data is associated with the long-run
allocation of capital across firms. We find that firms with a higher perceived cost of
capital have higher returns on invested capital and lower investment rates. These
findings suggest that the perceived cost of capital shapes capital allocation decisions
in the long run, in line with conventional theory. We emphasize, however, that these
findings refer to firms’ long-run investment decisions. In the short run, changes in
the perceived cost of capital do not immediately lead to changes in firm investment
because of stickiness in firms’ required returns on new investments (known as hurdle or
discount rates, see Gormsen and Huber 2025). In the long run, however, the perceived
cost of capital determines firms’ required returns, and hence also their real investment
decisions. In this paper, we focus on the long-run allocation of capital and therefore
the properties of the perceived cost of capital.
We document stylized facts about which factors shape the perceived cost of capital.
In the cross section of firms, the perceived cost of capital is related to a firm’s market
beta, leverage ratio, and size. There is little evidence that firms incorporate the
2