NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANK LENDING AND DEPOSIT CRUNCHES DURING THE GREAT DEPRESSION
Kris James Mitchener
Gary Richardson
Working Paper 32783
http://www.nber.org/papers/w32783
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2024
We thank conference and seminar participants at the University of California – Berkeley, CEPR-
Bank of Norway, Toulouse School of Economics, University of Colorado-Boulder, Université
libre de Bruxelles, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, and Yale University as well as the editor
of this journal and two anonymous referees for helpful comments and suggestions. Joseph
Johnson and Fabrizio Marodin provided invaluable research assistance. The University of
California at Irvine’s Program on Corporate Welfare provided financial support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2024 by Kris James Mitchener and Gary Richardson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Bank Lending and Deposit Crunches during the Great Depression
Kris James Mitchener and Gary Richardson
NBER Working Paper No. 32783
August 2024
JEL No. N1,N10,N12,N2,N22
ABSTRACT
Bank distress was a defining feature of the Great Depression in the United States. Most banks,
however, weathered the storm and remained in operation throughout the contraction. We show
that surviving banks cut lending when depositors withdrew funds en masse during panics. This
panic-induced decline in lending explains about one-third of the reduction in aggregate
commercial bank lending between 1929 and 1932, more than twice as much as attributed to the
failure of banks.
Kris James Mitchener
Department of Economics
Leavey School of Business
Santa Clara University
Santa Clara, CA 95053
and NBER
kmitchener@scu.edu
Gary Richardson
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
3155 Social Sciences Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
and NBER
garyr@uci.edu

Introduction
Banking panics and bank failures were defining characteristics of the Great Depression
in the United States. According to monetary theory, panics drained deposits from banks,
reduced the money supply, raised prices, triggered debt deflation, and inhibited purchasing and
investment (Friedman and Schwartz 1963, Fisher 1933). According to the information theory,
bank failures disrupted bank-borrower relationships that facilitated financial flows and
destroyed information that had been compiled by failed banks, raising the costs of credit and
reducing the availability of funds to firms to small- and medium- sized firms that needed to
borrow from banks (Bernanke 1983). An important question, however, remains unanswered.
How did the banking panics of the early 1930s impact the lending of banks that weathered the
storm and survived the deepest downturn in U.S. history?
To answer this question, this paper provides new estimates of the decline in commercial
bank lending during the contraction of the early 1930s due to banking panics. Previous
scholarship has shed little light on this issue because of data and methodological constraints.
We introduce new data and utilize recent innovations in identifying panics to show that lending
by banks that remained in operation fell precipitously during panics. From July 1929 and
December 1932, we find that, in aggregate, panics forced banks to reduce lending by $6.1
billion, which was 17% of all loans outstanding on the eve of the Depression and 38.9% of the
total decline in lending over that span. Comparing our findings to other channels, loans trapped
in failed banks summed to $2.6 billion or approximately 7.4% of loans outstanding in June
1932 and 16.8% of the decline in lending from peak to trough (Richardson 2008; Cohen,
Hachem, and Richardson 2020). In other words, the deposit crunch explored in this paper
accounts for more than twice the decline in lending due to failed banks. It is also greater than
1

the retrenchment of interbank networks, which reduced aggregate lending by about 12%
(Mitchener and Richardson 2019).1
Our methods rest upon four observations. First, the majority of commercial banks (more
than 15,000) survived the financial crises of the 1930s. Second, local and regional panics
featured prominently in the banking distress of early 1930s (Friedman and Schwartz, 1963;
Wicker, 1996; Jalil, 2015). Banks experienced these shocks in different locations and at
different times. We use the variation in timing and location of panics to identify how these
shocks reduced aggregate lending independent of other factors. Third, since deposit insurance
did not exist during this era, we can observe banks’ responses in a setting where depositors
were known to have monitored banks and where withdrawals would be the normal response
when bank runs occurred (Diamond and Dybvig 1983).2 Fourth, except for a few Federal
Reserve banks, the Federal Reserve System did little to counteract the panics, allowing us to
analyze how banks respond to a deposit crunch free of modern policy responses.
Our analysis draws on two new data sets. The first is composed of the balance sheets
of all commercial banks in the United States aggregated by: (i) call report date, which is the
highest frequency possible using nationally representative data; (ii) Federal Reserve district,
which enables us to control for economic shocks observed at the district level and the policies
of Federal Reserve banks; and (iii) membership in the Federal Reserve, which is necessary
because member and nonmember banks had different specialties and responded differently to
1 Mitchener and Richardson (2019) examined how events on the periphery of the financial system that forced
country banks to draw down their interbank balances influenced lending by correspondent banks at the core of
the US financial system. This paper builds on that earlier work but considers an entirely different question. It
asks how runs on banks, which were typically regional events but occasionally nationwide, influenced lending
by banks operating in the region where the panic occurred and that remained in operation throughout the
contraction of the early 1930s.
2 National deposit insurance was enacted only in response to the banking crisis of the early 1930s. Eight states
had deposit insurance systems that were established between 1908 and 1917, but all were abandoned by 1930.
Excluding data from the two Fed districts containing states that abandoned in 1930, Nebraska and Mississippi,
does not change the results in the paper.
2