NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INDUSTRIAL COMPOSITION OF SYNDICATED LOANS AND BANKS' CLIMATE
COMMITMENTS
Galina Hale
Brigid Meisenbacher
Fernanda Nechio
Working Paper 32874
http://www.nber.org/papers/w32874
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2024
We benefited from the comments of seminar participants at the ECB and BIS Mexico. The views
expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the position of the
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco or the Federal Reserve System, NBER, or CEPR. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2024 by Galina Hale, Brigid Meisenbacher, and Fernanda Nechio. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Industrial Composition of Syndicated Loans and Banks' Climate Commitments
Galina Hale, Brigid Meisenbacher, and Fernanda Nechio
NBER Working Paper No. 32874
August 2024
JEL No. F21, G21, Q54
ABSTRACT
In the past two decades, a number of banks joined global initiatives aimed to mitigate climate
change by “greening” their asset portfolios. We study whether banks that made such commitments
have a different emission exposure of their portfolios of syndicated loans than banks that did not.
We rely on loan-level information with global coverage combined with country-industry
information on emissions. We find that all banks have reduced their loan-emission exposures over
the last 8 years. However, we do not find differences between banks that did and those that did
not signal their sustainability goals, with the exception of early signers of Principles of Responsible
Investments (PRI), who already had lower exposure to emissions through their syndicated lending.
In addition, banks that signed PRI shortened the maturity of the loans extended to highly-emitting
industries but only temporarily. Thus, we conclude that banks reduced their exposure to climate
transition risks on average, but voluntary climate commitments did not contribute to syndicated
loan reallocation away from highly-emitting sectors.
Galina Hale Fernanda Nechio
Department of Economics Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
University of California, Santa Cruz 101 Market Street, MS 1130
Engineering 2, 1156 High Street San Francisco, CA 94105
Santa Cruz, CA 95064 fnechio@gmail.com
and NBER
gbhale@ucsc.edu
Brigid Meisenbacher
Columbia University
bcm2167@columbia.org

1 Introduction
In2006KofiAnnanlaunchedtheUnitedNation’sinitiativeofPrinciplesforResponsibleInvestment
(PRI) designed to draw the attention of financial institutions to sustainable development goals.
The climate sustainability goal is one among them. However, it was not until 2015 Mark Carney’s
speech on the “tragedy of horizons” that financial regulators started to include climate-related
risks into their discussions of financial stability. The establishment of the Task Force on Climate-
related Financial Disclosure (TCFD) by the Financial Stability Board, then chaired by Carney,
followed suit. In 2017 the Network for Greening Financial System was launched as a coalition of
a handful of central banks. Finally, in 2019, the Principles for Responsible Banking (PRB) were
launched. The idea was that by accounting for climate-related risks, financial institutions would
move money away from high-emission sectors, therefore “greening” their portfolio and, therefore,
disincentivizing investment into technologies with high emissions. As Hartzmark and Shue (2022)
clearly demonstrated, however, this strategy might be counter-productive — facing higher cost
of borrowing, firms are likely to reduce their investment in greening their technologies. Many
banks have signed the PRI, TCFD, and PRB agreements, all of which require a measure of the
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions embedded in the assets of financial institutions and the limits
on such exposure. At the same time, the NGFS encouraged regulators to price climate risks
appropriately. Have these efforts led to substantial divestment of financial institutions from sectors
that require funds for green investments? We provide an answer to this question for the global
syndicated loan market.
Recent empirical literature made some headway in assessing the effect of portfolio greening ini-
tiatives on financial capital allocation. Looking at the bank-firm pairs, Kacperczyk and Peydr´o
(2022) find that banks that have made climate commitments reallocate their funding from firms
with high to firms with low direct emissions (Scope 1). Since low-emission firms are likely to be
in the industries that do not innovate in green technologies space, these dynamics can be coun-
terproductive to climate goals. In fact, Kacperczyk and Peydr´o (2022) show that high-emission
firms do reduce their investments and do not improve their emission efficiency when their funding
is reduced. These findings are corroborated by the analysis in Reghezza et al. (2022); Mueller and
Sfrappini (2022) who find that after Paris Accord in 2015 European banks reduced their lending
to European firms with high emissions. There is also evidence that climate risks are reflected in
loan pricing (Degryse et al., 2023; Ehlers et al., 2022; Hrazdil et al., 2020), although the evidence is
mixedonwhetherthereisadifferencebetweenbanksthatmadeclimatecommitmentsandtheones
that did not. This analysis shows that bank appear to “green” their loan portfolios by reducing
their exposure to highly-emitting firms, which may be of concern. In this paper, we take a broader
view on the question and ask whether there is evidence that green commitments made by banks
lead to a reduction of credit to highly-emitting industries, which would be of greater concern since
these are industries in which investment in green technologies is the most needed.
Our goal is to take the broadest view possible on the question of how green commitments might
2

have affected the industry composition of bank lending. To do so, we focus on the syndicated loan
market, for which global bank lending information is available at the loan level. We aggregate
these data to the global ultimate owner (GUO) of the lender, since climate commitments are made
at the headquarter level, focusing on 64 GUOs that account for a substantial share of syndicated
loans globally. Given our focus on the industrial composition of bank lending, we are not limited
by the self-reported firm-level emission data. Instead, we rely on World Input-Output Database
environmental accounts to measure country-industry emissions. We match each borrower to a
relevant country and industry to classify or aggregate loans by emissions. We conduct our analysis
at bank-borrower country level as well as at the loan level. Since most findings point to changes in
bank behavior only occurring after the Paris Accord, we limit our sample to 2015-2022.
Weask thefollowing questions: Didbanks thatsigned climatecommitments reducetheir lending
tohigh-emissionsectors? Alternatively,werebanksalreadylessexposedtohighemittersmorelikely
to sign climate commitments? We distinguish between these two possibilities by comparing the
distribution of emission intensity of the syndicated loan portfolios across banks and within banks
over time. We also distinguish between banks that made commitments before the Paris Accord
and those who did so more recently. We find that all banks, regardless of their commitments (or
lack of), reduced their lending to firms in highly-emitting sectors during our sample period. Banks
that made commitments earlier were already lending less to highly emitting sectors, and we find
no effect of climate commitments.
Another margin of adjustment for banks would be changes to the maturity structure of their
loans. The risk of lending to highly-emitting sectors could increase with possible climate miti-
gation policies going forward. One way to reduce this risk is to shorten the maturity of loans
extended to high emitters.1 Thus, we also test whether climate commitments, which explicitly re-
quireacknowledgmentandmeasurementofclimaterisks, ledtoshortermaturityofloanstofirmsin
highly-emitting sectors. This would also be counter-productive because long-term investments are
needed to fund green transition in these sectors. We do find a temporary shortening of maturities
in new loans to high emitters following the signing of PRI.
Our paper contributes to the strand of literature on syndicated loans and emissions data. Prior
work has focused on the degree to which climate risk is priced into loans (Hrazdil et al., 2020;
Ehlers et al., 2022; Mueller and Sfrappini, 2022; Degryse et al., 2023). While there is evidence for a
“carbonpremium”inloansgivensincetheParisAgreementof2015, theeffectofclimateregulatory
risk depends on several factors including firm exposure and location (Mueller and Sfrappini, 2022).
Additionally, “green” banks–both de facto and as signaled via climate agreements–do not seem to
price carbon differently than non-green banks across all firms, but instead only to similar ”green”
firms (Ehlers et al., 2022; Degryse et al., 2023). In addition, Ho and Wong (2023) find that climate
transition risk has been increasingly priced into syndicated loans to emissions-intensive sectors in
emerging markets since the signing of the Paris agreement.
1Using firm-level data, Ivanov et al. (2023) find that higher-emitting firms face shorter loan maturities.
3