NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CLIMATE CAPITALISTS
Niels Joachim Gormsen
Kilian Huber
Sangmin Simon Oh
Working Paper 32933
http://www.nber.org/papers/w32933
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2024, Revised May 2025
We are grateful to Kent Daniel, Theis Ingerslev Jensen, Sydney Ludvigson, Lasse Pedersen,
Monika Piazzesi, Martin Schneider, Lucian Taylor, David Thesmar, and many seminar participants
for helpful comments. This research was supported by the Asness Junior Faculty Fellowship, the
Becker Friedman Institute, the Fishman Faculty Research Fund, the Fama-Miller Center, the
Lamfalussy Research Fellowship, and the William S. Fishman Fund. We thank Rahul Chauhan,
Jason Jia, Sonali Mishra, Esfandiar Rouhani, Felix Trikos, and Raymon Yue for outstanding
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2024 by Niels Joachim Gormsen, Kilian Huber, and Sangmin Simon Oh. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Climate Capitalists
Niels Joachim Gormsen, Kilian Huber, and Sangmin Simon Oh
NBER Working Paper No. 32933
September 2024, Revised May 2025
JEL No. D24, E22, G10, G12, G31, G32, G41, Q50, Q51, Q54
ABSTRACT
In theory, a cost of capital channel can incentivize green investments like a carbon tax. This channel
requires that firms perceive the cost of green capital as lower than that of brown capital. Using
hand-collected data, we show that green firms have indeed perceived their cost of capital to be 1
percentage point lower since 2016, when climate concerns by financial investors and governments
surged. Moreover, some energy firms have used a lower cost of capital for their green divisions.
The findings suggest that the cost of capital can incentivize capital reallocation toward greener
investments across firms and within firms.
Niels Joachim Gormsen Sangmin Simon Oh
University of Chicago Columbia University
Booth School of Business Columbia Business School
and NBER oh@gsb.columbia.edu
niels.gormsen@chicagobooth.edu
Kilian Huber
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
and NBER
kilianhuber@uchicago.edu
A project website is available at https://costofcapital.org/

1 Introduction
Climate change has sparked a public debate about how to incentivize firms to invest
into green production methods. A commonly discussed tool is a carbon tax, which
reduces the returns that firms earn from brown production. But current carbon taxes
do not match the social cost of carbon, so financial investors, government funds, and
central banks have discussed an approach operating through firms’ cost of capital.1
In the long run, the cost of capital determines firms’ willingness to undertake an
investment, given the investment return. If financial markets set a lower cost of green
capital, it becomes profitable for firms to undertake more green investments, even if
these investments do not offer high returns.2 The cost of capital channel can thereby
incentivize green investments similarly to a carbon tax (Pedersen 2023, Chitarro et al.
2025).
Despite the prominence of this idea in the public debate, it has not been established
whether the cost of green capital differs from that of brown capital and whether this
difference has increased with recent climate concerns of investors and governments.
A large literature has estimated the cost of green capital in financial markets using
realized asset returns. However, the relevant sample is too short to estimate firms’ cost
of capital without strong assumptions, leading to conflicting results (e.g., Bolton and
Kacperczyk 2021, Pástor et al. 2022) and disagreement among experts.3 Researchers
have also surveyed households on their preferences, but it is not trivial to infer the
cost of capital from such surveys, as explained by Aron-Dine et al. (2024).
A further challenge for existing approaches is that the cost of capital set in financial
markets does not directly enter firm investment decisions (Graham 2022). Instead,
firms form their own perceptions of the cost of green capital, which then determine
their demand for green investments. Even if the cost of green capital in financial
markets falls, firms may not adjust their perceived cost of green capital in tandem,
1Proponents include institutional investors like BlackRock (BlackRock 2020), government funds
(Invesco 2022), and the Catholic Church (Vatican 2022). Similarly, the European Central Bank
operates a bond purchase program providing more capital to green firms (Papoutsi et al. 2022).
Sustainable funds make up around 25% of global assets under management today (Bloomberg 2024).
2The cost of capital is key because firms adjust the minimum required returns they are willing to
accept on new investments (also known as discount rates or hurdle rates) with the cost of capital
in the long run (see Sections 3.5 and 4.4 and Gormsen and Huber 2024). Required returns can be
stickier than the cost of capital in the short run, so we will also analyze them separately below.
321% of academics agree that firms pursuing social and environmental initiatives benefit from a
lower cost of capital, 55% are uncertain, and 23% disagree (Chicago Booth Clark Center 2024).
1

eliminating any potential real effects.
We overcome these issues by directly studying how firms’ perceived cost of capital
relates to greenness. We analyze data from corporate conference calls where firms
report their perceptions of their weighted average cost of capital. The perceptions are
based on firms’ estimates of expected returns to their outstanding debt and equity
in financial markets. Unlike estimates of the cost of capital obtained from financial
market data, the perceived cost of capital captures a direct input into firms’ investment
decisions. Indeed, we confirm that firms’ investment rates and realized returns to
capital are strongly predicted by the perceived cost of capital observed on conference
calls, in line with theory. The conference call data also offer more statistical power
than estimates based on asset returns because we do not need to infer the cost of
capital from realized returns, but can directly observe firms’ ex ante perceptions.
Our main finding, shown in Figure 1, is that the perceived cost of capital has
dropped substantially for green firms relative to brown firms as climate concerns have
increased. Up until 2016, the perceived cost of capital of green firms was close to that
of brown firms. After 2016, climate concerns surged, as exemplified by the enormous
inflow into sustainable funds in financial markets, and the perceived cost of capital of
green firms fell substantially relative to that of brown firms. On average, the perceived
cost of capital of green firms was 1 percentage point lower than that of brown firms
after 2016. This difference is large relative to variation in the cost of capital in general,
as firm greenness is the third most powerful explanatory variable for the perceived
cost of capital post-2016, ranked behind only market beta and leverage. We also
find within-firm variation: some of the largest energy and utility firms have started
applying a lower perceived cost of capital and discount rate to their greener divisions,
such as renewable energy, since 2016. Finally, firms facing a higher spread between
the cost of green and brown capital in their sector have pledged to reduce emissions
by more, consistent with the cost of capital affecting real outcomes.
Together, theresultsimplythatthecostofgreencapitalrelevantforfirminvestment
decisions is lower than that of brown capital and has substantially decreased since
2016. The decline coincided with rising climate concerns and sustainable investing in
financial markets by financial investors, governments, and central banks. The results
do not point to one specific driver of the cost of green capital and our ambition is not
to identify one.4 Instead, the results offer three implications. First, firm greenness
4For example, as discussed in Chitarro et al. (2025), the results are consistent with greater
2