NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PREDICTABLE STOCK RETURNS: REALITY OR STATISTICAL ILLUSION?
Charles R. Nelson
Myung J. Kim
Working Paper No. 3297
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1990
We are grateful to John Campbell for providing us with the data set assembled
by him and Robert Shiller. Helpful comments from Andrew Lo, Pierre Perron,
Richard Startz and participants in seminars at the Federal Reserve Board,
Princeton University, and the University of Washington are acknowledged with
thanks, but responsibility for errors is entirely that of the authors. This
paper is part of NBER's research program in Financial Markets and Monetary
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3297
March 1990
PREDICTABLE STOCK RETURNS: REALITY OR STATISTICAL ILLUSION?
ABSTRACT
Recent research suggests that stock returns are predictable from
fundamentals such as dividend yield, and that the degree of predictability
rises with the length of the horizon over which return is measured. This paper
investigates the magnitude of two sources of small ssmple bias in these
reaults.
First, it is a standard result in econometrics that regression on the
lagged value of the dependent variable is biased in finite samples. Since a
fundamental such as the price/dividend ratio is a statistical proxy for lagged
price, predictive regressions are potentially subject to a corresponding small
sample bias. This may create the illusion that one can buy low and sell high
in the sample even if the relationship is useless for forecasting. Second,
multiperiod returns are positively autocorrelated by construction, raising the
possibility of spurious regression. Standard errors which are computed from
the asymptotic formula may not be large enough in small samples.
A set of Monte Carlo experiments are presented in which data are generated
by a version of the present value model in which the discount rate is constant
so returns are not in fact predictable. We show that a number of the
characteristica of the historical results can be replicated simply by the
combined effects of the two small sample biases.
Charles R. Nelson Myung Jig Kim
Dept. of Economics, DR-3D Dept. of Economics, Finance, &
University of Washington Legal Studies
Seattle, WA 98195 College of Commerce & Bus. Admin.
University of Alabama
Tuscaloosa, AL 35487-0224

Introduction
The proposition that stock returns are not predictable was until very
recently regarded as one of the most (some would say the only) firmly
established empirical results in economics. In his classic 1965 paper
"The Behavior of Stock-Market Prices" Eugene Fama concluded that it had
'presented strong and voluminous evidence in favor of the random walk
hypothesis." Subsequent research over the next two decades only
reinforced the evidence that neither past returns nor publicly available
information were of any value in prediction. This large literature was
widely interpreted as providing strong evidence that the capital markets
are efficient in the sense of incorporating all available information in
current prices. The extent to which the non-predictability result has been
overturned in just the last few years in reflected in the opening
statement in a recent paper by Fama and French (1988): "There is much
evidence that stock returns are predictable." They cite estimates made by
themselves and others that 25 to 40% of the variance in returns over
periods of three to five years is predictable from past returns.
Two sources of predictability have been identified in the recent
literature: past returns themselves and "fundamentals" such as dividend
yield and price-earnings ratios. Poterba and Summers (1988) and Fama
and French (1988b) report negative autocorrelation in returns over long
horizons. Apparently, moves in prices tend to be reversed over several
years, a tendency referred to as mean reversion. Lo and MacKinlay (1988)
have reported evidence of positive autocorrelation at lags measured in
weeks, suggesting persistence in returns over shorter periods. In an
earlier paper (see Kim, Nelson and Startz (1989)) we have questioned the
strength of the evidence for mean reversion over long horizons by
demonstrating its dependence on pre-1947 data and by showing that
randomization methods suggest that estimated standard errors may have
been too small
The hypothesis that fundamentals should be useful in predicting
stock returns follows from the seminal paper of Shiller (1981) which
concluded that stock prices move too much to be justified by subsequent
movement in dividends, If stock prices contain transient components
unrelated to fundamentals but are anchored to fundamentals over the long
term, then the fundamentals should contain information that is useful in
predicting the future direction of prices. Indeed, Keim and Stambaugh
(1986), Campbell and Shiller (1988), Fama and French (1988) and Cutler,
Poterba, and Summers (1989) report that lagged ratios of dividends or

earnings to price may explain more than 25% of the variation in stock
returns measured over intervals of several years.
A finding that stock returns are to some extent predictable would
not of itself contradict the efficient markets hypothesis since expected
returns may well vary over time in a predictable way. Whether the
observed degree of predictability constitutes evidence against efficient
markets is, however, a subject of continuing debate in the literature.
Cecchetti, Lam and Mark (1990) show that mean reversion can be a
property of equilibrium returns in an economy where investors are risk
averse.
The purpose of this paper is to consider the extent to which
inferences about the predictability of stock returns might be influenced
by small sample biases. One source of concern that we have comes from
the use of multi-period overlapping stock returns data which introduces
positive Serial correlation by construction. For example, if annual one-
year returns are serially random then overlapping annual observations on
ten-year returns will have a MA(9) structure with first order
autocorrelation equal to 0.9 by construction. Granger and Newbold (1974)
cautioned against interpreting a high R2 as evidence in itself of a
relationship when the data are positively autocorrelated. Hansen and
Hodrick (1980) and subsequent authors have recognized the need to correct
regression standard errors in the case of overlapping observations. We
are interested in investigating the adequacy of the correction in relevant
sample sizes.
Another potential small sample problem is closely related to the
bias which occurs in regressions involving a lagged dependent variable. To
motivate the possibility of such a bias, consider the regression of the log
of price, denoted p, on its lagged value,
= a+ b
If price is a random walk with drift then the true coefficient of is
one. It is a standard result in econometrics that least squares is biased in
regression on a lagged dependent variable for finite samples, and in this
case we know the sample slope coefficient b to be biased towards zero;
see Fuller (1976) and Evans and Savin (1984). Subtracting lagged price
from both sides of the equation we have
2