NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DOES FOREIGN EXCHANGE INTERVENTION MATTER?
DISENTANGLING THE PORTFOLIO AND EXPECTATIONS EFFECTS FOR TIlE MARK
Kathryn Dominguez
Jeffrey Frankel
Working Paper No. 3299
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1990
We wish to thank Julia Marsh and Julia Lowell for research assistance, and Dr.
Franz Scholl of the Bundesbank for making the daily intervention data
available. This paper is part of NBER's research program in International
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3299
March 1990
DOES FOREIGN EXCHANGE INTERVENTION MATTER?
DISENTANGLING THE PORTFOLIO AND EXPECTATIONS EFFECTS FOR THE MARX
ABSTRACT
The time is ripe for a re-examination of the
question whether foreign
attempt to isolate
exchange intervention can affect the exchange rate. We
two distinct effects: the portfolio effect, whereby an increase in the
supply of marks must reduce the dollar/mark rate (for given expected rates
of return) and the additional expectations effect, whereby intervention
that is publically known may alter investors expectations of the future
exchange rate, which will feed back to the current equilibrium price. We
estimate a system consisting of two equations, one describing investors'
portfolio behavior and the other their formation of expectations, where the
two endogenous variables are the current spot rate and investors'
expectation of the future spot rate. We use relatively new data sources:
actual daily data on intervention by the Bundesbank, newspaper stories on
known intervention, and survey data on investors' expectations. We find
evidence of both an expectations effect and a portfolio effect. The
statistical significance of the portfolio effect suggests that even
sterilized intervention may have had positive effects during the sample
period. (It tends to be significant only during the later of our two
sample periods, October 1984 to December 1987. That intervention appears
less significant statistically during the earlier period, November 1982 to
October 1984, could be attributed to the fact that little intervention was
undertaken until 1985.) For the magnitude of the effects to be large
requires that intervention be publically known. Our (still preliminary)
estimates suggest that a typical $100 million of "secret" intervention has
an effect of less than 0.1 per Cent on the exchange rate, but that the
effect of news reports of intervention can be as large as an additional 4
per cent.
Kathryn Dominguez Jeffrey Frankel
Kennedy School of Government Department of Economics
Harvard University University of California
Cambridge, MA 02138 Berkeley, CA 94720

Introduction
Until recently, there was an unusual degree of consensus among
economists, and among policy-makers and participants in the financial
markets as well, that intervention by central banks in the foreign exchange
market did not offer an effective or lasting instrument for affecting the
exchange rate, at least not independently of monetary policy. The 1982 G-7
economic summit at Versailles commissioned a study of intervention, known
as the Jurgenson report, which found that the effects were small and
transitory at most.2
We think that the time is ripe for new statistical testing of the
question. Many policy-makers and foreign exchange traders believe that the
intervention operations that have taken place since the Plaza Agreement of
September 1985 have had an effect. Moreover, the theoretical case against
the effectiveness of intervention is not as clear as a reading of the
economics literature might suggest.
The academic literature is predicated on the distinction between
intervention operations that are sterilized and those that are not
sterilized. Intervention operations that change the supplies of domestic
and foreign money are considered nonsterilized. Sterilized intervention
operations, in contrast, are accompanied by offsetting open-market
operations which return the relevant money supply to its original level.
In this paper we do not concentrate on this distinction. We study the
intervention operations that actually took place between 1982 and 1987,
2
Many of the econometric results, finding little or no effect, were
reported in Rogoff (1984) and Henderson and Sampson (1983).
1

But we do begin in section II
regardless of whether they were sterilized.
with a review of the issues involved.3
which
In this paper we examine the two possible channels through
intervention (whether sterilized or not) can influence the foreign exchange
Intervention can, even
rate; the portfolio and the expectations channels.
channel
if sterilized, influence exchange rates through the portfolio
substitutes in
provided foreign and domestic bonds are considered imperfect
investor's portfolios. Intervention operations that, for example, increase
the current relative supply of mark to dollar assets that private investors
force a decrease in the
are obliged to accept into their portfolios, will
relative price of mark assets.4 Intervention can also influence exchange
rates, regardless of whether foreign and domestic bonds are imperfect
that
substitutes, through the expectations channel. The public information
central banks are intervening in support of a currency (or are planning to
intervene in the future) may. under certain conditions, cause speculators
to expect an increase in the price of that currency in the future.
Speculators react to this information by buying the currency today.
bringing about the change In the exchange rate today.
While some previous empirical studies of foreign exchange
intervention operations have found evidence from daily data that central
banks have had a statistically significant effect on exchange rates
able to
(Loopesko (1984) and Dominguez (1987,1989)), the studies were not
distinguish whether the effect was coming through the portfolio or the
For authoritative statements, see Henderson (1984) or Obstfeld (1988).
The exchange rate reaction to an increase in the relative supply of
outside foreign assets may be reduced by an increase in their expected rate
of return that induces a corresponding increase in demand.
2