NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE SELECTIVE DISCLOSURE OF EVIDENCE:
AN EXPERIMENT
Agata Farina
Guillaume Fréchette
Alessandro Ispano
Alessandro Lizzeri
Jacopo Perego
Working Paper 32975
http://www.nber.org/papers/w32975
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2024
Financial Support from the National Science Foundation; no other significant sources of funds. This
paper merges and replaces Farina et al. (2024) and Ispano (2024). We are thankful to Jonathan
Glover, Jeanne Hagenbach, Navin Kartik, Yichuan Lou, Marco Ottaviani, Emanuel Vespa, Leeat
Yariv, Sevgi Yuksel, and seminar participants at Bocconi University, Brown University, Columbia
University, John Hopkins University, MIT, New York University, Northwestern University,
Princeton University, Stanford University, and the University of Pittsburgh for helpful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2024 by Agata Farina, Guillaume Fréchette, Alessandro Ispano, Alessandro Lizzeri, and Jacopo
Perego. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Selective Disclosure of Evidence: An Experiment
Agata Farina, Guillaume Fréchette, Alessandro Ispano, Alessandro Lizzeri, and Jacopo Perego
NBER Working Paper No. 32975
September 2024
JEL No. C92, D83
ABSTRACT
We conduct an experimental analysis of selective disclosure in communication. In our model, an
informed sender aims to influence a receiver by disclosing verifiable evidence that is selected from
a larger pool of available evidence. Our experimental design leverages the rich comparative statics
predictions of this model, enabling a systematic test of the relative importance of evidence selection
versus evidence concealment in communication. Our findings confirm the key qualitative
predictions of the theory, suggesting that selection, rather than concealment, is often the dominant
distortion in communication. We also identify deviations from the theory: A minority of senders
overcommunicate relative to predictions, while some receivers partially neglect the selective
nature of the evidence they observe.
Agata Farina Alessandro Lizzeri
Princeton University Department of Economics
Department of Economics Princeton University
Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton, NJ 08544 Princeton, NJ 08544
United States and NBER
agatafarina@princeton.edu lizzeri@princeton.edu
Guillaume Fréchette Jacopo Perego
New York University Columbia University
Department of Economics 3022 Broadway Uris 616
19 West 4th Street New York, NY 10027
New York, NY 10012 jp3754@columbia.edu
guillaume.frechette@nyu.edu
Alessandro Ispano
Laboratoire d'Economie de Dauphine (LEDa)
Place du Maréchal de Lattre de Tassigny
Paris 75775
France
alessandro.ispano@gmail.com

1 Introduction
This paper presents the results of an experimental analysis of selective disclosure. We study
settings in which an informed sender seeks to influence the actions of an uninformed receiver
bydisclosingselectedevidence. Thisformofselectivecommunicationispervasiveinpractice.
Forinstance,ajournalistmayselectthenewseventstoreportdependingonhowtheyreflecton
apoliticalcandidate;adefenselawyermayselecttheevidencetopresentincourtinanattempt
to increase the chance of acquittal; a firm may choose specific features of its product portfolio
to advertise to customers.1 These settings share the following characteristics: The evidence is
verifiable(i.e.,thesendercannotfabricateit)butpossiblynoisy(i.e.,itisimperfectlyinforma-
tive); furthermore, it may be selected by the sender from a larger pool of available evidence.
Thus,theinterpretationofthedisclosedevidencedependsonthecontext—namely,howitwas
selectedbythesender. Thisselectionultimatelydetermineshoweffectivelythesenderandthe
receivercancommunicate.
The disclosure of verifiable evidence is a centerpiece of the economic analysis of the po-
tential distortions caused by asymmetric information, with numerous applications to financial
economics, accounting, and industrial organization (for reviews, see Verrecchia (2001), Mil-
grom (2008), Dranove and Jin (2010), and Beyer et al. (2010)). The benchmark result in this
literature—theunravelingprinciple—arguesthatifthesendercanverifiablydisclosetheavail-
able evidence, she will do so, regardless of how favorable it is. According to this prediction,
communication helps resolve the initial information asymmetry. The disclosure literature has
largelyfocusedondocumentingandexplainingakeydeviationfromthisbenchmark: Theten-
dencyofsenderstoconcealunfavorableevidence.2 Thisbehaviorcausesdistortions,assenders
undercommunicaterelativetotheunravelingbenchmark,allowingtheinformationasymmetry
topersist. Thesedistortionsjustifytheadoptionofdisclosuremandates,whicharecommonin
manycontexts.3
In this paper, we shift the emphasis away from distortions caused by the concealment of ev-
idence and focus instead on a less-studied aspect of the problem: distortions arising from the
1Prat and Stro¨mberg (2013) and Gentzkow et al. (2015) argue that selective disclosure is in practice one of
theprincipalsourcesofmediaslant,whichtheyrefertoas“filtering”or“factbias.” KoehlerandMercer(2009)
illustratehowmutualfundcompaniesselectivelyadvertisetheirbetter-performingfunds.
2StartingfromDye(1985),severaltheoreticalmodelshaveexplainedwhyconcealmentmightoccurinequi-
librium. Intheempiricalliterature,excessiveconcealmenthasbeendocumentedbothinthefieldandthelabora-
tory(see,e.g.,Mathios,2000;JinandLeslie,2003;Bertomeuetal.,2020;Jinetal.,2021).
3IntheUnitedStates,forinstance,regulationsmayrequirerestaurantstodisplaysanitarygradesandcalorie
counts,publiclytradedcompaniestodisclosefinancialstatements,andrealestatesellerstorevealspecificproperty
conditions.
1

sender’s ability to select which evidence to disclose. This shift in focus may lead to a corre-
sponding change in policy recommendations. Our experimental analysis is informed by a the-
oryofselectivedisclosurethatprovidesrichcomparativestatics,wherebywevarythequantity
of evidence available to the sender and how much of it can be disclosed to the receiver. These
comparative statics results enable a systematic test of the strategic forces driving selective dis-
closure.
Our model, building on Milgrom (1981), features a sender who privately observes the state
oftheworldandtherealizationof N independentsignals(orevidence),whichareinformative
about the state. The sender can verifiably disclose up to K of these signals to a receiver. In
this context, N represents how much evidence is available to the sender, and K represents the
communicationcapacityoftheenvironment(e.g.,thenumberofstoriesanewspapercanprint).
The receiver observes the disclosed signals and takes an action. The receiver’s objective is to
match her action to the state, while the sender wishes to persuade the receiver to take a higher
action, regardless of the state. We show that in our setting, an equilibrium exists in which the
sender discloses the K highest signals among those she observes. This equilibrium reflects the
sender’sincentivestobeselectiveanddisclosethemost-favorableevidenceatherdisposal.
Theinterplaybetweenconcealmentandselectionofevidenceshapesthestrategicinteraction
between the sender and the receiver in our setting. Notably, their relative importance changes
as we vary N and K. When K = N, evidence can only be concealed, not selected, as in a
classic disclosure setting. Conversely, when N is large relative to K, selection is likely to be
the dominant distortion: The sender can disclose highly favorable evidence regardless of the
state, similar to a cheap-talk setting. Thus, by varying K and N, this model accommodates
forcestypicaloftwooppositecommunicationparadigms: verifiabledisclosure(e.g.,Milgrom,
1981; Grossman, 1981) at one extreme and cheap talk (e.g., Crawford and Sobel, 1982) at the
other. These extremes have been analyzed separately in the experimental literature, leading to
contrastingfindingsthat,asexplainedbelow,ourhybridsettingcanhelpreconcile.
Ourexperimentalanalysisisguidedbytherichcomparativestaticpredictionsthatarisefrom
varying K and N. As N increases relative to K, the sender should disclose more-favorable
evidence. This endogenous selection should make receivers more skeptical of any message
as N increases or K decreases. The behavior of both the sender and the receivers jointly
determinestheinformativenessoftheequilibrium,whichwedefineasthecorrelationbetween
the state and the receiver’s action. Holding N constant, the informativeness should increase
in K. Instead, holding K constant, the informativeness may be nonmonotone in N, but it
shouldnecessarilydecreasetozeroas N becomeslarge. Thesepredictionsstemfromabalance
2