NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ARE JAPANESE STOCK PRICES TOO HIGH?
Kenneth R. French
James M. Poterba
Working Paper No. 3290
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1990
We are grateful to David Boyle, Milan Brahmbhatt, Fumio Hayashi, Sarah Johnson,
Deborah Kesler, Mark Sladkus, Atsushi Suzuki, Takanori Tanabe, Masahiro Tsuji,
and Hiroaki Yamaji for providing us with data, to Fischer Black, Eugene Fama,
Takatoshi Ito, Andrew Lo, Merton Miller, Myron Scholes, Larry Summers, Mark
Wolfson, Kazuo Ueda, and Mark Zmijewski for helpful discussions, and to Paul
Gompers for research assistance. This research was supported bythe Alfred P.
Sloan Foundation, the Center for Research in Security Prices, the National
Institute for Research Advancement, and the National Science Foundation. This
paper is part of NBERs research programs in Financial Markets and Monetary
Economics and Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3290
March 1990
ARE JAPANESE STOCK PRICES TOO HIGH?
ABSTRACT
The difference between reported price-earnings ratios in the United
States and Japan is not as puzzling as it appears at first glance. Nearly
half the disparity is caused by differences in accounting practices with
and depreciation of
respect to consolidation of earnings from subsidiaries
fixed assets. If Japanese firms used U.S. accounting rules, we estimate that
the P/E ratio for the Tokyo Stock Exchange would have been 32.1, not the
reported 54.3, at the end of 1988. Accounting differences are unable,
however, to explain the sharp rise in the Japanese stock market during the
mid-1980s. Changes in required returns on equities, or in investor expecta-
tions of future growth for Japanese firms, must be invoked to explain this
phenomenon. Real interest rates declined during the period of rapid price
increase, but there is little evidence that growth expectations became more
optimistic. The real interest rate changes do not, however, appear large
enough to fully account for the change in stock prices.
Kenneth R. French James M. Poterba
NBER and MIT
University of Chicago
Graduate School of Business Department of Economics
1101 East 58th Street Room 852-350
Chicago, IL 60637 50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02139

Japanese equities trade at a higher earnings multiple than shares in any
other major equity market. At the end of 1989, the price-earnings ratio for
the Nomura Research Institute (NRI) 350, a broad index of Japanese nonfinan-
cial firms, was 53.7. The comparable ratio for the Standard and Poor's
Industrial index of Anerican stocks was 15.0, and the average P/E ratio for
all nations except Japan in the Morgan Stanley-Capital International database
was 13.6.
The large difference between price-earnings ratios in Japan and other
markets is a recent phenomenon. In the early 1970s, Japanese P/E ratios were
below p/Es in the United States. Between 1973 and 1985, Japanese P/Es were
approximately twice those of the United States. Most of the recent divergence
between the two P/Es occurred in 1986, when the Japanese ratio doubled from
29.4 to 58.6 while the U.S. P/E increased by only 20%, from 15.4 to 18.7.
The developments of the last decade in the Tokyo stock market have led
many analysts to ask if high Japanese price-earnings ratios are consistent
with much lower P/Es in other nations. Differences could be attributed to
differential accounting practices and tax rules which complicate the interna-
tional comparison of P/Es, or to divergences in required returns or expected
earnings growth. This paper examines the most important differences between
U.S. and Japanese financial accounting practices and tries to "correct"
Japanese P/Es for comparison with U.S. values. We then ask whether the rapid
growth in share values during the 1980s can be traced to fundamentals such as
falling investor discount rates or increased growth expectations.
This paper is divided into five sections. The first presents a stylized
overview of the U.S. and Japanese equity markets. We report the price-
earnings and dividend-price ratios in both countries, as well as information
on the size of each equity market, the volume of trade, and the composition of
shareownership. The second section relates the rise in Japanese share prices

to the equally dramatic increase in land values. The escalation of Japanese
land prices is simply another manifestation of recently-rising price-earnings
multiples for assets in Japan relative to those elsewhere. Our analysis
focuses on stock market valuation because available data on common stocks are
far better than data on the cash flows from land and other real assets.
Section three explores the influence of accounting differences on the
disparity between the price-earnings ratios of the two countries. We show
that several factors make Japanese price-earnings ratios systematically higher
than their U.S. counterparts, but none of these factors can account for the
recent increase in Japanese P/E ratios. Section four examines differences in
required after-tax returns and expected growth rates in the two countries. We
first calibrate the changes in discount factors and growth expectations that
would be needed to explain the recent increase in Japanese share values. We
then consider various proxies for actual changes in required returns and
growth expectations. We find that rather extreme assumptions would be needed
to explain the post-1985 increase in Japanese share prices. There is a brief
conclusion.
1. Overvew of Japanese and U.S. Eguity Markets
The relative importance of the Japanese and U.S. equity markets has
shifted dramatically during the last two decades, the result of rapid growth
in Japanese share prices and depreciation of the dollar. This section
provides background information on these markets.
1.1 Market Size
The widely cited data from Morgan Stanley-Capital International (MSCI)
Persoectives and other data sources imply that the Japanese equity market was
55% larger than the U.S. market at the end of 1988. However, these data
2