NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO PUBLICLY TRADED CORPORATIONS ACT IN THE PUBLIC INTEREST?
Roger H. Cordon
Working Paper No. 3303
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge. MA 02138
March 1990
This paper is part of NBERs research program in Financial Markets and Monetary
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3S03
March 1990
DO PUBLICLY TRADED CORPORATIONS ACT IN THE PUBLIC INTEREST?
ABsTRACT
Models of corporate behavior normally assume that a firm acts in the interest of share-
holders, and that shareholders care only about the returns they receive on the shares they
own in that firm. But shareholders should also care about the effects of a manager's
decisions on the value of shares they own in other firms, on the price they pay as con-
sumers of the firm's output, on the value of the firm's bonds they own, on government
tax revenue which finances public expenditures benefiting shareholders, etc. These effects
are normally presumed to be of second order. This paper reexamines this presumption,
argues that many of these effects are likely to be important, and examines how a variety
of conventional conclusions about corporate behavior change as a result.
Roger H. Cordon
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109

Models of the behavior of corporations normally assume that amanager acts in the
interests of the firm's shareholders, and furthennore that shareholders care about the
manager's decisions only in so far as these decisions affect the returns shareholders receive
on the shares they own in that firm. If the return distribution on new projects is within the
span of the distributions on available securities, then shareholders unanimously want the
manager to maximize share values.' This is the objective that papers normally attribute
to corporations.2 But a manager's decisions can affect shareholders in more ways than just
through their effects on the value of shares in that firm. For example, shareholders normally
hold highly diversified portfolios, so they would want a manager to take into accountany
effects his decisions might have on the share values of other firms. If shareholders hold
proportional amounts of all the firms in an industry, for example, then their portfolio value
is maximized if they can induce each manager to maximize the market value of the industry
as a whole. Managers would do this by taking into account any externalities their firm
imposes on other firms in the industry, such as through spillovers of information from R&D
or through advertising or price changes that lead to changes in market shares. Everything
else equal, this would lead shareholders to prefer that the industry behave as a cartel and
charge the monopoly price, regardless of the implications for the share values of individual
firms. However, shareholders may also be consumers of the product, and to that degree
they want to discourage firms from exploiting their market power.3 Further, shareholders
Much ofthispaper was written while I was visitingthe Universidade Nova de Lisboa. I would like to
thank seminar participants at the Universities of Michigan and Wisconsin, and especially Mark Bagnoli
and Michelle White, for helpful comments on an earlier draft.
For further discussion, see Leland(1974).
2 Evenwithspanning,
a number of papers derive different objectives for managers as a result of asym-
metric information (see e.g. Ross(1913) or Myers and Majluf(1984)), strategic considerations (see e.g.
Fershtman and Judd(1987)), or more generally the separation of ownership andcontrol (see e.g. Jensen
andMeckling(1916)).
See Farrell (1985) and Manning(1988) fora discussion of theseconflicting incentives.
1

may also own bonds issued by the firm. If so, they care what happens to bond values,
which lessens the conflict of interest between bondholders and stockholders. Shareholders
are also normally citizens of the country in which the finn is located, and therefore benefit
from any tax payments or charitable donations that the firm might make.
The implications of this argument are most striking if all shareholders are identical in
all respects and the economy is closed. In this case, each firm is owned equally by all
members of the economy. Managers, acting in the interests of shareholders, should there-
fore maximize efficiency.4 Spillovers (at least those which affect all shareholders equally)
will be internalized, monopoly power will not be used, and the public benefits arising from
extra tax payments will be taken into account.
If instead the model allows shareholders to differ, for example in their wealth and
tastes, will it forecast that firms should maximize their own share values, at least to a first
approximation, as is traditionally assumed? This is the question addressed in the paper.
It is easy to see that the model suggests not. For example, as long as wealthy individuals
maintain diversified portfolios, then they will want managers to take into account the
effects of their actions on the value of all other securities.
This story about the internalization of externalities and the offsetting benefits that arise
from tax payments is totally different from the story told in Bernheim and Bagwell(1988)
about the neutrality of all government policies.5 The Bernheim and Bagwell(1988) result
relies on altruism — take into account effects on others because they care about
people
the welfare of others, directly or through its effects on the utility of people whose welfare
they do care about directly. In this paper, results depend simply on each individual taking
into account all the various ways he or she is affected directly by a firm's decisions: qua
shareholder, qua bondholder, qua consumer, and qua citizen.
In section 1, I explore the degree to which a firm, acting in the interests of shareholders,
should take into account the benefits it generates for others as a result of taies and direct
An exception would be actionswhich have different effects on different shareholders, e.g. localized
pollution. Deviations couldalso arje with asymmetricinformation,as in the principal—agent literature.
It alsodiffers from the argument in Litzenberger and Tahnor (1988) thatrisk ingovernment policy
isirrelevant if security markets aresufficiently complete. They argue that investors can then fully insure
themselves against random policy changes, since random policy creates no aggregate risk. The focus in
this paper is on theeffectsof nonstochastic policies.
2