NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RETHINKING SHORT-TERM REAL INTEREST RATES AND TERM SPREADS
USING VERY LONG-RUN DATA
Kenneth S. Rogoff
Barbara Rossi
Paul Schmelzing
Working Paper 33079
http://www.nber.org/papers/w33079
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2024
The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors. We thank audiences at
the Austrian Central Bank, Boston College, the Harvard Economics department, and
Harvard Kennedy School as well as Laura Nicolae, Baiyun Jing, and Alessandro Tarozzi for
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not
been peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that
accompanies official NBER publications.
© 2024 by Kenneth S. Rogoff, Barbara Rossi, and Paul Schmelzing. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Rethinking Short-Term Real Interest Rates and Term Spreads Using Very Long-Run Data
Kenneth S. Rogoff, Barbara Rossi, and Paul Schmelzing
NBER Working Paper No. 33079
October 2024
JEL No. E04, F3, N20
ABSTRACT
Utilizing critical recent data advances, we analyze empirical evidence on long-run samples of short-
maturity real interest rates as well as term spreads based on multi-century data. In contrast to an
extensive literature on short-maturity real interest rates over the past few decades, we find strong
and consistent evidence of trend stationarity in long horizon series, relatively fast adjustment
speeds, and a paucity of structural breaks – results that we show to survive out of sample tests. The
use of very long-run data offers a fresh perspective for ongoing monetary policy debates
surrounding r*, and also provides a crucial missing link to reconstructing the long-run properties of
term spreads. On balance and against limited post-COVID data, our evidence suggests caution on
the idea of a break in short-term real interest rate behavior and instead points to elements of
continuity over very long time periods. Relatedly, we show that term spreads are secularly rising
while inflation volatility trends in the exact opposite direction – a finding questioning the emphasis
of influential term structure models.
Kenneth S. Rogoff Paul Schmelzing
Maurits C. Boas Professor of Boston College
International Economics Carroll School of Management
Economics Department 140 Commonwealth Ave
Harvard University Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
Littauer Center 216 and Hoover Institution
Cambridge, MA 02138-3001 paul.schmelzing@bc.edu
and NBER
krogoff@harvard.edu
Barbara Rossi
ICREA-Universitat Pompeu Fabra
and EUI, Barcelona School of
Economics, CREI.
barbara.rossi@upf.edu

1 Introduction
In this paper, we revisit the econometric properties of advanced economies’ short-maturity real
interest rates as well as term spreads, over the very long run, building on comprehensive advances
1
by financial historians over recent years.
Short-maturityrealinterestratesare,ofcourse,verycloselyrelatedtotheconceptoftheunderlying
"neutral interest rate", "r*", the north star of modern monetary policy. At the same time, term
spreads are important across a host of financial issues, not least for the maturity structure of
public debt. As we shall demonstrate, a perspective based on centuries instead of decades of
data, indeed gives fresh perspectives, for example challenging the consensus view that there is a
significantpermanentcomponenttoshort-runrealratemovements,andperhapssignallingcaution
in overstating the widespread belief that the sharp fall in r* after the financial crisis was mostly
permanent. Relatedly, we show that centuries long trends in term spreads have been upward
rather than downward, again raising questions about how much of the downward shift of recent
decades can be expected to last.
Until now, broader types of investigations could simply not be undertaken, given the absence of a
consistent long span of short-maturity rates. Seminal work on secular interest rate dynamics, such
1987
as Barro ( ), categorically declared: "A usable series on short-term interest rates is unavailable
for the full sample". When more recent attempts were made to construct long-run series, they
were inconsistent with regards to issuers and maturities – even for key economies such as the
United States. The situation has fundamentally changed and this study exploits substantial recent
data advances for both nominal rate and inflation series, as well as introducing new data, to
leverage the radically improved statistical power that accompanies the use of multi-century, higher
frequency, and conceptually consistent time series for the two key "safe economies" over the past
centuries – the United Kingdom and the United States – and apply the insights to the major
ongoing policy questions. Our data set is not only significantly longer than any previously studied
in the literature, it is quarterly instead of annual, and based on consistent data construction.
Besides its basic properties, we are interested in the empirical evidence on structural breaks
and half-lives – the time it takes for time series with such trend components to revert halfway
back to the trendline: only if such half-lives (and higher order measures of mean reversion)
are sufficiently short, and the frequency of structural breaks sufficiently low, are the results on
stationarity also economically significant. We show that these properties indeed all apply, and
not least we demonstrate that, on the basis of our new long-sample interest rate series, our main
points survive an out of sample robustness check.
Inaninterpretativesectionfollowingtheeconometricpart,weapplyournovellongsampleinsights
6
toakeytopicaltheoreticalandempiricaldebateofrecentyears(section ): arguably,short-maturity
1 Recent application of long-dated historical data to long-maturity real rates (Rogoff et al., 2024), while perhaps
suggestive,doesnotreallyaddressthequestionofhowshort-runrealratesbehave,givenlargeandongoingchangesin
termspreads,investorpreferencesandpublicdebtissuancestrategies.
2

real rates are the decisive variable for matters of monetary policy and also from the perspective
of many financial intermediaries: we therefore discuss in particular what our re-assessment of
real short-maturity interest rate properties implies for the characterization of r*, also known as the
"neutral" rate of interest. Assessing the evidence from both long- and short-maturity sections of
the term structure, we argue that r* should be modeled as a stationary process – whatever other
specific modelling assumptions one incorporates for r*. Equally, the absence of clear evidence for
1980
a structural break in or around carries relevant policy implications, though it is very well
conceivable that tests beyond our standard ones may nuance the break narratives.
There is a natural fundamental extension from our new short-maturity data with recent new data
on long-maturity rates to derive term spreads over centuries. Though short-maturity debt is the
decidedly more recent part of public debt, such a reconstruction using private commercial paper
and also central bank discount rates is now possible for selected leading economies for more
than two hundred years: in the process, the empirical backdrops afflicting the literature on term
1945
spreads can also be addressed, a literature that has equally operated with post- data even
when purportedly analyzing long-term structural trends and associations.
Crucially, we find that short-maturity rates have secularly fallen faster than long-maturity rates –
resulting in clear evidence of secularly rising term spreads. This is surprising against a consensus
literature that focused on falling term spreads over the recent decades in the context of the "great
moderation" and falling inflation volatility. Indeed, we document that falling inflation volatility
across advanced economies is unfolding against a backdrop of secularly rising term spreads over
time. While we abstain from sweeping generalizations, we propose that, in order to jointly match
long-run patterns in inflation volatility and term spreads, important qualifications in the existing
literature are required: either term premia remain a close approximation of sovereign default risk –
and default risk has in fact risen (in contrast to "safe asset" propositions) – say because financial
repression risk has increased; or else, factors other than default risk are long-run determinants of
term premia time variation – plausibly liquidity factors.
Overall, our evidence suggests that crucial stylized interest rate facts – including those most
important to financial markets and monetary policy – may need to be reconsidered when much
longer run data are applied.
2 Literature
Short-maturity real interest rates have been investigated extensively, especially for the U.S. and the
1945 1980
U.K., though overwhelmingly they focus on post- or even post- data. A few examples of
1988
long sample econometric studies on short-maturity rates include Rose ( ), and Hamilton et al.
2016 1945
( ), with these two being distinct for their attempt to incorporate pre- annual data. Both
were unable to reject a unit root in their short-maturity real rate series, echoing results from short
sample literature. However, while covering longer samples than related literature, it is not clear
that either approach in fact exploited a sufficiently long sample to obtain significant statistical
3