NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE WELFARE ECONOMICS OF MORAL HAZARD
Richard Arnott
Joseph
Stiglitz
Working Paper No. 3316
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1990
This paper is part of NBER's research program in Taxation.
Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3316
April 1990
THE WELFARE ECONOMICS OF MORAL HAZARD
ABSTRACT
This
paper shows that, except in certain limiting cases, competitive
equilibrium with moral hazard is constrained inefficient. The first section
compares the competitive equilibrium and the constrained social optimum in a
fairly general model, and identifies types of market failure. Each of the
subsequent sections focuses on a particular market failure,
Richard Arnott
Joseph Stiglitz
Boston College Stanford University
Carney 247 Department of Economics
Chestnut Hill, MA 02167 Stanford, CA 94305

It is now widely recognized that the phenomenon of moral hazard, which
arises whenever risk-averse individuals obtain insurance and their
accident-
avoidance activities cannot be perfectly monitored, is
pervasive in the
economy.' Since individuals do not bear the full consequences of their
actions, incentives for accident avoidance tend to be Less than if
they did.
This, in itself, does not imply that the market is (constrained)
inefficient; to establish inefficiency, it needs to be shown that there is
some intervention in the economy which would lead to a Pareto improvement.
The object of this paper is to show that,,in general, whenever moral hazard
is present, market equilibrium is indeed "potentially" inefficient (i.e.
no costs of government intervention),
assuming The inefficiencies
associated with market equilibrium with moral hazard take on a number of
different forms, and this paper provides a taxonomy of these market
failures.
Such a taxonomy is useful for several reasons. First, it helps in
identifying different forms of government intervention which might yield
Pareto improvements. Secondly, several of the inefficiencies which we
identify in decentralized market economies can be thought of as
externalities. There is a strong presumption that market economies respond
to
the existence of externalities by attempting to internalize them. Our
analysis thus provides some insights into patterns of market structure which
are otherwise difficult to explain, and, in the process of identifying the
various forms of inefficiencies associated with moral hazard, enables us to

2
ascertain the circumstances in which market solutions' -- internalizing
the
informational externalities - - are more likely to be effective. Finally.
the literature has identified certain limiting cases in which
equilibrium is
efficient. Our analysis helps to understand why these limiting
cases are so
special.
One of Arrow's great contributions was to show that the
traditional
competitive analysis, and hence the basic welfare theorems, can be extended
to treat uncertainty, provided there is a complete set of insurance markets.
The markets in which we are interested differ from Arrow-Debreu markets in
an important way. Those markets provide insurance against states of
nature, the occurrence of which is unaffected (by definition) by
individuals' actions. Most insurance, however is for events (like
hospitalization), the likelihood of which is affected by individuals'
actions.2
Traditional results on the efficiency of market economies can be
obtained even when the insured-against events are endogenous, so long as
individuals' accident-prevention activities are observable. Inefficiencies
ens, only when neither the exogenous states of nature nor the individuals'
accident-prevention activities are observable.
The fact that moral hazard alters the nature of market equilibrium has
long been recognized. With moral hazard and complete insurance,3
individuals have no incentive to avoid the accident; hence competitive
markets typically entail incomplete insurance. But the existence of
incomplete insurance does not imply that the market is necessarily Pareto
inefficient, ziven the informational problems which are at the core of the
Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February, 1989