NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RISK ADJUSTED DEPOSIT INSURANCE FOR JAPANESE BANKS
Ryuzo Sato
Rama V. Ramachandran
Bohyong Kang
Working Paper No. 3314
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1990
This paper is part of NEER's research program in Financial Markets and Monetary
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NSER Working Paper #3314
April 1990
RISK ADJUSTED DEPOSIT INSURANCE FOR JAPANESE BANKS
ABSTRACT
The purpose of this paper is to evaluate the Japanese deposit
insurance scheme by contrasting the flat insurance rate with a
market—determined risk—adjusted rate. The model used to calculatIet
the risk—adjusted rate is that of Ronn and Verrna (1986) .
utilizes the notion of Merton(1977) that the deposit insurance can
be based on a one—to—one relation between it and the put option;
this permits the application of Black and Scholes(1973) oodel for
the calculation of the insurance rate. The risk adjusted preniums
are calculated for the thirteen city banks and twenty-two regional
banks. The inter-bank spread in risk-adjusted rates in Japan is
found to be as wide as in the United States. But the insurance
system is only one component of the safety network for a county's
banking system. The difference in the American and Japanese
networks is described and its implications for the evaluation of
the insurance system is discussed.
Ryuzo Sato
Rama V. Ramachandran
Bohyong Kang
Center for Japan - U.S. Business
and Economic Studies
Leonard N. Stern School of Business
New York University
100 Trinity Place
New York, NY 10006

I. INTRODUCTION
The necessity for public institutions to bolster the
liquidity and the solvency of the commercial banks even in
economies committed to unregulated markets, is recognized by all
but a small minority of scholars committed to tree banking. The
justification offered is that there is a beneficial externality to
the vitality of the banking sector that must be preserved from
contagious runs created by public suspicion of Its solvency.
A recurrent theme in this literature is the consequences of
the support and supervisory responsibilities of the central bank
(as the controller of currency and the lender of the last resort)
overlapping that of the deposit insurance corporation. The
American model of deposit insuarance has been widely adopted
elsewhere McCarthy (1980)J, but the system cannot be judged
independently of the nexus of banking relationships. Though the
objective of this paper is the use of Ronn and Verma(1986) model
to rank the city banks and a twenty—two regional banks of Japan by
risk— adjusted insurance premium, we shall begin with a selective
review of the literature on deposit Insurance and the
characteristics of the Japanese banking system.
In this context, it is common to differentiate between the
macro—functions (pursuit of monetary policy) and the
micro—functions (supervision and control of individual banks) of
the central bank. Even though the Insolvency of an individual bank
would reduce the money supply by making its deposits llLtquid. it
is in itself no justification of Interfering with the market.
Bentson (1983, p.5) points out that the loses to depositors from
1

bank failures were not excessive before the Great Depression. It
was only 0.10 percent of the total deposits per year from 1900 to
1920 and 0.42 percent per annum between 1921 to 1929. Such losses
to liquidity can be rectified easily by a central bank through its
open market operations. Another argument is that insolvencies will
disrupt the payment system and increase the cost of transaction
for the rest of the economy. An Individuals use of the means of
payment has a positive effect on the system as this will
facilitate other people using the same means. The individual will
only consider his private benefit and ignore the greater social
return. Bentson (1983) is skeptical of the argument that the banks
should be given a Pigovian subsidy for the optimal exploitation of
this positive externality. He notes that the use of checks spread
considerably before the introduction of deposit insurance and that
the check anyway carries with it the danger of inadequate funds.
Goodhart(1988, p.102) goes further in arguing: "Monetary payment
services not only could be provided, and are increasingly being
provided, by other collective—Investment funds but could also be
thus provided more safely than by banks".
Another argument that had a wide circulation In historical
literature and has received support In recent theoretical analyses
is that there Is an informational asymmetry which prevents the
depositors from enforcing the normal market discipline on the
banks. Assuming risk aversion, depositors will require riskier
banks to provide a higher return; but they are numerous, small and
possibly ill—educated and do not have the necessary information
which is very expensive to acquire. Ever: brushing aside Eenry
Thonton's comment of bank credit being used by persons of lower
2