NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RE-INTERPRETING THE FAILURE OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKET EFFICIENCY TESTS:
SMALL TRANSACTION COSTS. BIG HYSTERESIS BANDS
Richard E. Baldwin
Working Paper No. 3319
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 MassachusettS Avenue
Cambridge. MA 02138
April 1990
This paper is part of NBERs research program in International Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3319
April 1990
RE-INTERPRETING THE FAIUJRE OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKET EFFICIENCY TESTS:
SMALL TRANSACTION , BIG HYSTERESIS BANDS
ABSTRACT
Small transaction costs and uncertainty imply that optimal cross—currency interest rate
speculation is marked by a first—order hysteresis band. Consequently uncovered interest
parity does not hold and market efficiency tests based on it are miaspecified. Indeed
prediction errors and a wedge that
measured prediction errors are a combination of true
being in foreign currency and either plus or minus the
consists of the "option value" of
transaction cost. Due to the nature of this wedge, we should expect measured prediction
with the current forward rate and perhaps have a
errors to be serially correlated, c d o i r f r f e e l r a e t n ed tial itself is serially correlated. The existence of the
non—zero mean, if the interest
wedge helps account both for the failure of market efficiency tests and the difficulties in
finding an empirically successful model ofthe risk premium.
Richard E. Baldwin
Columbia University Business School
611 Uris Hall
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027

If the foreign exchange market i. efficient, traders risk neutral and transactions costs
negligible, the difference between the forward rate and the realised future spot rate should be
white noise. Empirical research has resoundingly rejected this joint hypothesis. Hansen and
Hodrick (1980), Meese and Singleton (1980), Levich (1980), Frenkel (1981), Cumby and Obstfeld
(1981), Hsieh (1984) and Frankel and Froot (1987), inter aim, find that prediction errors
sometimes have a non—sero mean, are serially correlated and correlated with lagged variables
including the forward rate itself. Meese and Rogoff (1983) find that the current spot and forward
rate are equally good predictors of the future spot. Hodrick (1987) and Levich (1985) provide
excellent analytic surveys of this vast literature.
Hodrick (1987) states that there are three interpretations of this evidence. The first
claims that the data are not ergodic (due to regime changes) and attributes the failure. to severe
small sample bias. The second views the failure. as evidence of foreign exchange market
inefficiency (e.g., Bilson 1981, Krugman 1989). The third views the failure. as evidence of a risk
premium in the foreign exchange market. Roll and Solnik (1977), Meese and Singleton (1980),
Frankel (1982, 1986), Hansen and Hodrick (1983), Faint (1984), Hodrick and Srivutava (1984),
Rogoff (1984), Domowits and Hakkio (1985), Giovannini and Jorion (1987), Caznpell and Clarida
(1987) and Lewis (1988) consider various models of the risk premium, however, a theoretical
model of the risk premium that performs well empirically has proved elusive.
1

Thu paper contributes a fourth (not mutually exclusive) interpretation to this list. We
argue that very small transaction costs can help account for the failure of these market efficiency
tests, and may help explain why an empirical model of the risk premium has proved elusive.
Foreign exchange market efficiency tests assume that uncovered arbitrage equalizes expected rates
of return on all currencies. With this assumption1 unobservable expectations can be deduced from
observed interest differentials and spot rate.. An entirely unrelated line of research shows that
sunk entry and/or exit costs create a range of inactivity in firms' dynamic entry—exit strategic.,
and that this band permits hysteresis.' Dixit (1989c) provides an analytic approximation which
shows that even third—order small sunk costs produces a first—order hysteresis band. Since
transaction costs are sunk co.ti, cross—currency interest rate arbitrage should be marked by a
first—order hysteresis band even if trading costs are only third—order small. In other word., even
third—order small transaction coats may prevent arbitrage from equalizing expected rates of
return and so invalidate uncovered interest parity. The importance of this observation is that the
prediction errors used in market efficiency tests are actually a combination of true prediction
errors and a first—order wedge that consists of the "option value" of being in foreign currency and
either plus or minus the transaction cost. As it turns out the wedge is positive for low interest rate
differentials and negative for high differential..
This suggest an alternative interpretation of market efficiency tests. Namely, the failure
of measured prediction errors to be white noise may be due to the wedge. Even if the true
prediction errors were white noise, if the interest differential itself is serially correlated, the
measured prediction errors will be serially correlated, correlated with the forward rate and other
lagged variables, and may have a non—sero mean due to the nature of the wedge. We also show
that white noise tests should fail more strongly during prolonged appreciation, and depreciations
of the exchange rate. Furthermore, since empirical models of the risk premium use measured
prediction errors as data, their lack of success may be due in part to the presence of the wedge.
2