NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FINANCIAL INNOVATION AND CURRENT TRENDS IN U.S. FINANCIAL MARKETS
Frederic S. Mishkin
Working Paper No. 3323
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
-
April 1990
Prepared for the NBER's U.S. -Japan Economic Forum February 15-17, 1990.
thank Martin Feldstein for helpful comments. Thia paper is part of NBER's
research program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3323
April 1990
FINANCIAL INNOVATION AND CURRENT TRENDS IN U.S. FINANCIAL MARKETS
ABSTRACT
This paper discusses recent developments in U.S. financial markets and
provides an economic analysis of why vsrious recent financial innovations have
occurred. This will not only provide us with s better understanding of
existing financial markets in the United States and why they have been
undergoing so much change in recent years, but it also may provide us with
clues as to where our financial system may be heading.
Frederic S. Mishkin
Graduate School of Business
Uris Hall 619
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
(212)280-3488

1. Introduction
Financial markets and institutions in the United States have been
undergoing revolutionary changes in recent years. Twenty, or even ten years
ago, many of the financial instruments and institutions that we now take for
granted did not exist. What explains this revolutionary change in the U. S.
financial system and the proliferation of new financial products?
This paper discusses recent developments in U. S. financial markets and
provides an economic analysis of whyvarious recentfinancial innovations have
occurred. This will not only provide us with a better understanding of existing
financial markets in the United States and why they have been undergoing so
much change in recent years, but it also may provide us with clues as to where
our financial system may he heading.
II. The Forces Behind Financial Innovation
Financial institutions develop products to satisfy their own needs as well
as those of their customers. As in other industries, the key driving force
behind innovation is the search for profits. Changes in the economic
environment will stimulate a search for innovations that are likely to be
profitable. From this perspective, it is not surprising that innovations in the
financial industry are stimulated by many of the same factors (changes in
technology and market conditions) that stimulate innovation in other
industries. However, because financial institutions face more restrictive
regulations than most firms in other industries, regulation is an additional
important factor in financial innovation.
Starting in the 1960s, individuals and financial institutions operating in
financial markets in the United States were confronted with drastic changes

in the economic environment: Inflation and interest rates climbed sharply and
became harder to predict, while computer technology advanced rapidly.
Financial institutions found that many of the old ways of doing business were
no longer profitable: financial products they had been offering to the public
were not selling. Many financial intermediaries found that they were no
longer able to acquire funds with their traditional financial instruments, and
without these funds they would soon be out of business. In order to survive in
the new economic environment, financial institutions had to research and
develop new products thatwould prove profitable. In their case, necessitywas
the mother of innovation. Even in businesses (financial and otherwise) that
were not threatened by the new economic environment, entrepreneurs
recognized that changes in the financial environment could be profitably
exploited.
To expand on this economic analysis of financial innovation, we now turn
to the specific forces that have been driving financial innovation --
changing
market conditions, advances in technology, and regulation --andlook at how
they stimulated the development of new financial products and markets.1
CHANGING MARKET CONDITIONS
The most significant change in market conditions in recent years has been
the dramatic increase in the volatility of interest rate movements. In the 1950s
the interest rate on three-month Treasury bills fluctuated between land 3.5%,
while in the 1970s it fluctuated between 4 and 11½ %.Thisvolatilityin interest
rates has become even more pronounced in the l980s, during which the three-
month T-bill rate ranged from 5%toover 15%. Large fluctuations in interest
rates lead to substantial capital gains or tosses on long-term securities and
'For an extensive overview of U.S. financial markets and further discussion of the process of financial
innovation, see Mishkin (1989).