NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DISSERTATION PATHS:
ADVISORS AND STUDENTS IN THE ECONOMICS RESEARCH PRODUCTION FUNCTION
Joshua Angrist
Marc Diederichs
Working Paper 33281
http://www.nber.org/papers/w33281
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2024, Revised February 2025
We thank our exceptionally committed and hard-working research assistants, Alison Fang, Merilin
Martinson, Isabel Munoz, and Tianyuan (Margaret) Zheng for two years of painstaking work.
Thanks also go to Glenn Ellison, Drew Fudenberg, and Tobias Salz for comments, to RFBerlin for
research funding, to Reyn van Ewijk for letting us use his server, and to Liz Braunstein for
invaluable help with digital EconLit. This essay is dedicated to the memory of Oberlin College
Professor Hirschel Kasper, a pioneer in the study of economics education and undergraduate
advisor to Josh Angrist. Kasper’s report on economics education was published as Kasper et al.
(1991). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2024 by Joshua Angrist and Marc Diederichs. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Dissertation Paths: Advisors and Students in the Economics Research Production Function
Joshua Angrist and Marc Diederichs
NBER Working Paper No. 33281
December 2024, Revised February 2025
JEL No. A2, A20, A23, I21, I23
ABSTRACT
Elite economics PhD programs aim to train graduate students for a lifetime of academic research.
This paper asks how advising affects graduate students’ post-PhD research productivity. Advising
is highly concentrated: at the eight highly-selective schools in our study, a minority of advisors do
most of the advising work. We quantify advisor attributes such as an advisor’s own research output
and aspects of the advising relationship like coauthoring and research field affinity that might
contribute to student research success. Students advised by research-active, prolific advisors tend to
publish more, while coauthoring has no effect. Student-advisor research affinity also predicts
student success. But a school-level aggregate production function provides much weaker evidence
of causal effects, suggesting that successful advisors attract students likely to succeed–without
necessarily boosting their students’ chances of success. Evidence for causal effects is strongest for
a measure of advisors’ own research output. Aggregate student research output appears to scale
linearly with graduate student enrollment, with no evidence of negative class-size effects. An
analysis of gender differences in research output shows male and female graduate students to be
equally productive in the first few years post-PhD, but female productivity peaks sooner than male
productivity.
Joshua Angrist
Department of Economics, E52-436
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
angrist@mit.edu
Marc Diederichs
ROCKWOOL Foundation Berlin
Gormannstraße 22
10119 Berlin
Germany
and University of Passau
md@rfberlin.com
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w33281

1 Introduction
The most selective doctoral programs in economics promise to teach their students to write
and publish journal articles reporting on their research. Although many economics PhD
students land in non-research positions in consulting, finance, or government, elite program
curriculum is research-oriented. This can be seen in the programs’ lengthy reading lists,
demanding research exercises such as second- and third-year papers, and the time students
are expected to invest in their job market papers and thesis chapters. Stratospherically–and
increasingly–selective economics PhD programs target bright and ambitious students who
appear committed to and well-prepared for a career of academic economics research.1
These scholarly aspirations notwithstanding, half of elite economics PhDs, graduates of
Harvard, MIT, Stanford and the like, publish next to nothing in the 6 years following de-
¨
gree completion, while only 5-10% publish more than a paper or two (Conley and Onder,
2014).2 Elite schools employ stellar faculty with lengthy, influential research careers. Sur-
¨
prisingly, the Conley and Onder (2014) data suggest that graduates of good-but-not elite
programs(classifiedaccordingtowidely-usedrankings), likeCMU,RochesterandSanDiego,
publish about as well as do graduates from Harvard, MIT, and Stanford. Why do so few
highly-selected elite program graduates follow the path to research success taken by their
extraordinarily successful advisors? What aspects of economics advisee training might be
changed or enhanced so as to boost graduate student success and total research output?
These questions motivate our study of the economics PhD education production function
at elite universities. The principal production inputs in this function are the faculty who
teach and advise graduate students, along with aspects of the advising relationship that
faculty and students develop together. We aim to measure features of the advising rela-
tionship and to link these features with students’ research success. Graduate education has
many features; we focus here on those most obviously tied to research. Specifically, we look
at advisors’ own research success and aspects of an advisor’s advising history such as the
number of past advisees and the scholarship of former students. We also consider measures
of research affinity such as whether an advisee’s doctoral thesis cites advisor work and the
extent of coauthoring between advisors and their students. Notably, we ignore teaching and
graduate classes. This reflects our view that students in the elite programs we study are
exposed to broadly similar levels of coursework. Advising relationships, by contrast, are
highly idiosyncratic even within programs.
1The MIT Department of Economics, long a flagship for economics graduate education, admitted 38
of 794 PhD applicants in 2014 and just 27 of 895 PhD applicants in 2024. MIT Economics’ current 3%
acceptance rate is below that of even the most selective Ivy League colleges.
2These statistics are for 1986-2000 PhD graduates of 30 top departments.
1

Our analysis starts with an ambitious data collection effort linking doctoral disserta-
tions with advisor characteristics and measures of recent graduates’ research productiv-
ity for cohorts of PhD students completing an economics degree since 1994. We focus on
eight elite schools, some of which have multiple programs training economics research PhDs.
These schools are, in alphabetical order, Berkeley, Chicago, Harvard, MIT, Northwestern,
Princeton, Stanford, and Yale. Our linked sample contains roughly 8,000 graduates from
economics departments and economics-adjacent programs like those in business and public
policy schools granting economics-related PhDs. By the early 2000s, the graduates in our
sample account for roughly 20% of research articles published in the 137 or so most cited
journals indexed by the AEA’s bibliographic database Econlit (their advisors likewise ac-
count for around 20%). The students of interest authored roughly half of articles published
in top-6 economics journals in 2020.3
Our investigation of the economics graduate education production function is related to
earlier analyses of economics graduate education and to studies of research training in other
fields. Waldinger (2010), for instance, shows that Nazi Germany’s expulsion of Jewish and
politically unreliable mathematics faculty degraded PhD student success in affected depart-
ments. Corsini, Pezzoni and Visentin (2022) examines the effect of advisor characteristics
on STEM PhD student success, focusing on advisor gender as a causal factor. Gaule and
Piacentini (2018) and Neumark and Gardecki (1998) investigate the importance of gender
matching between advisors and graduate students in the sciences and economics, respec-
tively. Following a broader analysis of student research output, we look briefly at gender
effects and interactions in the PhD student research production function as well. Our gender
analysis is related to Card et al. (2020); Iaria, Schwarz and Waldinger (2024), and Sarsons
et al. (2021), among others.
Also related, Hilmer and Hilmer (2009, 2011) attempt to distinguish the effects of advisor
scholarship from program prestige effects in a sample of economics PhDs. Garc´ıa-Suaza,
Otero and Winkelmann (2020) does something similar using recently-available data from the
Repec economics research paper repository. Athey et al. (2007) examine effects of graduate
school performance indicators like grades on job placement. Building on this work, our
analysis examines the role of advisor networks and considers estimates with and without
controlforschoolfixedeffects. NaturalsciencesPhDstudentsappeartobenefitfromadvising
and mentoring by highly visible and productive superstar scholars (Li et al., 2019). At the
same time, an analysis of life sciences students suggests PhD graduates are more successful
3Journal lists come from Angrist et al. (2020), which identifies the journals most cited by the American
Economic Review. Top-6journalsincludetheusualtop5plustheReview of Economics and Statistics. Fora
sample graduating 1987-92, Collins, Cox and Stango (2000) likewise report a preponderance of top program
graduates’ research publications in 36 highly-cited and top-5 economics journals.
2