NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DOES CORPORATE PERFORMANCE IMPROVE AFTER MERGERS?
Paul M. Healy
Krishna C. Palepu
Richard S. Rubak
Working Paper No. 3348
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 1990
We thank Robin Cooper, George Foster, Michael Jensen, Bob Kaplan, Richard
Leftwich, Mark Wolfson, Karen Wruck, and seminar participants at Baruch
College, Carnegie Mellon, Columbia, Dartmouth, Duke, Federal Reserve Bank
(Washington D.C.), Harvard, Michigan, MIT, NYU, Rochester, Stanford, USC, and
U.S. Department of Justice for helpful comments on earlier drafts, Chris Fox
and Ken Hao for research assistance, and the International Financial Services
Center at MIT and the Division of Research at HBS for financial support. This
paper is part of NEER's research programs in Financial Markets and Monetary
Economics and Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NEER Working Paper #3348
May 1990
DOES CORPORATE PERFORMANCE IMPROVE AFTER MERGERS?
ABSTRACT
We examine the post-acquisition operating performance of merged firms
using a sample of the 50 largest mergers between U.S. public industrial firms
completed in the period 1979 to 1983. The results indicate that merged firms
have significant improvement in asset productivity relative to their industries
after the merger, leading to higher post-merger operating cash flow returns.
Sample firms maintain their capital expenditure and R&D rates relative to their
industries after the merger, indicating that merged firms do not reduce their
long-term investments. There is a strong positive relation between post-
merger increases in operating cash flows and abnormal stock returns at merger
announcements, indicating that expectations of economic improvements underlie
the equity revaluations of the merging firms.
Paul M. Healy Krishna C. Palepu Richard S. Rubak
MIT Harvard Business School Harvard Business School
Sloan School of Cambridge, MA 02138 Cambridge, MA 02138
Management
Cambridge, MA 02139

1. Introduction
This study examines the post-merger cash flow performance of acquiring and target firms,
and explores the sources of merger-induced changes in cash flow performance. Our research is
motivated by the inability of stock price performance studies to determine whether takeovers create
real economic gains and to identify their sources.
There is near unanimous agreement that target stockholders benefit from mergers, as
evidenced by the premium they receive for selling their shares. The stock price studies of
takeovers also indicate that bidders generally break-even, and that the combined equity value of the
bidding and target firms increase as a result of takeovers. These increases in equity values are
typically attributed to some unmeasured source of real economic gains, such as synergy. But the
equity value gains could also be due to capital market inefficiencies. For example, the equity value
gains may simply arise from the creation of an over-valued security.
Previous studies have analyzed the stock price performance of unsuccessful takeovers to
determine if the equity increases in takeovers are from real economic gains or capital market
inefficiencies.1 However, the studies of unsuccessful takeovers cannot distinguish between the
real economic gains and the market inefficiency explanations. The fact that the stock prices of
unsuccessful merger targets return to their pre-offer level is consistent with the loss of an
anticipated premium -- whatever its source. The anticipation of real economic gains is
observationally equIvalent to market mispricing. It is, therefore, difficult to conceive of a pure
stock price study that could resolve the ambiguity in the interpretation of the stock price evidence
because of this inherent identification problem.
Stock price studies also cannot provide evidence on the sources o any merger-related
i
Dod(19.Asquis!t(1983),DoddandRuback(1977), Bradley, Desai and Kim (1983). andRuback

Post-merger corporate peformaiwe page 2
gains. Yet, differences of opinion about the source of the gains in takeovers underlies much of
the public policy debate on their desirability. Gains from mergers could arise from a variety of
sources, such as operating synergies, tax savings, transfers from employees or other
stakeholders, or increased monopoly rents. Equity gains from only some of these sources are
unequivocally beneficial at the social level.
Our approach is to use post-merger accounting data to directly test for changes in
operating performance that result from mergers.2 Our tests use accounting data collected from
company annual reports, merger prospectuses, proxy statements and analysts' reports for 50
large mergers between U.S. public industrial firms which were completed in the period 1979 to
1983. We recognize that accounting data are imperfect measures of economic performance and
that these data can be affected by managerial decisions. As we explain in section 2, we use cash
flow measures of economic performance to mitigate the impact of the fmancing of the acquisition
and the method of accounting for the transaction. We also recognize that our cash flow variables
measure period-by-period performance which is affected by firm-specific and industry factors.
We therefore use industry performance as a benchmark to evaluate post-merger performance.
Results reported in Section 3 show that the merged firms have increases in post-merger
operating cash flow performance relative to their industries. These increases arise from post-
merger improvements in asset productivity. We find no evidence that the improvement in post-
merger cash flows is achieved at the expense of the merged firms' long-term viability since the
sample firms maintain their capital expenditure and R&D rates relative to their industries. Our
results differ from the findings reported by Ravenscraft and Scherer (1987), and Herman and
Lowenstein (1988) who examine earnings performance after takeovers and conclude that merged
2 Three recent studies haveexamined earnings performance subsequent to management buyouts of
corporations (Bull (1988), Kaplan(1990), and Smith (1990)). Our paper focuses on acquisitions of one public
company by another either in a merger or a tender offer, rather than on management buyouts.