NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EFFICIENT WINDOWS AND LABOR FORCE REDUCTION
Robin L. Lumsdaine
James H. Stock
David A. Wise
Working Paper No. 3369
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 1990
This paper is part of NBERs research programs in Aging and Labor Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3369
May 1990
EFFICIENT WINDOWS AND LABOR FORCE REDUCTION
ABSTRACT
Recently many U.S. firma have offered "window" plans that provide bonuses
to a group of workers if the worker retires within a specified short time
span. This paper examines a window plan at a Fortune 500 firm, and addresses
two main issues. First, what was the effect of the window plan on departures?
Second, assuming a variety of possible firm objectives, what would be the
design of an efficient window plan? These questions are addressed using the
retirement model in Stock and Wise [l988a, l988b] . The model, estimated using
data for an earlier year, predicts well out-of-sample the subsequent large
increase in retirements under the window plan. We find that while the firm
successfully msximized departures, if its goal was to minimize either expected
future wage payments or the current cost per induced retirement, the firm
could have saved more with efficient plans constructed using the model. One
interpretation is that the firm was primarily interested in reducing the
overall size of the labor force or in retiring older employees to allow
promotion of younger employees.
Robin L. Lumsdaine James H. Stock David A. Wise
Department of Economics Kennedy School of Kennedy School of
Littauer Center Government Government
Harvard University Harvard University Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138 79 Kennedy Street 79 Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138 Cambridge, MA 02138

In recent years many U.S. firms have offered "window" plans that provide
incentives for older workers to retire early. Window plans provide special
- often
bonuses to a specific group of workers - defined by age, occupational
- if
group, or even a division within the firm - the worker retires within a
specified period of time, typically a year or less. The apparent goal of such
plans is either to reduce the salary cost of older employees or to reduce the
size of the older labor force, possibly without primary concern for total
labor cost. Some firm executives emphasize that by inducing employees in
higher level positions to retire such plans can enhance promotion
possibilities for younger employees. Others emphasize that such plans are a
convenient way to reduce the overall size of the workforce without resorting
to layoffs. Another possibility is that firms use the window plan to induce
older workers to retire because their salaries would exceed their marginal
products, were they to continue working. This is in line with the theoretical
proposition of Lazear (1979] , that defined benefit pension plans serve this
purpose in general. The window plan might be an additional inducement
motivated by the same goal. With these possible goals in mind, this paper
considers the potential effects of "optimal" window plans. To focus the
discussion and to demonstrate the effects of window plans, the analysis is
*Financial support was provided by the National Institute on Aging, grant
numbers R37 A0O8146 and T32 AGOO186, the Hoover Institution, and the National
Science Foundation.

(2)
applied to the experience of a large Fortune 500 firm. We consider whether
the window plan in this firm was as efficient as it could have been; was there
another plan that could have done the job better?
The analysis relies on the option value model developed in earlier
papers
[Stock and Wise 1988a and 1988b] and used to analyze the retirement incentives
of defined benefit pension plans. About 50 percent of workers in the United
States have firm pension plans. Approximately 75 percent of these are covered
by defined benefit plansj The typical defined benefit pension plan provides
substantial incentive for workers to retire early, often as young as 55. Most
window plans can be treated as temporary changes in the provisions of firm
pension plans.
Firm pension plan coverage expanded quickly in the late 1940's and the
1950's, after 1942 legislation that made contributions to pension funds tax
deductible. Although totsl coverage has not changed much in recent years, the
proportion of workers that retires with a firm plan is still increasing. The
rapid increase of pension plan coverage has been accompanied by a dramatic
decrease in the labor force participation of older workers, as shown by the
following data for men:
Male Labor Force Psrticioation Rates, by Age
Year 50-54 55-59 60-64 65+
1971 92.8 88.8 74.1 25.5
1986 88.9 79.0 54.9 17.5
1The others are covered by defined contribution plans. Under these
plans, the pension benefit is determined by contributions to the firm pension
fund, which are in turn usually set at a percentage of salary earnings.
Defined contribution plans typically have none of the incentive effects of
defined benefit plans, as described below.