NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MORAL HAZARD IN PARTNERSHIPS
Martin Gaynor
Paul Gertler
Working Paper No. 3373
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1990
We are grateful to Randy Ellis, Tom McGuire, Mark Pauly, Rob Porter, Louis
Putterman, John Strauss, and participants in seminars at Carleton University,
Johns Hopkins University, The RAND Corporation, the University of Toronto and
the RAND Conference on Health Economics for helpful comments. The usual caveat
applies. Special thanks are due to Chuanfa Guo for exceptional research
assistance. This paper has not been accorded the review given official NBER
publications. This paper is part of NEER's research program in Health
Economics. Any opinLons expressed are those of the authors and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research. Caynor's work on this
project was
partially supported by BRS Grant No. 01-90. This support is gratefully
acknowledged.

NBER Working Paper #3373
June 1990
MORAL HAZARD IN PARTNERSHIPS
ABSTRACT
In
this paper, we ijuvestigate incentive structures within partnerships.
Partnerships provide a classic example of the tradeoff between risk spreading and
moral hazard. The degree to which firms choose to spread risk and sacrifice
efficiency incentives depends upon risk preferences, for which
data are typically unavailable. We are able to overcome this difficulty due to the
existence of a unique data set on a prominent form of professional partnership;
medical group practice.
We consider a two-stage model In which agents choose effort in response to
incentives and in which the firm can choose two different Instruments to affect
incentives and to spread risk: the compensation method and the number of members.
There are two new theoretical results. First, relative to the compensation method
or group size which would be chosen in the absence of risk or risk aversion, the
best compensation method will be one which sacrifices efficiency incentives in order
to spread risk, and the best membership size will exceed the first best size for the
same reasons. Second, a further increase in risk or risk aversion leads the firm to
sacrifice more efficiency incentives in order to spread more risk. Hence, firms who
are more risk averse or face greater uncertainty pay larger risk premiums In terms
of sacrificed output due to shirking.
The empirical results are striking and consistent with the theory. Firms which
report møre risk aversion have greater departures from first-best organizational
incentive structures. Specifically, increased risk aversion leads to compensation
arrangements which spread more risk through greater sharing of output and to
decreased group size in order to counteract diminished incentives. We also find
that compensation arrangements that have greater degrees of sharing of output across
physicians significantly reduce each physician's productivity, whereas reductions in
group size significantly increase productivity. The estimated premium associated
with risk aversion accounts for almost eleven percent of gross income, comparing the
most risk averse to the least risk averse physicians in the sample.
Martin Gaynor Paul J. Certler
Department of Health Policy The RAND Corporation
and Management 1700 Main Street
Department of Economics Santa Monica, CA 90406
Johns Hopkins University
624 North Broadway, 6th Floor
Baltimore, MD 21205

1. INTROOUCTION
One of the primary contributions of economic theory in the last twenty years Is
the recognition that first-best efficiency incentives must be compromised in order
to spread risk In the presence of imperfect information. This was first realized in
the study of insurance', and has been extended to a wide variety of situations. One
prominent area of analysts has been the structure of incentives within an
organization.2 In this paper, we focus on the incentive structure within
partnerships. Partnerships provide a classic example of the tradeoff between risk
spreading and moral hazard. They form In order to split fixed costs and spread risk
due to uncertainty. Risk is spread through some degree of sharing of output
among
firm members. The greater the degree of output sharing, however, the stronger is
the incentive for members to shirk and thus free ride on the effort of other
members.
Although there has been extensive theoretical analysis of this point, the
corresponding empirical literature is sparse. The existing empirical literature has
focused mainly on the impact of compensation method on firm performance, and has not
typically examined the determinants of compensation method. The studies In this
area have covered executive compensation, compensation of workers, and employee
profit-sharing.3 With the exception of Seller (1984), however, these papers do not
consider the impact of risk aversion on compensation method and efficiency.
In this paper we theoretically and empirically analyze the tradeoff between risk
spreading and efficiency incentives in partnerships. The degree to which firms
'The classic reference is Zeckhauser (1970).
2See Holmstrdm and Tirole (1989) for an excellent
survey.
For example, on executive compensation see Jensen and Murphy (1990),
Abowd (1990), Gibbons and Murphy (1989, 1990), leonard (1990). On worker
compensation, see Pencavel (1977), Seller (1984), Brown (1990). On employee
profit-sharing, see Fitzroy and Kraft (1987).

choose to spread risk and sacrifice efficiency incentives depends upon risk
preferences, for which data are typically unavailable. It is this data limitation
which has heretofore stymied attempts at empirical analysis. We are able to
overcome this difficulty due to the existence of a unique data set on a prominent
form of professional partnership; medical group practice. These data are unique in
that they contain detailed information on risk aversion, compensation arrangements,.
physician productivity, and other aspects of the internal organization of these
fins.
We model partnerships as fins who use two instruments to affect incentives and
to spread risk: the compensation method and the number of members. To our
knowledge, this case has not been previously examined. Previous models of the
choice of Incentives under risk have considered the case where the fin has only one
choice variable: either compensation or membership. The agency literature has
examined the case In which the finn chooses compensation method, given a fixed
number of agents (e.g., I4olmstrm, 1982). These are models of team production,
which implies that the agents in an organization are jointly subject to a single
random shock. The consequence of this is that risk cannot be spread by adding
members; only by compromising incentives, or by diversifying production activities.
The literature on labor-managed firms (e.g., Ireland and Law, 1982) has concerned
itself with the opposite case; fixed compensation method (equal sharing) and
variable membership. The result here is that risk can be spread if members' random
shocks are not perfectly correlated.
Professional partnerships share some aspects of both these models. Production in
professional partnerships is typically non-joint across members of the firm, i.e.,
the members produce independently of one another. Partners also face demand curves
for their individual services, Consequently there is less than perfect correlation
between individuals' stochastic shocks, implying that risk can be spread by adding
2