NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
IMPLICATIONS OF A CAPITAL GAINS TAX CUT
REVENUE AND WELFARE
WHEN GAINS REALIZATIONS AND DIVIDEND PAYOUTS ARE ENDOGENOUS
Patric H. HendershOtt
Eric Toder
Yunhi Won
Working Paper No. 3386
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1990
of the National Chamber
We gratefully acknowledge the financial support
This paper is part of NBER'S
Foundation and the comments for Harvey Galper e . xpressed are those of the authors
research program in Taxation. Any opinions
of Economic Research.
and not those of the National Bureau

NBER Working Paper #3386
June 1990
REVENUE AND WELFARE IMPLICATIONS OF A CAPITAL GAINS TAX CUT
WHEN GAINS REALIZATIONS AND DIVIDEND PAYOUTS ARE ENDOGENOUS
ABSTRACT
This paper uses a general equilibrium model to simulate both the
effects of a preferential capital-gains tax rate on total income tax
revenues and the effects of a revenue-neutral substitution between a capital
gains preference and marginal income tax rates on economic efficiency and
the distribution of income. In the simulations, a capital gains preference
increases efficiency by reducing tax distortions between untaxed assets
(household and state and local capital) and taxable business sector assets
and between realized and unrealized capital gains (the "lock-in" effect),
but reduces efficiency by increasing tax distortions between corporate
dividends and retained earnings and between financial assets that produce
capital gain income and those that produce ordinary income. Because the
model treats aggregate factor supplies as fixed, however, the simulations do
not capture the efficiency gain from reducing the tax distortion between
current and future consumption or the loss from increasing the tax
distortion between current consumption and leisure (or untaxed labor).
The net estimated welfare effects depend on two parameters: the
elasticity of capital gains realizations with respect to a change in the
capital gains tax rate and the elasticity of the dividend-payout ratio with
respect to a change in the tax cost of dividends relative to retentions.
With no payout response, the net welfare effect from a 15% maximum rate on
capital gains is positive for a wide range of realizations elasticities.
With a high payout elasticity, the net welfare effect is slightly positive
for high estimates of the realizations elasticity and slightly negative for
low estimates of the realizations elasticity. The welfare changes, both
positive and negative, mainly affect taxpayers with income of $50,000 and
over.
Patric H. Hendershott Eric Toder Yunhi Won
Ohio State University The Treasury Ohio State University
Dept. of Finance P.O. Box 3724 Dept. of Public Policy
Hagerty Hall 1 The Terrace Hagerty Hall
1775 College Road Wellington, 1775 College Road
Columbus, OH 43210 New Zealand Columbus, OH 43210

Under the U.S. income tax, as in most OECD countries, capital income
that people accrue in the form of increases in asset values (capital gains)
is taxed only when the gain is realized by sale or exchange. The taxation
of capital gains upon realization instead of accrual produces two sources of
efficiency loss. First, because tax liability is triggered by realizations,
the capital gains tax in its current form encourages taxpayers to hold onto
assets with accrued gains, instead of disposing of them by sale or exchange,
in order to compound income tax-free until realization. Further, under U.S.
law, the step-up in basis at death allows gains transferred by bequest to
escape income tax entirely. The result is a "lock-in" effect in which many
households hold suboptimal portfolios (in terms of higher risk or lower
productivity of assets to the household than to other households) to reduce
tax liability.1 One can usefully interpret the utility loss from lock-in to
- a
a suboptimal portfolio as art implicit tax - tax paid by the household but
not received by the tax collector.
Second, the ability of households to defer tax until realization
results in a lower effective tax rate on assets that produce capital gain
than on assets that produce ordinary income. This distorts the choice among
assets, leading to overinvestment in gains-producing assets, and induces
investors to incur transactions costs to convert ordinary income to capital
gain.

2
One important source of conversion of income to capital gain is the
substitution of corporate retained earnings for dividend payouts.
Households may prefer dividends to retained earnings because such payouts
convey useful information and increase shareholder control of the firm.2
The higher effective tax rate on dividends than on retained earnings,
however, reduces the desired payout rate. The optimal payout rate is one at
which the information (and other) benefits of an extra dollar of dividends
to shareholders exactly equals the marginal net tax costs of payouts to the
weighted average shareholder.3 Again, tax avoidance, through reduced
corporate payouts, has its cost in the form of an implicit tax.
A reduction in the tax rate on realized capital gains would lessen one
excess burden on households, by unlocking them from suboptimal portfolios,
but would increase another excess burden, by discouraging corporate payouts
(and, more generally, by encouraging taxpayers to incur costs to substitute
capital gains for ordinary income). The impact of a capital-gains tax rate
cut on these excess burdens, as well as on the Federal budget, the
efficiency of allocation of real capital, the level and allocation of risk
in the economy and the distribution of income, should be taken into account
when considering the wisdom of a capital-gains tax rate cut. Moreover,
measurement of all these impacts should allow for household portfolio
responses, capital stock reallocations, changes in the corporate debt-equity
ratio, and changes in the interest rate on Federal debt (Cook and O'Hare,
1987).
In this paper we calculate the impact of capital-gains tax rate cuts on
both the Federal budget and economic welfare by income class. The vehicle
for this calculation is an enhanced version of the Hendershott and Won
extension (1989b) of the Galper-Lucke-Toder general equilibrium model
(1988). The enhancement entails introducing utility-maximizing realization
and payout responses.4 The enhanced model incorporates all of the above