NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANKS IN THE MARKET FOR LIQUIDITY
Peter Carber
Steven Wejsbrod
Working Paper No. 3381
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1990
This paper is part of NBER's
research program in Financial Markets and Monetary
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3381
June 1990
BANKS IN THE MARKET FOR LIQUIDITy
ABSTRACT
Banks are unique among financial institutions because they are the
cheapest source of liquidity in the economy. Banks choose to hold reserves
to facilitate settlement of end-of-day net due to positions arising from
payments operations. Money market substitutes for bank liabilities do not
escape from the cost of reserves since their
issuers lean on banks to
provide liquidity. Since the cost of reserves falls on all issuers of less
liquid liabilities seeking
access to payment services, including non-bank
intermediaries, reserves cannot represent a tax on the banking system alone.
Peter Carber Steven Weisbrod
Department of Economics Weisbrod Group Ltd.
Brown University
114 E. 32 Street
Providence, RI 02912 Suite 1306
New York, NY 10016

In recent literature on the role of banks in financial
markets, the ascendent perspective
has focused on banks'
special
information about borrowers
relative to that of other
financial
institutions)- For example, Fania (1985)
presented evidence that
commercial, paper, bankers'
acceptances, and bank
certificates of
deposit trade at the same yields. Banks must hold reserves against
deposits, which most researchers interpret as a tax paid by bank
customers.2 Because commercial paper does not have
a reserve
requirement, Fama inferred that depositors do not pay for reserves.
He concluded that the tax incidence
falls on customers who borrow
from banks and that therefore
bank loans are a unique form of
credit. Otherwise, borrowers would switch to an untaxed source of
credit.
Such observations have
generated assumptions that banks have
private information about
customers unavailable to other, non—bank
lenders. Little effort has been expended, however, to detail the
1 For a recent review of this literature
and of other
perspectives on the role of banks, see Gertler (1987).
2 For example, see Black (1975) for such an interpretation.
James (1987) confirms Fania's
evidences on insignificant spreads
between certificates of deposit
and commercial paper, showing that
the average spread remained
unchanged across changes in reserve
requirements.
James (1987) developed additional
evidence that capital
markets regard banks
as possessors of private information about
borrowers not available to other lenders. He found that the
announcement of a bank line of
credit causes the stock of the
recipient company to exhibit
excess returns immediately after the
announcement. In contrast, he found that the announcement of a
commitment to lend by an insurance company causes no such reaction
in the stock market.
Lummer and Mcconnell
(1989) found that
James's results hold only when existing bank lines are renewed.
2

sources of such superior bank information.4
In these pages, we consider an explanation of why banks are
unique among financial intermediaries which does not lean on an
informational advantage. Banks are unique because they are the
cheapest source of liquidity in the economy. This advantage is not
derived from the special nature of individual banks but from the
special nature of the banking system which can mobilize good funds
more easily than competing financial institutions.5 When a cash
in advance requirement materializes for some transaction, a bank
must make the market by delivering a bank deposit.
We develop this liquidity concept by presenting a basic image
of the commercial paper market in which issuers may be forced to
depend on bank loans to guarantee delivery of cash to investors
when their paper matures. Issuers in such wholesale markets obtain
Black (1975) and Goodfriend (1988) have suggested that
banks obtain their special information because of their role in the
payments system. They argue that a bank benefits from having a
demand deposit relationship with a customer which provides it with
current information about the state of the borrower's financial
condition. Another non—bank lender, however, could easily erode
this competitive advantage by requesting that the borrower provide
real time access to his on line bank financial statements.
Goodfriend also argues that since banks must lend to each
other on short notice, they develop skills for quick credit
evaluation. These skills are then transferable to customer
examination.
There may be economies for a potential borrower to subject
itself to a bank credit examination because the borrower must visit
the bank anyway to access the payment system. After having done
the examination, the bank knows more than other lenders ex cost;
but ex ante it has no intrinsic advantage in information gathering.
"Good funds" can mean either cash or, more typically in the
wholesale markets we examine, deposits at the Federal Reserve or at
banks, items whose delivery always constitutes settlement of
a
claim for dollars.
3