HERR WORKING PAPERS SERIES
SANCTIONS
Jonathan Eaton
Maxim Engers
Working Paper No. 3399
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
July 1990
We thank seminar participants at Tokyo, Robe, Nagoya. Hiroshima, Dnshisho,
Osaka, Kyoto, Keio, Tohoku, and Osaka Municipal Universities for useful
comments. This paper is part of NEER's research program in International
Studies, Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3399
July 1990
SANCTIONS
ABSTRACT
Sanctions are measures that one party (the sender) takes to influence the
actions of another (the target). Sanctions, or the threat of sanctions, have
been used, for example, by creditors to get a foreign sovereign to repay debt
or by one government to influence the human rights, trade, or foreign policies
of another government. Sanctions can harm the sender as well as the target.
The credibility of such sanctions is thus at issue. We examine, in a
game-theoretic framework, whether sanctions that harm both parties enable the
sender to extract concesaiona. We find that they can, and that their thrust
alone can suffice when they are contingent on the target's subsequent
behavior. Even when sanctions are not used in equilibrium, however, how much
compliance they can extract typically depend-s upon the coats that they would
impose on each party,
Jonathan Eaton Maxim Engers
Department of Economics Department of Economics
Rouss Wall Rouss Hall
University of Virginia University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22901 Charlottesville, VA 22901

I. Introduction
Within national boundaries, laws and contracts allow parties to influence
each other's actions. A third party, the legal system, can punish those vho
break laws or breach contracts. In contrast, the interactions of sovereign
governments, or of parties under the jurisdictions of different sovereign
governments, typically lack third parties to enforce contracts and agreements.
Hence, parties to such contrscts or agreements must themselves be willing to
enforce them if they are to have any effect. Enforcement may then require
measures that affect the other party directly, without involving anyone else.
Economic sanctions, steps by a government that inflict harm on another
country, possibly at a cost to itself, are such measures.
National governments have often used economic sanctions to affect
policies of other countries.' The United States government, for example, has
banned trade with Cuba and South Africa in response to policier of their
governments. U.S. trade law calls for trade restrictions against countries
found to engage in practices that damage U.S. industry or infringe upon U.S.
intellectual property. Finally, collecting repayment from debtor governments
may require that creditor countries threaten to curtail financial relations or
trade with debtor countries. In each of these circumstances, one national
government tries to affect the actions of another by threatening, or by
actually tsking seesures that are likely to han both countries.
We examine the potential for sanctions to elicit desired behavior from
Oaoudi and Dajani (1983) and Hufbeuer at al. (1985) provide detailed case
studies of several historical situations in which national governments have
used economic sanctions, successfully and otherwise, to pursue foreign policy
obj ectivea,

another party. We consider the interaction over time of two parties, called
the sender and the the target.2 The sender would like to affect the target's
actions. It has the power to harm the target, but at a cost to taef,
We consider two types of actions that the sender aight wish to affect.
One is the target's ongoing choice of some action, such as the target's
debtservice payments, trade policies, pollution, or degree of protection of
intellectual property. Another is the target's once—and—for—all choice of an
irreversihle action, such as ceding territory, releaeing s hostage,
extraditing an accused criminal, or relinquishing power to a new government.
We examine whether sanctions that are costly both to the sender and to
the target enable the sender to alter the behavior of the target.4 When they
can, we also consider whether the threat alone of such sanctions is enough, or
whether they must actually be used.
The answers depend critically on the dynamics of the interaction between
the sender and target. One issue is whether sanctions are contingent on what
the target then does, or are purely spiteful in the sense of imposing a cost
independent of the target's subsequent actions. Sanctions, for example, si5'nt
be imposed or renewed only occasionally (as by a legislature), but enforced
continuously (as by an executive or judiciary). Legislation could then
instruct the executive or judiciary to lift sanctions as soon as the target
are using the terminology of Hufbeuar et sl. (1985).
3The relationship between sender and target resembles that between
principal andagent in contract theory. See, for example. toss (1973). Our
concern here is not with the nonobservability of the target's (egent's)
action, which has been the focus of this litarature, but with the sender's
(principal's) ebility to enforce a contract with the target (agent).
4For example, the failure of the grain embargo imposed by the United
States against the Soviet Union sfter its invasion of Afghanistan is tommonly
attributed to the toss of export revenue it implied for U.S. farmers. See
Oauodi and Dajani (1983) or }Iufbauer et sI. (1985) for a discussion.