CAPITAL POSITIONS OF JAPANESE BANKS
Edward J. Kane
Haluk Unal
Ash Demirguc -Kunt
Working Paper No. 3401
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1990
The authors wish to thank Daniel Kobb for research assistance and to
acknowledge helpful comments from Thomas Cargill, Ray Y. Chou, and Texas A&M
University. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and should not be
attributed to either the World Bank or the NBER. This paper is part of NEER's
research program in Financial Markets. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author(s) and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3401
July 1990
CAPITAL POSITIONS OF JAPANESE BANKS
ABSTRACT
This paper measures and analyzes two types of hidden capital at Japanese
banks: (1) the net undervaluation preaent in accounting measures of on-
balance-sheet assets and liabilities and (2) the net economic value of off-
balance-sheet items. A model is constructed that explains changes in both
types of capital as functions of holding that explains changes in both types of
capital as functions of holding-period returns earned in Japan on stocks,
bonds, yen, and real estate. The model is applied to annual data covering
1975-1989 and a four-class size/charter partition of the Japanese banking
system. For each type of hidden capital and each class of bank, the model
develops estimates of the stock-market, interest-rate, foreign-exchange, snd
real estate sensitivities of returns to bank stockholders.
Only the stock-market sensitivities prove significant at five percent.
This finding leads us to investigate what happens when we analyze Japanese bsnk
stock returns by means of stationary and split-sample market models. Time-
series regressions show that very large Japanese banks have developed stock-
market betas in excess of two and that the value of a bank's beta has come to
increase with measures of its size and accounting leverage.
Future research will investigate the sensibility of our results to
different ways of pooling data from individual banka and to more-sophisticated
methods for estimating various parameters. We also plan to extend the analysis
by imbedding it in a model of how variations in bank-customer contracting
arrangements in Japan affect the returns that can be earned by bank
stockholders.
Edward J. Kane Haluk B. Unal Ash Oemirguc-Kunt
Ohio State University University of Maryland The World Bank
343 Hagerty Hall Tydings Hall, 21488 1818 H Street, NW.
Columbus, Ohio 43210 College Park, MD 20742 S-8017

CAPITAL POSITIONS OF JAPANESE RANKS
I.
Introduction
In recent years, Japanese banks have become major playera in world
finance. Many apparently knowledgeable observers attribute thia development
to the maintenance of inappropriately low capital requirements by Japanese
authorities (Corrigan, 1987; Pettway, Kaneko, and Young, 1990). However,
Japanese banks are not undercapitalized. Their stocks show market
capitalizations that average several timea the value of the banks'
accounting net worths (Kane, 1987; Baer and Mote, 1989).
Divergences between accounting and stock-market estimates may be
described as "hidden capital." Kane and Unal (1990) develop a method for
testing hypotheses about the determinants of two types of hidden capital:
the misvaluation of on-balance-sheet items (post-acquisition gains and
losses that, although they remain unbooked, are bookable upon the sale of
the item under Generally Accepted Accounting Principles, CA.AP) and
intangible values which CAAP currently designates to be unbookable off-
balance-aheet items.
This paper shows that Japanese banks are highly capitalized on a
market-value basis and tests hypotheses about the determinants of hidden
capital at Japanese banks. We first develop estimates of a valuation ratio,
k, by which to adjust the book value of a firm's net worth and of the net
market value of unbookable equity elements, U. These parameters are
estimated by regressing crosssectionally the market value of the
institution's market capitalization on the book value of its accounting net
worth. This regression equation forms the heart of what Kane and Unal (1990)
call the Statistical Market Value Accounting Model, SMVAM.

2
A second block of the model endogenizes changes in k and U aa functions
of ex post holding period returns on stocks, bonds, yen, and Japanese real
estate. This formulation permits us not only to test hypotheses about the
determinants of both forms of hidden capital, but to use the model to
explain variation in the market, interest, foreign-exchange, end real-estate
sensitivities of an institution's stock.
The analysis extracts market, interest-rate, foreign-exchange, and
real-estate sensitivities from a time series of cross-section regressions
that use accounting and rste-of-return information to explain the market
vslue of stockholder equity claims. The first block of the model is
estimated for each of the 15 years 1975-1989 for four categories of Japanese
banks. The four-class partition of the banking system represents a
conventional Japanese classification that uses the names city banks, long-
term credit banks, trust banks, end regional banks. This classification
closely approximates a size-based partition, with city banks having the
largest average asset size end regional banks the smallest average asset
size throughout the period we study.
II. Model and Diagnostic Checks
The SMVAM is estimated separately at each date for members of each
class of institution:
MV_U+kBV+e. (1)