NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DID J.P. MORGAN'S MEN ADD VALUE?
A HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
ON FINANCIAL CAPITALISM
J. Bradford De Long
Working Paper No. 3426
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1990
I would like to thank George Alter, Michael Bordo, David Corbett, Greg Clark,
Bill Lazonick, Perry Mehrling, Dan Raff, Elyse Rotella, Andrei Schleifer,
Mike Spagat, Eugene White, members of the Gliometrics Society, and
participants in seminars at Rutgers, the University of Michigan, and Indiana
University for helpful discussions. This paper is part of NBER's research
program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER Working Paper #3426
August 1990
DID J.P. MORGAN'S MEN ADD VALUE?
A HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
ON FINANCIAL CAPITALISM
£3 S TRACT
The pre-WWI period saw the heyday of financia1 capitalism" in the
United States: the concentration of securities issues in the hands of a few
investment bankers which had substantial representation on corporate boards
of directors. This form of organization had costs: it created a conflict of
interest that allowed investment bankers to heavily tax operating
corporations. It also had benefits: investment banker representation on
boards allowed bankers to monitor the performance of firm managers, quickly
replace mangers whose performance was unsatisfactory, and signal to ultimate
investors that a company was well managed and fundamentally sound. The
presence on one's board of directors of a partner in J.P Morgan and Co. was
associated with a rise of perhaps 30 percent in common stock equity value.
Some share of the increase in value almost surely arose because investment
banker representation on the boards of competing companies aided the
formation of oligopoly. But the development of similar institutions in other
countries that like the Gilded Age U.S. experienced exceptionally rapid
economic growth-Germany and Japan are the most prominent examples-suggests
that a substantial share of value added may have arisen because "financial
capitalism" improved the functioning of financial markets as social capital
allocation mechanisms.
J. Bradford De Long
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 314
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138

June 16. 1990 1
I. Introduction
Inthe years before World Wax I, a corporate security flotation worth more than $10mil-
lion invariably passed through the hands of one of a very small number of mvestment banking
houses—J.P. Morgan and Co.: Kuhn, Loeb. and Co.: the First National Bank: the National City
Bank; Kidder. Peabody. and Co.; and Lee, Higginsori, and Co.1 The partners and directors of
these institutions were directors, voting trustees, or principal stockholders of financial and non-
financial corporations with a total market capitalization—debt plus equity—including sub-
sidiaries of perhaps $30 billion.2 To place this quantity in perspective, this sum bore the same
relation to the size of the U.S. economy that $7.5 trillion would bear today: it amounted to about
one and a half times a year's national product. and to perhaps forty percent of the country's
produced capital stock (Goldsmith, 1954). Investment bankers profited immensely from their
role as the key middlemen on Wall Street: the commissions on the flotation of United States
Steel were as large a share of the American economy then as $15 billion would be today.
American finance just before World War I was thus several orders of magnitude more
concentrated than it has been at any time since World War II. Financiers possessed strong
voices, or at least strong potential voices, in corporate management. The implications of this
concentration of finance—this" money trust"—and its influence was a major political flashpoint
of the first half of this century. Progressives and their allies feared this money trust in finance as
an evil much worse and more dangerous than any monopoly in an individual industry. For
finance to be concentrated, and for industry to be beholden to finance, was in their eyes a deeply
disturbing departure from their populist ideal of small firms and competitive markets.
Historians, by contrast, have often been more approving of the large financial organiza-
tions and deals of the Gilded Age and Progressive Era. Alexander Gerschenkron (1962) argued
When questioned bySamuelUntermyer, chief counsel and guiding spiritof the investigating Pujo Committee (chaired by
Louisiana Representative Amene Pujo).First National Bank Chairman GeorgeF. Baker was 'unable to namea single issue of as
much as that had been made within tenyears withoutthe participation or cooperation ofone ofthemembers' of
the small group of dominant investment banks, Public securities issues by the members of the investment banking oligarchy then
amounted to about S5C mithon a year.
2ThePujo Committee report (Pujo. 1913b) gives a smaller number. Louis Brandeis (1914) points out that the Pujo calculations
neglect partially-owned subsidiaries' capitalization not owncd by the parent company.

June 16, 1990 2
that the heavy capital requirements of the modem technologies of the turn of the century required
large firms and large banks. LanceDavis (1963) wondered whether Great Britain's apparent re!-
ative failure after 1870 might be linked to its failure to develop "finance capitalist" institutions
like those present in Germany and the United States.
Economic theory provides little guidance, as it does not speak with one voice about
"financial capitalism." In the early 1970's conglomerate stocks appeared to sell for more than
the value their operating companies would bring standing alone. It was then used argued that
informed investors are scarce—that it is difficult to assess the prospects of individual industrial
firms—and that those skilled at making such assessments could add value by forming con-
glomerates, closely watching managers, and serving as "miniature capital markets" that direct
new resources to areas of greatest opportunity (Williamson, l975).
The end of the conglomerate boom and stasis in the market for corporate control followed
in the 1970's; theoretical arguments were then advanced that the absence of "financial capital-
ism"—in tht sense of an active market for corporate control and of financiers' monitoring man-
agers—would not lead to large efficiency losses. In a world of informed investors, a firm's stock
price serves as a signal of its performance; managers can be provided with the correct incentives
to act in the interest of shareholders, their principals, by tying their compensation to the stock
market's valuation of the firm (see Jensen and Meckling, 1976).
In the early 1980's the relatively close links between banks and industrial firms in the
successful Japanese keiretsu became the focus of attention. Some observers (for example,
Thurow, 1986) then argued that the absence today of links between finance and industry charac-
teristic of the "money trust" is a serious weakness in the U.S. capital market, but today Thurow
calls his preferred system "merchant banking" rather than "financial capitalism" or "money
3Williamson estimatedthe transactionscoats associated with the exercise of stoclholder control over management at fourteen
percent of equity value. Since these large coats blocktheexercise of stockisolder control over managers and there "turks Lhe
susptciort that these enclaves of private power will run amok,' Williamsonargues that conglomerates evolved to do what
stockholders cannot do: "organizational innovations.., have mitigated capital market failures by transferring functions
traditionally imputed to the capital market to the firm instead."
4Shareholders can make a manager's incentives congruent with their own b; tying his compensation to stock returns even when
their interest is his dismissal. English investors obtained Jay Gould's resignation from the Erie Railroad by pointing out that tt
would trigger a large rise in the stock price whicb would give Gould substantial gains on his holdtngs.