NBER VORXING PAPERS SERIES
A THEORY OF CORPORATE FINANCIAL STRUCTURE
BASED ON THE SENIORITY OF ClAIMS
Oliver Hart
John Moore
Vorking Paper No. 3431
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1990
We are grateful to the National Science Foundation, the LSE
Suntory-Toyota
International Centre for Economics and Related Disciplines, the Olin
Foundation, and the Center for Energy Policy Research at MIT for financial
support. We would also like to thank Rabindran Abraham, Dick Brealey, Lucien
Bebchuk, Stu Myers, David Webb, and participants in the conference on
"Financial Contracting and The Theory of the Firm," Paris, June, 1990, for
helpful comments. They are, of course, not responsible for the views
expressed here. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Workirg Paper #3431
Septatter 1990
A 'flIDDRY OF CDRIORkI'E FINPINCThL S11JCIURE
BASFD ON¶IHE SEIOPTF1 OF cLADtS
ABSTRACT
We develcp a theory of optinal capital structure based on the idea that
debt ath equity differ in their priority status relative to future corporate
cash pants. A catpany with high (dispersed) debt will fird it hard to
raise new capital since new serity-holders will have lew priority relative
to existii senior creditors. Conversely for a conpany with lew debt. We
shew that there is an optimal debt-equity ratio arxl mix of senior an junior
debt for a corporation whose managemant may unlertake unprofitable as well as
profitable investments. other thins, cr theory can explain the
ctervation that profitable fin have lew debt. In addition, it predicts
that (bog-term) debt will be high if new investment is risky ard on average
profitable, or if assets in place are risky an new invesbnt is on average
unprofitable.
Oliver Hart
Jthn !.kDore
Department of Econamics Department of Econcittics
E-52 Lorxion School of Econcimics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Hcghton Street
80 Merial Drive
London WC2A 2E
Cambridge, 02139 Eoglard

1. Introduction
Since the time of Modigliani and Miller's famous irrelevance theorem,
economists have devoted much effort to relaxing the theorem's assumptions in
order to understand the real-world trade-offs between debt, equity and other
corporate financial instruments. In particular, literatures have developed
that explain financial structure as an attempt to reduce taxes (see, e.g.,
Modigliani and Miller (1963) and Miller (1977)); as a signaling device (see,
e.g., Leland-Pyle (1977) and Ross (1977)); as a bonding device (see, e.g.,
Grossman-Hart (1982) and Jensen (1986)); as a way of completing markets (see,
e.g., Stiglitz (1974) and Allen-Gale (1988)); or as a device for dividing up
control rights between various claimant groups (see, e.g., Aghion-Bolton
(1988), Hart-Moore (1989), Bolton-Scharfstein (1990), Diamond (1989),
Harris-Raviv (1989) and Zender (1989)).
While each of these approaches has provided useful insights, none has
been entirely successful in explaining the choice of financial structure. On
the one hand, the tax, signaling and bonding theories all rely on an
exogenous cost of bankruptcy to explain why firms are not 100%
debt-financed.1 Not only is this theoretically unsatisfactory, but also,
given that estimated bankruptcy costs are not that high (see Warner (1977)),
it is unclear whether these theories can explain observed debt-equity ratios.
On the other hand, while market completion theories are consistent with high
debt-equity ratios, they do not explain the widespread use of debt and
equity, as opposed to more complex contingent securities, or why financial
intermediaries issuing derivative securities on corporations cannot complete
the market instead of the corporations themselves.2 Finally, recent control
theories do go some way toward explaining the costs of bankruptcy or default
and hence the disadvantages of high debt, but most deal with entrepreneurial
firms and do not analyze the choice between public debt and public equity.3
In this paper, we take a different, and we believe new, approach to
understanding corporate financial structure. We argue that an important
aspect of any claim issued by a corporation is its seniority or priority
status with regard to future corporate cash payments. For example, debt has
priority over equity in the sense that if the corporation owes creditors $100
and has P dollars to pay out, then creditors must be paid off first, so that
-1-

equity-holders receive something only if P > 100. In the same way, senior
debt has priority over junior (or subordinated) debt in the sense that
junior
creditors receive something only after senior creditors have been
fully paid
off.
We argue that the priority structure of a firm's existing claims will
be important if the firm needs to return to the market in the future to raise
funds for further investment. Suppose at one extreme that the firm is
initially 100% equity financed. Then raising funds for further investment
will be relatively easy since the firm can issue debt to the new
claim-holders, thus putting them first in line for any future payment. Since
claim-holders are prepared to pay for this attractive priority position, the
likelihood that the firm can carry out the new investment project is
high.
At the other extreme, if the firm has a large amount of
(dispersed) initial senior long-term debt, any new claimants will be junior
to existing claim-holders (the senior creditors) and so the expected return
on new claims wil1 be relatively low. Hence raising new funds will be hard
and it is less likely that the firm will be able to carry out the new
investment project.
In a world where management cannot be trusted always to make the
right
investment decisions, either because it is incompetent or because it has
objectives of its own, there is an optimal balance between making further
investment too easy or too hard. (In the formal model of the paper, we
assume that management is self-interested, rather than incompetent.) We use
this idea to analyze the corporation's optimal initial financial
structure,
and in particular the choice between (long-term) debt and equity. Our
analysis throws light not only on the debt-equity ratio of a corporation, but
also on the mix between different seniorities of debt. Our framework also
provides a clear-cut distinction between debt and equity: equity is a "soft"
claim in the sense that new claims can be created senior to it; while
(senior) debt is a "hard" claim in the sense that new claims can only be
created junior to it.
We can illustrate the main idea of the paper using a simple
example.
Suppose that a firm has assets in place which yield a return of $200 at date
-2-