a flE EDICIVE I OF flhI'2ES1 Ra's
AND flIIP RE SEAES
n
Bexanke
Workini Paper No. 3486
WTIEALJREJIJ OF EOtlIC RSFA1{
1050 Massacthusetts Averp.e
Ca]*,rice, W 02138
Octd,er 1990
This paper is part of N's reseazth pxogi in Ecuiiic Fluctuations ar
Finarcia]. Markets ar Minetary Eunics. Any cpthicris expressal are those
of the author arxl rct those of the National B.ireau of Ecutiic Pesearcth.

NB Workixx Paper #3486
October 1990
C4 ThE EDICIVE ER OF I EREST RATES
AND INTEREST PATE SEN
ABsTRAC'r
A number of interest rates ard interest rate spreads have been fourd to
be useful in predictir the cxxirse of the eoonany. We oatpare the predictive
pcer of sai of these suested interest rate variables for nine irdicators
of real activity ard the inflation rate. ()ir results are oonsistent with
those of Stock ard Watson (1989) ard Friethian aid Kuttner (1989), who fourxl
that the spread between the caTTercial paper rate aix3. the Treasury bill rate
has been a particularly good predictor. We present eviderxe that this spread
is inforsative not so much because it is a muasure of default risk (which has
been the usual presumption), but because it is an indicator of the stance of
nK)netary policy; for example, durir the "credit crunches" of the l960s aid
the 1970s, the ccarcial paper—Treasury bill spread typically rose
significantly. We also shc that, possibly because of charges in inetary
policy cçeratin procedures aid in financial markets, this spread appears r
to be a less reliable predictor than it used to be.
Ben Bernanke
Woodrci Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NY 08544

1
Economists have long understood that financial market variables
contain considerable information about the future of the economy. Stock
prices, in particular, have always been a popular leading indicator.
Recently, though, a number of researchers have pointed out that interest
rates and interest rate spreads--that is, differences between interest
rates on alternative financial assets- -can be effective predictors of
the economy.
Probably the most striking results along these lines have been
obtained by James Stock and Mark Watson1, who examined the information
contained in a wide variety of economic variables in an attempt to
construct a new index of leading indicators. Stock and Watson found
that two interest rate spreads- -the difference between the six-month
commercial paper rate and the six-month Treasury bill rate, and the
difference between the ten-year and one-year Treasury bond rates- -
outperformed nearly every other variable as forecasters of the business
cycle. The two Stock and Watson variables are not the only candidates
that have been advanced, however: A number of alternative interest
rates and spreads have been suggested by various authors, as we will
discuss further below.
The finding that interest rates and spreads contain a great deal
of information is interesting, but it raises a number of questions.
Possibly the most important of these is the question of interest
rates and spreads predict the course of the economy so well. In this
article we try to make some progress on this issue.
To do this, a necessary first step is to determine which interest
rate variable (or variables) is the most informative about the future
"New Indexes of Coincident and Leading Economic Indicators",
NEER Macroeconomics Annual, MIT Press, 1989.

2
course of the economy. Section I of this paper runs a "horse race'
between a number of suggested predictors. We test the ability of the
alternative interest rate variables to predict nine different monthly
measures of real macroeconomic activity, as well as the inflation rate.
While many interest rate variables have been excellent predictors of the
economy during the period that we consider, we find that the best single
variable is the spread between the commercial paper rate and the
Treasury bill rate- -one of the two Stock and Watson variables.2 An
additional finding is that, unfortunately, the predictive power of this
variable (as well as of the other interest rate variables) appears to
have weakened in the last decade; this poses a potential problem for the
use of this variable in the new index of leading indicators proposed by
Stock and Watson.
Given the superiority of the commercial paper- -Treasury bill
spread documented in Section I, in Section II we narrow our focus to
inquire why this particular spread has historically been so informative
about the economy. We consider two principal hypotheses: The first is
that the commercial paper--Treasury bill spread is informative because,
as the difference between a risky return and a safe return on assets of
the same maturity, it is a measure of perceived default risk. Suppose
that, for whatever reason, investors expect the economy to turn down in
the
near future; because this will increase the riskiness of privately
issued debt, the current spread between private and safe public debt
will be bid up. The commercial paper--Treasury bill spread forecasts
L
Actually, the predictive power of this particular spread was
first noticed not by Stock and Watson but by Benjamin Friedman and
Kenneth Kuttner, as discussed below.