NBER RKt PM' SIES
ThE XD SiNRD, zmM'Ict, AND FDCThL
E7*T SIc*:
Q.ISIS IN
AN fl1ThTIL PARISON
Ben Benke
Harold Jans
Workiri Paper No. 3488
1IC
EA1
NiTItThL aJREiIJ OF
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
ca±ridge, 02138
tcber
1990
This paper is part of NBR's research prcran in Ecxinic Fluctuations an
Finanoial Markets ard !'kDnetaxy Ecxranics. riy cpinions express1 are those
of the authors ard not those of the National Rireau of Ecx,iunic Research.

NB Workir Paper #3488
Cctcber 1990
ThE QDID SI7NDPD, DEFLATIC, AND FNCIkL QISIS Dl EAT
1SIctl: AN INIHThTIctL 14PARISN
ABSTR
Pnt research has providel stron circntantial evidence for the
prcçositici that sustainI deflation—the result of a mismanaged
international gold starxard—was a major cause of the Great Depression of the
1930s. Less clear is the itcthanism by 'which deflation led to depression. In
this paper cnsider several channels, I luflr effects cperatir thrcuh
real wages anl thrgh interest rates. CXr foo.s, however, is on the
disruptive effect of deflation on the financial system, partiQllarly the
bankirq system. Thecry su3gests that fan ir prices, by reducixxj the net
worth of banks arri borrowers, cn affect flows of credit ard thus real
activity. Usir annual data for twenty-four cxxintries, we confirm that
cxxmtries 'which (for historical or institutional reasons) were nre
vulnerable to severe banJd.n panics also suffered iaidi worse depressions, as
did intries which reained on the gold stardard. We also fird that there
may have been a feedback locp thrh which bankIrx panics, partioularly
those in the United States, intensified the worldwide deflation.
Ben Bernanke Harold JanEs
Woedrow Wilson School Departrent of History
Princeton University Priieton University
Princeton, HI 08544 Princeton, NY 08544

I
The Gold Standard, Deflation, and Financial Crisis in the Great
Depression: An International Comparison
Ben Bernanke
Harold James
I. Introduction
Recent research on the causes of the Great Depression has laid
much of the blame for that catastrophe on the doorstep of the
international gold standard. In his new book, Temin (1989) argues that
structural flaws of the interwar gold standard, in conjunction with
policy responses dictated by the gold standard's "rules of the game",
made an international monetary contraction and deflation almost
inevitable. Eichengreen and Sachs (1985) have presented evidence that
countries which abandoned the gold standard and the associated
contractionary monetary policies recovered from Depression more quickly
than countries that remained on gold. Research by Hamilton (1987,1988)
supports the propositions that contractionary monetary policies in
France and the U.S. initiated the Great Slide, and that the defense of
gold standard parities added to the deflationary pressure.'
The gold standard-based explanation of the Depression (which we
will elaborate in Section 2) is in most respects compelling. The length
and depth of the deflation during the late 1920s and early l930s
strongly suggest a monetary origin, and the close correspondence (across
both space and time) between deflation and nations' adherence to the
gold standard shows the power of that system to transmit contractionary
monetary shocks. There is also a high correlation in the data between
deflation (falling prices) and depression (falling output), as the
previous authors have noted and we will demonstrate again below.

2
If the argument as it has been made so far has a weak link,
however, it is probably the explanation of how the deflation induced by
the malfunctioning gold standard caused depression; that is, what was
the source of this massive monetary non-neutrality?2 The goal of our
paper is to try to understand better the mechanisms by which deflation
may have induced depression in the 1930s. We consider several channels
suggested by earlier work, in particular effects operating through real
wages and through interest rates. Our focus, however,is on a channel
of transmission that has been largely ignored by the recent gold
the
standard literature; namely, disruptive effect of deflation on the
financial system.
Deflation (and the constraints on central bank policy imposed by
the gold standard) was an important cause of banking panics, which
occurred in a number of countries in the early 1930s. As discussed for
the case of the U.S. by Bernanke (1983), to the extent that bank panics
interfere with normal flows of credit, they may affect the performance
of the real economy; indeed, it is possible that economic performance
may be affected even without major panics, if the banking system is
sufficiently weakened. Because severe banking panics are the form of
financial
crisis most easily identified empirically, we will focus on
their effects in this paper. However, we don't want to lose sight of a
second potential effect of falling prices on the financial sector, which
is "debt-deflation" (Fisher 1933, Bernanke 1983, Bernanke and Gertler
1990). By increasing the real value of nominal debts and promoting
insolvency of borrowers, deflation creates an environment of financial
distress in which the incentives of borrowers are distorted, and in