NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES
ThE SU(XESS OF AOUISITIONS:
EVIDENCE F14 DIVSTIURFS
Steven Kaplan
Michael S. Weisbach
Workirg Paper No. 3484
NATIONAL JREAU OF EODNONIC RFSEARQ-t
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1990
We are grateful to Michael Barclay, Gene Fama, Paul Healy, Krishna Palepu,
Peter Pashigian, Ar1rei Shleifer, Robert Vishny, Jerry Zirman an seminar
participants at thicago, LSE, Rochester, an.i the SEC for helpful mnents.
Hick Reed provided excellent research assistance. We thank the Center for
Research in Security Prices (Kaplan), MERC ard the Jobn M. Olin Fairdation
(Weisbach) for financial support. This paper is part of NBER's research
program in Financial Morkets and Monetary Ecencznics. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National &ireau of Econanic
Research.

NR Workin Paper 3484
tther 1990
ID
ThE SU(XES OF ACXUISITIONs:
F DIVI1DR
ABSTRC
This paper sties a sanpie of large acquisitions ccmpleted between 1971
arid 1982. By the end of 1989, aouirers have divestal aiiist 44% of the
target caipanies. Usirg the accounting gain or loss reccqnizo by the
acquirer, press reports, and the sale price, we characterize the ex ncst
success of the divested acxiuisitjons and consider only 34% to 50% of
classified divestjtures as unsuccessful. cr.uirer returns arid total
(acquirer arid target) returns at the acquisition announcextnt are
significantly lower for unsuccessful acquisitions than for divestitures not
classified as unsuccessful arid for acquisitions not divested. These results
suggest that market reactions to acquisition annouricemants reflect
expectations of future profits and that unprofitable acquisitions are
reccqnized as such when initiated. Diversifying acquisitions are airrost four
times liore likely to be divested than related acquisitions.
However, we do
not find Strong evidence that diversifying acquisitions were less successful
than related ones.
Steven Kaplan Michael Weisbath
Graduate School of Eusiness
Siiron School
University of Qiicago University of Rochester
1101 East 58th Street
Rochester, NY 14627
iicago, IL 60637

1. Introduction
Acquirers often buy other companies only to sell them afterwards. Grimm's
Mergerstat Review reports that divestitures make-up at least 35% of mergers and acquisitions
transactions in the 1980s.1 In a more systematic study, Ravenscraft and Scherer (1987)
estimate that 33% of acquisitions in the 1960s and 1970s were later divested, while Porter
(1987) finds that over 50% of the acquisitions made by 33 conglomerate acquirers in "new"
or unrelated industries were later divested. These authors interpret the divestiture rates as
evidence that acquisition strategies, particularly diversifying ones failed to increase and
probably destroyed value. In light of such high divestiture rates, they question the typical
event-study results that the combined stock market return to acquirer and target
shareholders is positive [see Bradley, Desai and Kim (1988) and Jensen and Ruback (1983)].
In fact, Scherer (1988) concludes that " ... theimplications of event studies have been
contradicted by historical evidence (p. 71)."
This view of divestitures (and acquisitions) as failures, however, is not the only
explanation consistent with high divestiture rates. Weston (1989) argues that acquirers sell
targets for a number of reasons which do not involve poor performance. For example, an
acquirer may sell a business it has improved or a business that once had synergies with the
acquirer's core business but no longer does. In these cases, both the original acquisition and
the sale could have increased shareholder value. In addition, relaxed antitrust enforcement
and financial innovations made in the 1980s made possible some business combinations that
were not viable previously. Some acquisitions that led to a relatively efficient allocation of
resources in the 1970s may no longer have been efficient in the 1980s when sales to related
buyers or leveraged buyouts became feasible [see Shleifer and Vishny (1990)].
1
See Weston (1989) and W.T. Grimm's Mergersta: Review, 1989.
1

In this paper, we evaluate the extent to which divestitures in the 1980s represent
unsuccessful or failed acquisitions. Beginning with a sample of 271 large acquisitions
completed between 1971 and 1982, we follow the acquisitions and determine which are
subsequently divested. We find that 43.9% of the acquisitions have been divested by the end
of 1989. Whenever possible, we categorize divestitures as successful or unsuccessful
acquisitions using accounting data on the gain or loss on sale from the divestiture, divestiture
sale price, and the Wall Street Journal or business press article describing the divestiture.
The results suggest that many divestitures are not failures, expost. Forexample, of the
divestitures with a reported gain or loss on sale, 42% report a gain on sale; 44% report a
loss; and 14% report that the gain or loss is immaterial. Based on accounting results as well
as comments by reporters and managers, we classify only 34% of the divested acquisitions as
unsuccessful -thatis, the reason for the divestiture appears to be performance-related.
Furthermore, in transactions that report a comparable sale price, targets are divested at
192% of their purchase price, which when adjusted for the increase in the S&P 500 index
over the same time period equals 90% of their purchase price and 143% of their market
value before the initial takeover announcement.
The view of divested acquisitions as failures questions the use of the stock market
reaction to the initial acquisition announcement as a measure of an acquisition's value. The
results for gain on sale and sale price, however, are generally consistent with the event-study
results that bidder returns are slightly negative, while combined returns to bidder and target
are positive. Targets appear to be worth less than the bidders pay, but more than the target
is worth before the takeover occurs. We note, however, that because our sample is limited
to one time period, our evidence is also consistent with the alternative explanation that
sellers of assets received fortuitously high prices for those assets in the 1980s thanks to
relaxed antitrust, financial innovation or some other reason not known at the time of the
acquisitions.
2