NR PKI? PAPE1 SERIES
CAPTThL FLC, POREIQ DIRECT ThVES'INENT,
AND DEBr—EX3ITY SWAPS IN DEVELOPING JNI1IES
Sebastian &wards
Workiog Paper No. 3497
NATIONAL JPE11J OF EQC71IC RESEARQ!
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
ambri&e, ! 02138
Octther 1990
A previons version of this paper was presenta:1 at the Kiel Instithte
Conference on Capital FlcMs, Kiel June 20-22, 1990. Financial support fran
the National Science Fonrdation, the Rockefeller Fc*1ation, aixi the
University of California Pacific Rim Program is gratefully acknowledged. I
tharij nrj discussant, !.kin Ihan, ar the conference participants for helpful
canrints. I am ixxlebted to Miguel Savastano, Julio Santaella, Javier Ortiz-
Batalla ard Tan Harris for helpful discussions arxl efficient research
assistance. This paper is part of NEER's research program in International
Studies. Any cpinions expressed are those of the author ard not those of the
National reau of Econanic Research.

NBER krkir Paper #34 97
cxrtcber 1990
CAPTAL Fr..c, FOREIQr DflT INvINENr,
ND EEBT—BtJITf SW1'PS IN IVEtOPfl tWIRtS
One of the nest serious censequetres of the debt crisis
of 1982 has been
the retuctjc2-i in the ac sibiity to the r1d
capital sarket for itost
develcpir c.xxntries. This situation has provea to be
particularly serious
for Latin ?nrican nations. At this juncture,
a key question is hc to
inprove the LLCs attractiveness for foreign capital flows. In this paper I
explore the role of t potential sour of additional
private capital
inflows: irreaseI direct foreign invesbtnt, arxl
the debt-conversion
mediani. The paper presents the results frcznan ecorzttric analysis of
the detenninants of the cross-cintxy distri1ition
of the OEQ) direct foreign
investnt (DFI) into the L1Xz. Particular easis is given to assessirq
the relative inportance of political variables of the
recipient countries.
The role of the debt—equity swape as investnnts for retucir the extretne
debt turden is also investigated, usirg the
recent thilean experience with
these inedanisn as a case—study.
Sebastian Edwards
Epartment of EcncEiics
UCLA
405 Hilgard Avenue
Los ?neles, C7 90024—1477

1
I. Introduction
The debt crisis of 1982 drastically changed the circumstances of the
developing world. After years of relatively rapid growth, partially fueled
by generous flows of foreign funds, in 1982 the poorer nations suffered a
major setback: growth plummeted, unemployment soared and acute balance of
payments crises ensued. Since then the direction of international net
resource transfers has been reversed and has run from the LDCs to the
advanced nations. Nowhere have these changes been more dramatic than in
Latin America. During the 1980s real per capita income in Latin America and
the Caribbean as a whole (excluding Cuba) declined by 8.2%. Moreover, in
some nations such as Argentina, Bolivia, Peru and Nicaragua, real income
per
capita dropped by more than 20% during the decade of the l980s)
There is little doubt that economic recovery and the return to growth
and prosperity will take time and will require massive amounts of funds and
deep policy reforms. What makes the recovery prospects rather
grim is the
fact that in a large number of the Latin American nations
domestic savings
ratios have declined significantly during the last few years (see the 1989
World Develoyrnent Retort). Even if the liberalization
policy reforms advo-
cated by the IMP and the World Bank, among others,
are undertaken, and if as
a consequence of them investment productivity increases, most countries
will
still need to supplement their domestic savings with foreign funds. How-
ever, one of the most serious consequences of the debt crisis has been that
for most developing nations the accessibility to the world capital market
has been greatly reduced, if not completely closed. What makes this situa-
tion particularly serious is the fact that,
starting in the second half of
the l970s portfolio and bank lending became the
single most important source
of capital flows, greatly surpassing direct foreign investment
(Lal 1989).

2
A key policy question -- and, in fact, one that haunts politicians as
- is
well as economists -
how to improve the LDCs attractiveness for
foreign
capital flows. In their recent contribution to the Handbook of
Develooment
Economics, Cardoso and Dornbusch (1989) have succinctly
captured the
profession's concern regarding this issue:
Commercial banks are unlikely to provide much
development finance
in the years to come. Bond markets, likewise, will be
closed for
countries with a poor debt experience. Efforts to
develop private
capital flows to debtor countries must, therefore, focus
on other
mechanisms.
(p. 1434)
In the search for renewed sources of foreign
capital flows a fairly
long list of candidates, both old and new, has been identified.
In this
paper I explore the potential role of two of these sources of additional
rivate capital inflows into the less developed countries:
(1) increased
direct foreign investment (DFI), and (2) debt
conversions (and especially
debt-equity swaps) mechanisms.
The paper is organized as follows: Section II
presents the results
obtained from an econometric analysis of the determinants
of the cross-
country distribution of the OECDs direct foreign investment into the
LDCs.
More specifically, the question asked is why do the
advanced nations tend to
direct their DFI to some countries and not to others.
A fundamental aspect
of this problem refers to empirically determining the
relative importance of
government policies, structural variables and political considerations
in
explaining DFI. The political angle is particularly relevant in
the current
circumstances when so many developing nations - - and
especially the Latin
American countries -- have
been experiencing massive political changes. In
Section III, on the other hand, I analyze the role of
debt-equity swaps as
instruments for reducing the debt burden and
potentially increasing private
capital flows, especially in the form of DFI, into the
developing countries.