NB W3RGNG PAP SERIES
rr
ncs
mreir
amns, NO nlnmnaE:
m SPRE?LE,
N IXPThflLflThSflfl4
Mark Gertler
R. Glenn ftuI±ard
Anil Kap
Workirg Paper No. 3495
1TiCtlAL S3AU OF ECOtflUC RESflflB
1050 Massachusetts Avemza
cartridge, 02138
Oct±er 1990
We thank ngene Wan for eel1eztt research asaistarc; Flint Brayton, Eileen
Mauskcpf, ard Ivid Paifschneider for xnnents ard advice abcut data; ard
Benjamin Friedman, Gary Gorton, Bruce Creenwald, Frederic Mishkin, Jamas
Stock, Stephen Zeldes onnfenw participants, ardparticipants in seminars
at the Federal 1serve Bank of New York, the University of Pennsylvania, ard
the 1990 NEER Suimner Institute for helpful suggestions. The crrclusiona
expressed in this paper do oct necessarily reflect the opinions of the Roan
of Coverocra of the Federal Reserve System or its staff. This paper is part
of Nfl's research progress in Fcrcgnic Fluctuations aM Finarcial Markets
aM Ronetary Ecolunics. Any opinions expressed are thoee of the authors ard
oct those of the National 3.2reau of Econmnio Besearth.

Nfl Workirq l'aper #3495
Gctdar 1990
flhsn<kb's' WiflS SRFAZS, 5EDIT 1S]1flh1S
?JiD DWftCfl FLUCIUTIcKS;
M ENPThIAL flITIQ(
We present a sinçlefranncrkthat inxtpcrates a rvle for "interest
ratespreais" in 1s of invesnt fluctuations. Tonally,i develq' a
ample ncdel of izweetinent erd firiaxrial oontractirqurx3er asynretric
infonnaticn that can he used to generate an D.iler equation describirg fires'
intertanporal desisiona abazt invesunent. 'Iba Biler equation is tban
estintel usirq data on U.S. prtx1ucers' durable equipnent Investment. We
fird that &rirq certain perieds—ad.zq to agercy-xst prthlene —thebasic
Toler equation is violated, ard shifts in interest rate differentials help
predict investment. Thus, the empirical rilta lent suçnrt to e].s
eiphasizirq ha,: (i) mvenents in agency csts of external finance can
anplify investment fluctuation, ant (ii) thanges in the interest rate spread
may signal rvenents in these agercy cccts.
Nark Gertler R. Glenn lktbazd nil Kashyap
Department of Exrnnics Graduate School of aisinass Mail Stcç 61
New York University Cbltnubia University Division of Reseerth
269 Netter Street Uris Hall 609 ant Statistics
New York, NY 10003 New York, NY 10027 Federal Reserve Said
Washizqta'i, 20551

Recent time-settee work in macroeconomics has emphasized the role of
the interest rite spread between risky and safe debt in forecasting real
GNP. Stock and Watson (1989) demonstrate that the interest differential
has greater predictive power for output than either money, interest
or any other financial variable. Increases in the spread are
rates,
associated with subsequent downturns in GNP growth. While the Stock and
Watson analysis is limited to postwar data, similar results apply to the
prewar period)
Though the statistical relation between the spread and output
appears robust, relatively little effort has been devoted to providing a
sound structural interpretation of the evidence. It is clear thst, under
any story, movements in the spread reflect changes in "payoff" or "de-
fault" risk, broadly defined.2 Nonetheless, the question emerges as to
what are the sources of shifts in this payoff risk. In this paper, we
argue that the counter cyclical pattern in the spread may in part be
symptomatic of a financial element in the business-cycle propagation
mechanism. Our reasoning draws heavily on some recent theoretical work
that links informational problems in capital markets at the micro level
with fluctustiona in aggregate economic activity. We also provide some
supporting econometric evidence, extending methods used recently to teat
for the impact of credit-market imperfections on investment.
The theoretical literature to which we allude motivates a financial
propagation mechanism by providing a rationale for why the agency costs
of external finance may fluctuate countercyclically. Countercyclicsl
movements in the wedge between external and internal finance, in turn,
introduce a kind of "accelerator" effect on investment, ultimately
magnifying investment and output fluctuations.3 As Calnmiris and Hubbard

2
(1990) note, an associated implication of these theories is that the
spread between risky and safe interest rates should move inversely with
investment and output. The basic idea is that the wideningof the spread
is associated with, among other things, increased agency coats of exter-
nal, finance- In addition to being compatible with the time-series
evidence, these theories also provide some formal underpinnings on the
earlier work on financial crisis, which emphasized sharp increases in the
spread as the precursors to financially induced disruptions in real
activity.
is that cyclical
An alternative to our story shifts in payoff risk
are independent of financial factors. Defaults, for example, are driven
purely by technological factors. The spread is useful as a "leading
indicator" simply because it contains information about future techno-
logical disturbances, and not because there is any meaningful respect in
which financial structure interacts with real activity. Indeed, this is
a popular interpretation of the Stock-Watson results. While this expla-
nation has some intuitive appeal, the underlying theory is incomplete.
In the absence of any kind of imperfection in capital markets,
the pattern of financial payoffs from borrowers to lenders is indetermi-
nate (since the Nodigliani—Miller theorem sppliea). In particular, since
leverage ratios are indeterminate, there need be no particular connection
between interest rate spreads and output fluctuations, as we demonstrate
later.
In any event, a teat of the competing theories is available. If the
spread is simply an "information" variable and is not in any way reflec-
tive of credit-market imperfections, then the data should not reject the