1
NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
POST-WAR ECONOMIC GROWTH IN THE
GROUP-OF-FIVE COUNTRIES: A NEW ANALYSIS
Michael J. Boskin
Lawrence J. Lau
Working Paper No. 3521
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 1990
This paper is one of a series reporting on the results of a long—
term research project on economic growth at the Center for
Economic Policy Research, Stanford University, initiated by
Professors Boskin and Lau in 1987. Dr. Boskin is currently on
leave from Stanford University to serve as Chairman of the
President's Council of Economic Advisers. The views expressed
herein are his and in no way express the official views of the
Council of Economic Advisers. The authors wish to thank the John
M. Olin Foundation, the Ford Foundation, the Pine TRee Charitable
Trust and the Technology and Economic Growth Program of the
Center for Economic Policy Research, Stanford University, for
financial support; Irma Adelman, Surjit Bhalla, Paul David,
Steven Durlauf, Hidekazu Eguchi, Robert Eisner, John Helliwell,
Bert Hickman, Dean Jamison, Lawrence Klein, Ralph Landau, Randy
Norsworthy and Peter Pauly for helpful comments on earlier drafts
of this paper; and Yeon-Koo Che, Edwin Lai and particularly JUng-
Ii Kim for their research assistance. This paper is part of
NBER's project in Growth. Any opinions expressed are those of
the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Reearch.

NBER Working Paper #3521
November 1990
POST-WAR ECONOMIC GROWTH IN THE
GROUP-OF-FIVE COUNTRIES: A NEW ANALYSIS
ABSTRACT
An inter—country aggregate production function is estimated
using annual data for the post—war period drawn from the Group—
of—Five (G—5) countries: France, West Germany, Japan, United
Kingdom and United States. It is assumed that all countries have
the same underlying production function, not in terms of the
measured outputs and inputs, but in terms of efficiency—
equivalent units of outputs and inputs. The measured quantities
of outputs and inputs of each country may be converted into
efficiency-equivalent quantities of outputs and inputs by the
multiplication of country and commodity-specific and time—varying
augmentation factors. These augmentation factors are estimated
simultaneously with the parameters of the aggregate production
function.
Within this framework, the traditional assumptions for the
measurement of productivity-—constant returns to scale,
neutrality of technical progress and profit maximization——are
tested and all are rejected. Additional hypotheses about the
nature of technical progress are also tested. It is found that
technical progress may be represented as purely capital—
augmenting. In particular, the rate of augmentation is estimated
at between 14 and 16 percent per annum for France, West Germany
and Japan, and between 8 and 10 percent per annum for the U.K.
and the U.S. for the period under study. It is also found that
technical progress is capital-saving rather than labor—saving and
is therefore unlikely to be a cause of structural unemployment.
Using the estimated production function parameters, a
growth-accounting exercise is carried out and the results are
compared with those obtained from the conventional approach.
Technical progress is found to be the most important source of
growth, accounting for more than 50 percent, followed by the
growth of capital input. Together they account for more than 75
percent of the growth of real output in the Group—of—Five (G—5)
countries in the period under study. An international and
intertemporal comparison of the productive efficiencies is also
undertaken. It is found that the United States had the highest
level of overall productive efficiency for the whole period under
study. However, the productive efficiencies of France, West
Germany and Japan rose rapidly from less than 40 percent of the
U.S. level in 1949 to two—thirds of the U.S. level in 1985.
There is thus some evidence of convergence.
Dr. Michael J. Boskin Lawrence J. Lau
Chairman, Presidents Council Department of Economics
of Economic Advisers Stanford University
Old Executive Office Building Stanford, CA 94305—6072
Washington, DC 20500

1. Introduction
The objective of this study is to apply a new spprosch to the analysis
of post-war economic growth in the Group-of-Five (C-f) cou g ntr ies. The
framework used provides meaningful comparisons of the levels the rates
of growth of productivities across countries. This new approach also
enables us to identify separately not only the degree of returns to scale
and the rate of technical progress in each country but also their biases, if
any. The results of our empirical analysis are used as the basis for a new
assessment of the relative contriburicns of capital, labor and technical
progress co econcmic growth that does not depend on the conventional strong
assumptions of growth accounting--constant returns to scale, neutrality of
technical progress and prcfit maximization with competitive output and
faccor uarketa.
The new approach is board on the Lau-Yotcpoulos (1989) modification of
the concept of the meta-production function, introduced by Haysmi and Ruttan
(1970, 1985), throogh the uae of time-varying, country- and commodity-
specific augmentation factors. An empirical aggregate meta-production
function ia estimated from pooled inter-country time-series data. The basic
asaumptiona for this factor-augmentation approach to the meta-production
function are:
(1) All countries have the same underlying production function F()
but may operate on different parts of it. The production function, however,
applies to "efficiency-equivalent quantitiea of outputs and inputs, that
ta:
i I
(1.1) F(Xia 'rn) ' = ,.,,n

where and X'a are tha "effioiency-equivaient quantities of output
and inputs respectively of the ith country at time t, a is the number of
inputs, and n is the number of countries. The assumption of a meta-
production function implies that F(') does not depend on i (but may
depend on t)
(2) The "efficiency-equivalent quantities of output and inputs of
each country are not directly observable. They are, however, linked to the
measured quantities of outputs, Y1's, and inputs, X.'s, through tima-
varyihg, country- and commodity-specific augmentation factors A(t)'s, i
1 ,jD,...,m:
(1.2) —
j
(1.3) X7. A..(t)X, 1 a
,
We note that in terms of the measured quantities of outputs, the production
function may be rewritten as:
(1.4) Y. — A0(ri'F(x1 X*t), i — 1 n,
so that the reciprocal of the output-augmentation factor A10(t) has the
interpretation of the possibly time-varying level of the technical
efficiency of production, also referred ro as output efficiency, in the ith
country at time t.
There are many reasons why these commodity augmentation factors are not
likely to be identical across countries. Differences in climate, topography