NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES
CONTRACTS AND THE MARKET
FOR EXECUTIVES
Sherwin Rosen
Working Paper No. 3542
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December io
This paper was prepared for Nobel Symposium No. 77: Contracts:
Determinants, Properties and Implications, Stockholm, August 18-
20, 1990. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Labor
Stucies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3542
December 1990
CONTRACTS AND THE MARKET FOR EXECUTIVES
ABSTRACT
The
paper reviews empirical findings on executive
compensation in light of marginal productivity and
contract
theories. The executive labor market performs three
functions.
First, control must be distributed and assigned
among executives.
The most talented executives are efficiently
assigned to control
positions in the largest firms when talent and the
marginal product
of control are complements. These gains or rents
are partially
captured in larger earnings. In fact, the elasticity of
top execu-
tive pay lies within a tight band around .25
among industries, time
periods, and countries where it has been estimated.
Second,
executive contracts must provide incentives for
managers to act in
the interests of shareholders.
Potential loss of reputation,
bonding and takeovers probably substitute for direct
monetary
incentives in this task.
Nevertheless, the elasticity of top
executive pay with respect to accounting rates of return lie near
1.0. The elasticity with respect to stock market returns is much
smaller, though precisely estimated, near 0.1. Differences of
opinion remain on whether the market provides enough incentives to
align interests between ownership and control. Third, the market
must identify new talent and reassign control over careers from
older to younger generations. Competition
among executives for top
positions and the diminishing incentive effect of future rewards
with age implies that compensation shouldincreasingly tilt rewards
to current performance over the course of a career. Available
evidence supports this prediction.
Sherwin Rosen
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
Chicago, Illinois 60637

Revised, November 11, 1990
CONTRACTS AND THE MARKET FOR EXECUTIVES
Sherwin Rosen*
University of Chicago
I. INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY
The vital function of business executives in
efficiently directing
the vast amounts of resources under their control makes
the executive labor
market an especially interesting one to
study. Berle and Means raised the
fundamental contractual issue by pointing out
possible conflicts of interest
arising from separation of ownership and control. It has taken
many years
for the economics profession to put these matters in
proper perspective
The first important response was to identify a market for
corporate control [Manne (1965)], whereby the threat of
involuntary
termination would provide incentives for
managers to align their actions
with shareholders' interests. The remarkable level of
activity in the
American corporate-control market in recent
years has dispelled any
lingering doubts about the importance of this mechanism.
Still, there
remain differences of informed opinion on its
efficacy for solving the
problem.
Second generation debates on the
managerial theory of the firm
[Marris (1963), Baumol (1967)] focused attention on the firm's objective
function. If managers operated the firm in shareholders'
interests then
they would maximize profits, and if they catered to their
own interests then
such
things as sales and the amount of assets controlled would
enter into
the firm's objectives. An empirical question
was immediately suggested:
did executive earnings respond more to profitability or to sales? The
Paper prepared for Nobel Symposium No 77: Contracts:
Determinants,
Properties and Implications, Stockholm, August 18-20, 1990.

2
investigations provoked by this question were among the first empirical
studies of agency.
It would be interesting to report that these studies provided
empirical basis for the extensive theory of agency that has been developed
recently, but that is not the way it happened. Rather, much of that
development paralleled theoretical research on information economics.
Whatever its source, the executive labor market is one of the most importan:
practical applications of the new theory. Theory in turn has provided a
useful framework for thinking about the data and for showing precisely how
various mechanisms may be devised to align the interests of control and
ownership. I attempt to join the theoretical and empirical strands of this
literature in this paper. It is organized around the three main economic
problems that the executive labor market must solve: the distribution and
assignment of control among executives; providing performance incentives;
and identifying talent and reassigning control in the course of career
development.
Section II briefly takes up the problem of the allocation of
control, given incentives. The idea is that personal power and influence in
an organization depend on the interactions between talent and the
productivity of control. If there is complementarity between the two it is
efficient to assign greater control to more talented persons. In a market
equilibrium, the most talented executives occupy top positions of the
largest firms, whcre the marginal productivity of their actions is greatly
magnified over the many people below them to whom they are linked. This
explains why earnings of top executives in large firms are so large, and why
executive pay is positively correlated with firm size. The empirical