NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES
BANKS AND LOAN SALES:
MARKETING NON-MARKETABLE ASSETS
Gary Gorton
George Pennacchi
Working Paper No. 3551
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1990
The data used in this paper were provided by a large bank which
wishes to remain anonymous. We would like to thank the bank for
the data and, particularly, the loan sales desk employees for
their assistance in this study. Also, we are grateful to Mark
Flannery for providing helpful comments on an earlier draft, and
to the Geewax—Terker Research Program in Financial Instruments
for research support for this project. This paper is part of
NBER's research program in Financial Markets and Monetary
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3551
December 1990
BANKS AND LOAN SALES:
MARKETING NON-MARKETABLE ASSETS
ABSTRACT
A defining characteristic of bank loans is that they are not
resold once created. Yet, in 1989 about $240 billion of
commercial and industrial loans were sold, compared to trivial
amounts five years earlier. Selling loans without explicit
guarantee or recourse is inconsistent with theories of the
existence of financial intermediation. What has changed to make
bank loans marketable? In this paper we test for the presence of
implicit contractual features of bank loan sales contracts that
could explain this inconsistency. In addition, the effect of
technological progress on the reduction of information
asymmetries between loan buyers and loan sellers is considered.
The paper tests for the presence of these features and effects
using a sample of over 800 recent loan sales.
Gary Gorton George Pennacchi
The Wharton School Department of Finance
University of Pennsylvania University of Illinois
Philadelphia, PA 19104 Urbana, IL 61801

I. Introduction
In the last decade a market for selling commercial and industrial bank loans has opened.
Since bank loans were previously nonmarketable, this innovation in banking is of critical
importance to both academic economists and public policy makers. The existence of this
new market challenges recent theories of financial intermediation which would predict that
loan selling would be a lemons' market. Loan sales also contradict the presumption that
bank loans are illiquid, which is the underlying rationale for much of bank regulation and
Central Bank policy. Yet, little is known about this new market for loans, in part due to a
lack of data. In this essay we use a sample of over 800 individual loan sales to investigate
the nature of loan sales contracts.
Commercial and industrial loan sales grew tremendously during the 1980s. As
Table 1 indicates, the outstanding amount of commercial and industrial loan sales increased
from approximately $26.7 billion in the second quarter of 1983 to a peak of $290.9 billion in
the third quarter of 1989. This growth has been accompanied by signs of a developing
market. In the early stages of the market, the loans sold were very short maturity claims on
the cash flows of loans to well-known firms. However, as the loan sales market has grown,
the loans sold have increasingly represented claims on riskier firms. Now less than half the
loans sold are the obligations of investment-grade firms. There is also evidence that the
maturities of loan sales contracts have increased. In 1985, 80 percent of the loan sales had
maturities of 90 days or less, while by mid-1987, over half had maturities exceeding one
year.1
A commercial loan sale or secondary loan participation is a contract under which a bank
sells a proportional (equity) claim to all or part of the cash flow from an individual loan to a
'See Gorton and Haubrich (1989) for a complete description of the development and
regulation of the loan sales market.

I
third party buyer. The contract transfers no rights or obligationsbetween the bank and the
Since
borrower, so the third party buyer has no legal relationship with the bank's borrower.
many loans sales involve obligations of noripublicly traded firms, third party buyers, most of
whom are other banks, must rely upon the credit assessment of the originating bank. In
addition, bank regulations require that the originating bank not give any type of loan
guarantee to the loan buyer, if the originating bank wishes to remove the loan from its
balance sheet. In other words, the loan buyer has no recourse to the selling bank should a
loan default occur.
Loan sales appear paradoxical because commercial bank lending is thought to involve the
financing of nonmarketable assets. The theory of financial intermediation explains that the
(publicly unobserved) credit evaluation and monitoring services provided by banks require,
for incentive compatibility, that the bank hold the loans it creates. Holding loans until
maturity insures that the bank has incentive to effectively evaluate and monitor borrowers. If
loans were sold, then the bank would lack the incentive to produce an efficient level of credit
information and monitoring since it would not receive the rewards from this activity. Loan
buyers would recognize this lack of incentive and value the loan lower than otherwise.
Therefore, the existence of financial intermediaries implies the creation of bank loans which
banks should be unable to sell.2
The previous inability of banks to sell loans has historically been at the root of deposit
insurance and bank regulation. The non-marketability of bank loans is often taken to imply
that bank depositors have a difficult time valuing loans. It has been argued that such an
2 The explanations for the existence of financial intermediaries offered by Boyd and Prescott
(1986), Campbell and Kracaw (1980), and Diamond (1984) all have the implication thatthe
assets created by these firms cannot be resold.