NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES
EXCHANGE RATE VOLATILITY IN INTEGRATING CAPITAL MARKETS
Giancarlo Corsetti
Vittorio Grilli
Nouriel Roubini
Working Paper No. 3570
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1990
We thank Rudiger Dornbusch, Paolo Pesenti, Rony Hamaui and the
participants to the 1990 Money Study Group Conference of the
London Business School for helpful comments. Giancarlo Corsetti
acknowledges financial support by the Consiglio Nazionale delle
Ricerche. This paper is part of NBER's research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3570
December 1990
EXCHANGE RATE VOLATILITY IN INTEGRATING CAPITAL MARKETS
ABS TRACT
This paper investigates the relationship between
international capital liberalization and exchange rate
volatility. While the effects of a capital controls
liberalization on the transaction volume in the foreign exchange
market are theoretically unambiguous, the effects on the
volatility of exchange rate can have either sign. On one hand,
the liberalization leads to increasing economy—wide and
investor-specific uncertainty. On the other hand, the augiented
number of participants in the market should reduce exchange rate
fluctuations. The uncertainty effects should be dominant in the
short run, while the increase in the number of traders in the
longer run should make the market thicker and tend to reduce
volatility. It is shown that, for a sample of countries which
have liberalized capital controls in the last 15 years,
structural breaks in the process generating exchange rate
volatility have occurred very close to the time when
liberalization measures were implemented. The results also
suggest an increase in volatility after the structural
breakpoint.
Giancarlo Corsetti Vittorio Grilli
Department of Economics Department of Economics
Yale University Birkbeck College
New Haven, CT 06520 University of London
7 Grease Street
London W1P 1PA
ENGLAND
Nouriel Roubini
Department of Economics
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06520

1. Introduction
The structure and openness of the international financial markets has significantly
changed in the last two decades. Financial deregulation has led to the internationalization
of the financial services industry while the progressive liberalization of international capital
movements has allowed, and was followed by, increasing cross—country portfolio
diversification. These developments have stimulated the growth of the world foreign
exchange markets, the size of which has increased enormously in the last decade. A crucial
factor has been the separation between trade motivated transactions and total transactions
in foreign exchange. There is empirical evidence that most of the turnover in the foreign
exchange markets is generated by financial transactions, a large part of which are of a
speculative nature (Arcelli et al. [1990 b]).
The objective of this paper is to investigate the relationship between the removal of
capital controls and exchange rate volatility. We first present, in section 2, a model of the
foreign exchange market which produces a simple relationship between volume of
transactions and exchange rate variability. One of the implications of the model is that
there exist changes in the structure of financial markets which generate a simultaneous
increase in the transaction volume and in the exchange rate variance. Next, in section 3,
we turn to the data. We search for possible structural breaks in the stochastic process
generating exchange rates and ask whether these breaks could be related to liberalization
measures. The conclusion that we reach is that, for most currencies, changes in the process
generating the exchange rate have occurred, and they happened close to the time in which
major capital market innovations took place.
In section 4, we explore some implications of the model when different exchange rate
regimes are taken into account. We also present some empirical evidence regarding the
EMS, suggesting that the progressive strengthening of the European exchange rate
agreements may have played a role in reducing liberalization—related volatility with
respect to non—EMS countries.

—2—-
2. The model
In order to investigate the relationship between liberalization and exchange rate
volatility, consider a foreign exchange market where 3 agents trade currency A for currency
B'. For simplicity we assume that the desired net position in currency A of trader j at
time t is a linear function of the form:
=
(1)
where e is the :t exchange rate (defined as units of B currency for one unit of A
currency) and e,. is the reservation exchange rate for trader j, a function of his/her
expectations. Differently from the approach based on one representative agent, we want to
account explicitly for differences among participants in the market. Traders' heterogeneity
can be introduced in the model by assuming that the information known by different
individuals is not identical and, therefore, reservation prices (e.) vary among traders. If
e. > e, currency A is priced below trader j's reservation level, and thus he/she will want
to have a positive net position in currency A. Vice versa, if e. c e,currency A is more
appreciated than trader j's reservation level, and he/she will want to have a net positive
position in currency B.
In equilibrium, the following must hold:
(2)
that is, the exchange market clears. Together (1) and (2) imply:
I
Theforeign exchange market is modelled by adapting previous work on financial macket volatility and
transaction volume by Tauchen and Pitti [1983].