NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES
IS THE GASOLINE TAX REGRESSIVE?
James M. Poterba
Working Paper No. 3578
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 1990
am grateful to the National Science Foundation, the
MIT Center
for Energy Policy Research, and the John M. Olin Foundation for
research support. I received helpful comments from David
Bradford, Alan Krueger, Marc Robinson, Daniel Slesnick, and
Robert Stavjns. I am especially grateful to
Hilary Sigman for
outstanding research assistance and helpful discussions. This
paper is part of NBER's research program in Taxation.
Any
opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3578
January 1991
IS THE GASOLINE TAX REGRESSIVE?
ABSTRACT
Claims of the regressivity of gasoline taxes
typically rely
on annual surveys of consumer income and expenditures which show
that gasoline expenditures are a larger fraction of income
for
very low income households than for middle or high—income
households. This paper argues that annual expenditure
provides a
more reliable indicator of household well—being than annual
income. It uses data from the Consumer Expenditure
Survey to re-
assess the claim that gasoline taxes are regressive by
computing
the share of total expenditures which high-spending and
low-
spending households devote to retail gasoline purchases. This
alternative approach shows that low—expenditure households devote
a smaller share of their budget to gasoline than do their
counterparts in the middle of the expenditure distribution.
Although households in the top five percent of the total
spending
distribution spend less on gasoline than those who are less well-
off, the share of expenditure devoted to gasoline is much more
stable across the population than the ratio of
gasoline outlays
to current income. The gasoline tax thus
appears far less
regressive than conventional analyses suggest.
James M. Poterba
Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute
of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139

1
The long—standing view that excise taxes such as the
gaso-
line tax are regressive, imposing a heavier burden on low—income
households than on their higher—income counterparts, played a
central role in shaping the 1990 budget compromise. This issue
is certain to be debated again, since these taxes are
frequently
considered as a means to achieve environmental, budgetary, and
national security objectives (see Congressional Budget Office
(1986)). Claims of the regressivity of excise taxes typically
rely on annual surveys of consumer income and expenditures which
show that gasoline expenditures are a larger fraction of income
for very low income households than for middle or high—income
households (see for example KPMG Peat Marwick (1990)). Several
recent studies, however, notably Kasten and Sammartino (1988) and
Poterba (1989), suggest that year—to-year fluctuations in income
among households at the bottom of the annual income distribution
may exaggerate the regressivity of excise taxes. From a life—
cycle perspective, these taxes, particularly the gasoline tax,
are much less regressive than is commonly believed.
This paper argues that annual expenditure provides a more
reliable indicator of household well—being than annual income.
Whether a given tax is regressive should therefore be
analyzed by
testing whether it places higher burden on low-expenditure
households than on their high—expenditure counterparts.
My
empirical analysis uses data from the Consumer Expenditure
Survey
to compute the share of total expenditures which
high-spending
and low—spending households devote to retail gasoline
purchases.

2
This alternative approach to measuring the distributional burden
of gasoline taxes yields results which are strikingly different
from those using the traditional approach based on annual income.
Low—expenditure households devote a smaller share of their
budget to gasoline than do their counterparts in the middle of
the expenditure distribution. Although households in the top
five percent of the total spending distribution spend signifi—
cantly less on gasoline (as a share of expenditures) than those
who are less well—off, gasoline's expenditure share is much more
stable across the population than the ratio of gasoline
outlays
to current income. The reduced estimate of gasoline tax
regres—
sivity is not an inherent feature of using expenditures rather
than income as a basis for assessing incidence. Some other
energy expenditures, such as electricity, exhibit different
cross—sectional patterns with much higher expenditure shares for
low rather than high income households.
This study underscores a conclusion of the recent
Congres—
sional Budget Office (1990) excise tax study: "measured as a
percentage of total expenditures, ... outlays on these goods
[subject to excise taxes] tend to be more equal [than
outlays as
a share of income] across family income classes. (p.xviii) ."
However, this paper moves beyond the CBO study, which focuses on
gasoline's share of total outlays for households in different
income categories. If lifetime income is better
proxied by total
expenditures than by current income, a more complete
procedure