NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES
EQUILIBRIUM IN COMPETITIVE INSURANCE MARKETS
WITH MORAL HAZARD
Richard Arnott
Joseph Stiglitz
Working Paper No. 3588
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, NA 02138
January 1991
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3588
January 1991
EQUILIBRIUM IN COMPETITIVE INSURANCE MARKETS
WITH MORAL HAZARD
?BSTRACT
This paper examines the existence and nature of
competitive
equilibrium
with moral hazard. The more insurance an individual
has,
the less care will he take. Consequently, insurance
firms
attempt to restrict their clients' aggregate insurance
purchases.
If individuals' aggregate insurance purchases are observable,
each firm will ration the amount of insurance its clientscan
purchase and insist that they purchase no insurance from other
firms.
This paper focuses on the alternative situation where firms
cannot observe their clients' aggregate insurance purchases. We
show that firms will still attempt to restrict their clients'
aggregate purchases, but now they must do so indirectly. One
possibility is that all firms sell only policies with a
sufficiently large amount of coverage that individuals choose to
purchase insurance from only one firm. Another possibility is
that each firm offers a latent policy in addition to its
regular
policy. Latent policies are not purchased in equilibrium, but
to restrict entry. If an entering firm
serve
offers a
policy, an
supplementary individual will purchase not only this
policy plus his previous policy but also the latent policy. The
latent policy is designed so that the individual reduces effort
by enough to render any entering policy unprofitable.
Richard Arnott
Joseph Stiglitz
Department of Economics Department of Economics
Boston College
Stanford University
Chestnut Hill, MA 02167 Stanford, CA 94305

Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets with Moral Hazard*
I. Introduction
It is now widely recognized that moral hazard-incentive problems are pervasive in the
economy. In situations where moral hazard problems arise, firms make use of indirect control
mechanisms to alter behavior in the desired way. Among the most important are quantitative
limit.,. Insurers limit the amount of insurance which an insured can purchase, recognizing
that the more insurance he has, the less care will he take (Pauly, 1974). Lenders limit
the extent of indebtedness of a borrower, recognizing that the greater his indebtedness,
the more likely he is to take actions which result in default (Eaton and Gersovitz (1981)).
Employers, such as universities, limit their employees' outside employment (e.g. to one day
of consulting a week), recognizing that the level of effort exerted on behalf of the university
will be reduced by moonlighting. Landlords attempt to limit the employment of tenants
working under sharecropping contracts for similar reasons.
The effectiveness of these quantitative limitations depends on the information available.'
Universities often find it impossible to monitor outside consulting. Insurers find it difficult
to monitor insurance provided by others.2 Where firms and principals are unable to enforce
quantitative limits, there are other mechanisms they can employ to control indirectly quan-
tities. Insurers design their contracts to deter their customers from purchasing insurance
from others, and to deter other insurers from selling insurance to their customers. Similarly,
employers design their labor contracts to deter their employees from wanting to moonlight,
and to deter other employers from providing moonlighting opportunities.
The objective of this paper is to examine the existence and nature of market equilibrium
* We aie grateful to the National Science Foundation, the Olin Foundation, the Hoover Institution, and
the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada for financial support. We would like to
thank Oliver Hart, Martin Hellwig, Bentley MacLeod, Urs Schweizer, Thomas Von Ungern-Sternberg, and
seminar participants at the University of Pennsylvania for helpful comments. Remaining errors are our
responsibility.
This in turn depends on the cost of acquiring information, legal restrictions concerning what information
can be collected and how it may be acquired, the extent of communication between principals concerning
their agents' activities, etc.
2 This is particularly true because insurance is provided not only by insurance firms, but also by other
institutions i our society. Sick leave provided by firms for their employees is a form of health insurance.
For a more extended discussion, see Arnott and Stigtitz (1990a).
2

under these circumstances.3 We focus our analysis on the insurance market, because it
provides the simplest canonical model in which these questions can be examined. It should
be clear, however, that the general results obtained here apply in other contexts in which
moral hazard arises and direct quantitative restrictions are unenforceable.
Even when an insurer cannot monitor his clients' outside purchases of insurance, he can
monitor his own sales to them. By requiring his customers to purchase sufficiently large
policies, he might discourage them from purchasing insurance from other firms. We show
that, while firms will try to do this, this mechanism does not in general solve the over-
insurance problem which arises when quantities are unobservable. Also, the attempt to limit
the quantity of insurance may result in there being no Nash equilibrium in the market.
The actions which an individual takes to prevent the insured-against accident depend
on his total purchases of insurance; and his total purchases depend on the entire set of
insurance policies which are available to him. This introduces what turns out to be a powerful
commitment for deterring entry: An incumbent insurer can offer a set of latent insurance
policies, in addition to the policy he sells in equilibrium. These latent policies are not
purchased in equilibrium. But if an entrant offers a new policy which the incumbent's clients
find attractive enough to buy, they will also purchase the latent policies. Having purchased
a lot of additional insurance, they will reduce care, which will increase the probability of
accident by enough that the new policy makes a loss. We show that such latent insurance
policies are extremely effective in deterring entry, so effective that there exist positive profit
equilibria. Thus, while attempts to control the moral hazard problem by offering large
policies aimed at discouraging insurance purchases from other firms turn out not to be
successful, attempts to deter entry by offering latent policies turn out to be, in a sense, too
successful.
II. Model and Notation
We employ a very simple model in which individuals are identical (to abstract from
the adverse selection problem). There is a single, fixed-damage accident, the probability of
Important contributions to the literature on the topic include Pauly [1974], Helpman and Laffont j1975j
Stiglits [1983], and Heliwig [1983a,b].
3