NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES
INTERNATIONAL ACCOUNTING DIVERSITY:
DOES IT IMPACT MARKET PARTICIPANTS?
Frederick D.S. Choi
Richard M. Levich
Working Paper No. 3590
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 1991
This manuscript is based on a larger study, Frederick Choi and
Richard Levich, The Capital Market Effects of International
Accounting Diversity, Homewood, Illinois: Dow Jones-Irwin, 1990.
The original study was funded by a grant from Arthur Anderson &
Co. and Salomon Brothers, Inc. The analysis and conclusions in
this paper are those of the authors and do not reflect the views
of any of the participating institutions. This paper is part of
NBER's research program in International Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3590
January 1991
INTERNATIONAL ACCOUNTING DIVERSITY: DOES IT IMPACT
MARKET PARTICIPANTS?
ABSTRACT
While many indicators point to the globalization of capital
International
markets, one barrier may persist —— Accounting
Diversity. Even though coordination of many national policies is
gaining favor, the measurement and disclosure principles that
underlie financial statements remain largely a nationalistic
affair.
In this paper, we analyze the channels through which
accounting diversity affects financial statements. Accounting
differences may affect cash flows and lead to a direct affect on
valuation. Accounting differences may also affect balance sheet
items and measures of capital adequacy or credit worthiness that
indirectly affect managerial decisions and firm valuation.
In a survey of participants in the international capital
market, we find that accounting diversity is a problem that
affects the capital market decisions of roughly one—half of the
participants in our study. Thus, we cannot rule out the
possibility that international accounting diversity is a barrier
whose presence may affect the pricing of securities and the
composition of international portfolios. On the other hand,
roughly one-half of the participants in this study found what
they described as effective ways of coping with diversity. These
coping mechanisms may be useful for other investors and issuers
in making their capital market decisions.
Frederick D.S. Choi Richard M. Levich
New York University New York University
Stern School of Business Stern School of Business
100 Trinity Place 100 Trinity Place
New York, NY 10006 New York, NY 10006

1. Introduction
When asked to coment on the themes that will characterize capital markets in the
1990s, portfoLio managers and security analysts now routinely cite 'globalization of market.
as a major trend. There is plenty of hard evidence to support their forecast. In 1988, the
United States accounted for Less than 30% of world GNP, down from roughly 50% in 1960.' In
1989, the market capitaLization of U.S. securities markets was nearly $8 trilLion or 39% of
the world total, whereas in 1970, the United States accounted for more than two-thirds of world
market capitalization.2 U.S. gross purchases and sales of foreign stocks reached $140 biLLion
in 1988, a nine-fold increase over 1982, whiLe foreign gross purchases and sales of U.S. stocks
exceeded $380 billion, a five-fold increase over the same time period.3 Recent regulatory
changes in the United States (Rule 144A) arid ongoing regulatory changes in the European
Cooiminity shouLd further allow for linkages between national markets.4
The relative shrinkage of the U.S. economy suggests that passive U.S. investors ought
to hold a Larger fraction of non-U.S. securities to achieve welt-diversified portfolios. And
active U.S. investors have been attracted by higher rates of growth outside the United States,
as well as special situations such as privatization of foreign firms (e.g. British Air and
British Telecom), growth opportunities associated with Europe 1992, and the developing market-
oriented economies of Eastern Europe and Southeast Asia. The surge in specialized country funds
and international nstual funds in 1989 illustrates these trends.
While the stage seems to be set for globalization of capital markets, one barrier may
persist -- International Accot.nting Diversity.5 Even though coordination of many national
1 Based on 113 countries in 1988 and 93 countries in 1960 reporting in the International
Financial Statistics Yearbook (1989).
2 Data for the United States in 1988 reflects roughly $3 trillion in equities and $5
trillion in bonds. See International Herald Tribune, Septeaer 8-9, 1990. Data for 1970 are
from Morgan Stanley Capital International. In part, this trend reflects the tremendous growth
in emerging markets docunented by the World Bank (1989). However, the growth of some foreign
markets may be exaggerated as corporate cross-holding Leads to double counting. See French and
Poterba (1989).
U.S. Goverrinent Accounting Office, (1989, pp. 9-10).
Rule 144A, adopted on April 19, 1990, intends to expand the ability of foreign firms
to place securities with large institutional investors in the United States by alLowing the
resale of these securities to other large investors. See Gurwitz (1989).
Other barriers to international investment that have been analyzed include taxation
(Black, 1974), and ownership restrictions (Stapleton and Subrahmanyam, 1977 and Eun and
Janakiramanan, 1986).

pot ides -- trade policy, fiscal and monetary policy, and banking regulation -- are gaining
favor, the measurement and disclosure principles that underlie financial statement reports have
remained Largely a nationalistic affair. When accounting reporta retain a nationalistic
character, apparent differences in financial measures of enterprise risk and return
characteristics could be due as rruch to differences in accounting measurement rules as they
are to real differences in the attributes being measured. In the globolized envirornent of the
1990s, when a reader from one country examines financial statements from a firm in another
country, wilL the reader be able to understand (a) the ieçact of accounting measurement
differences, (b) the irrpact of economic, cultural and institutional differences, and (C) the
remaining real economic attributes of the firm being measured? Bear in mind that this difficult
problem is coeounded, in practice, by the fact that certain accounting data are not disclosed
in some countries. Even where disclosures are similar, differences in auditing standards may
affect the reader's confidence in reported figures.6
The purpose of this paper is three-fold. First, we briefly outline the channels though
which accounting diversity affects financial statements, and in turn affects institutional
investors and corporate issuers. Second,. we report the findings of a study of participants in
the international capital markets that examines whether international accounting diversity
affects capital market decisions and how these participants cope with accounting differences.
Third, we summarize the irrçlications of our study for institutional investors and corporate
issuers.
Our main finding is that international accounting diversity is a problem that affects
the capitaL market decisions of roughly one-half of the participants in our study. Thus we
cannot rule out the possibility that international accounting diversity is a barrier whose
presence may affect the pricing of securities and the colTposition of international portfolios.
On the other hand, roughly one-half of the participants in this study found what they described
as effective ways of coping with diversity. These coping mechanisms may be useful for other
investors and issuers in making their capital market decisions.
6 Branson and Jaffe (1989) analyze the ilTplications of the quality of information on
international capital mobility and welfare.
2