NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES
SHAREHOLDER TRADING PRACTICES
AND
CORPORATE INVESTMENT HORIZONS
Kenneth A. Froot
Andre F. Perold
Jeremy C. Stein
Working Paper No. 3638
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1991
Prepared for the Time Horizons of American Management Project,
aponsored by Harvard Business School end the Council on
Competitiveness. We thank the Division of Research at MBS and the
International Financial Services Research Center at MIT's Sloan
School for generous research support. This paper is part of NBER's
research programs in International Studies and Financial Markets
and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3638
Februaxy 1991
SHAREHOLDER TRADING PRACTICES AND CORPORATE
INVESTMENT HORIZONS
ABSTRACT
We investigate how shareholder trading practices might be linked to corporate investment
horizons. We examine two possible linkages and analyze a range of data relevant to them. The first
is excess volatility, which occurs when stock prices react not only to news about economic
fundamentals, but also to trades based on non-fundamental factors. Excess volatility could lead to a
higher cost of capital, and thereby reduce long-term corporate investment.
The second linkage derives from an information ea between management and outside
shareholders. In the presence of such a gap, maximizing short-ron and long-run stock prices are not
the same thing. Management may be able to raise current stock prices by undertaking certain actions
that will reduce long-run value. In such a case, management faces the dilemma of which shareholders
to please: those who do not plan to hold the stock for the long-run versus those who do. As
shareholder horizons shorten, it can become more difficult to focus exclusively on maximizing
long-mn value.
With respect to excess volatility, our basic conclusions are that neither changes in trading practices
over time nor differences in trading practices across countries contribute significantly to any
undcrinvestment problem. There is no evidence to indicate that measures to reduce trading volume
(such as transactions taxes) would lower stock-price volatility in a way that would stimulate
investment.
With respect to the information gap hypothesis, we find "circumstantial' evidence consistent with
certain preconditions for underinvestment. This is not, however, evidence of underinvestment itself.
In addition, many of the forces that can lead to underinvestment - - such as hostile takeovers -- are
also related to other, positive aspects of economic performance. Policy responses therefore involve a
difficult set of tradeoffs.
Kenneth A. Prod Andre F. Perold
Sloan School of Management Harvard University
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Cambridge, MA 02138
50MemorialDrive
Room E52-449 Jeremy C. Stein
Cambridge, MA 02139 Massachusetts Institute
of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139

ardo1ir Tradinj Practices aria Opcrath Investuit Thiz
1. Intrcxiuction
In rent years, the manner in tich corporate uities are bight arid
sold has teen dramatically transforma. Fueled
jdaieain the ccsosition
of share-cinership, advares in imru.inications tethnolisy, arri a rldwide
treed tcaiards market dereulation, trading volurars have skyrocketed. For
exarple, in 1974, just prior to the derepilation of broker cxamriissions, the
rate of turnover of the average share on the Ne'l York Stock Exdrare was 16%.
readiin a rate of 73%, before
NYSE turnover sore than quadrupled tr 1987,
fa11iri back to 52% in 1989. Other ntries have fo1led the U.S. exasple
with only a slight delay: during the 1980s, average turnover on the major
exchanges in Japan, the U. K., arid West Germany increased sore than threefold.
In adtition to reduced transactional costs arid heightened activity in the
uivierlyir eiuities, there has been an explosion in the use of derivative
instrunents sudi as index futures arid options. Since their introduction in the
early 19805, S&P 500 futures contracts alone have achieved a tradirrj volures
roihly uiva1ent to that of the entire U.S. stock market. The ni
instrunents have facilitated the deve1cItEnt of a variety of soç*iisticated
trading aed risk-managesont strategies: iridexin, portfolio insurarxs, index
arbitrage, etc.
There is sharp disagreeiarnt over the emxriic effocts of these changes in
tradirq practices. Business leaders in partiwlar have expressed onrrn that
2

