NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES
TESTING THE IMPORTS-AS-MARKET-DISCIPLINE HYPOTHESIS
James Levinsohn
Working Paper No. 3657
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1991
This paper is part of NBER's research program in International
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3 657
March 1991
TESTING THE IMPORTS-AS-MARKET-DISCIPLINE HYPOTHESIS
ABSTRACT
It has long been believed that international competition
forces domestic finns to behave more competitively. I term this
the imports-as--market-discipline hypothesis. I construct a
simple static oligopoly model and estimate the model using panel
data from Turkish manufacturing firms. The data span the course
of a dramatic trade liberalization. Looking for changes in
price-marginal cost markups as trade policy shifts, I test the
imports-as-market discipline hypothesis. In all five industries
to which the hypothesis is relevant, markups change in the
direction predicted by the theory. These changes are
statistically significant in all but one of the five industries.
James Levinsohn
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305—6010

Testing the Imports-As-Market-Discipline Hypothesis
James Levinsohn
1. Introduction
The theory of international trade policy is becoming quite well developed. Myriad
policies, real and imagined, have been investigated in models of perfect competition and,
more recently, in models of imperfect competition. The more recent literature is quite
nicely surveyed (and extended) in Elhanan Helpman and Paul Krugman's Trade Pohcy and
Market Structure (1989). Econometricstudies of trade policy under imperfect competition,
in contrast to the theoretical investigations, are scarce. It is perhaps telling that Helpman
and Krugman's survey of empirical work in the field does not mention a single econometric
study.
Recent empirical work in trade policy and market structure consists primarily of cali-
brated simulation models. Examples include Avinash Dixit's (1988) study of the United
States automobile industry, Paul Krugman and Richard Baldwin's (1988) study of the
semiconductor market, Alasdair Smith and Anthony Venables' (1988,1989) studies of sev-
eral industries in the United Kingdom, and Dani Rodrik's (1988) study of various Turkish
industries. Although none of these studies ask exactly the same question, they share some
common themes. All of these are studies of trade policy under imperfect competition em-
ploying industry level simulation models. They are calibrated, not estimated. All these
studies examine normative as well as positive consequences of trade policy. Also, all these
studies consider the role government policy might play in altering the game firms play and
are hence studies of strategic trade policies. Finally, they are all prospective. That is, they
evaluate policies that could be, but are not actually, implemented.
I am grateful to Steve Berry, Jim Brander, Tim Bresnahan, AvinashDixit, Rob Feenstra,
Eban Goodstein, Gene Grossman, Jeff Mackie-Mason, Ariel Pakes, Dani Rodrik, Bob Staiger, Jim Tybout,
and Frank Wolak for helpful comments and/or discussions. Also many thanks to to Lili Lui and Janet Nctz
(or research assistance. None of the above bear any blame. I am also grateful to the World Bank which
funded this paper under RP0674-46: Industrial Competition, Productive Efficiency, and their Relation to
Trade Regimes.

This paper investigates the effects of trade policy in imperfectly competitive markets,
hut beyond that it deviates from the above group in all the dimensions listed. Econo-
metric estimates are employed to evaluate the positive effects of a trade policy that was
implemented. In many respects, the goal of this paper is much more modest than its
predecessors. The policy studied is quite simple and not especially strategic. The welfare
consequences of the policy are not addressed. I test what Helpman and Flrugman call
"the oldest insight in this area (of trade policy and imperfect competitinn.) This is the
idea that international trade increases competition."1 When faced with intensified inter-
national competition, domestic industries, which may have reaped oligopoly profits in a
protected domestic market, are forced to behave more competitively. This phenomenon
is frequently claimed to be especially relevant in developing countries where the protected
domestic market often will only support a few firms. (See Rodrik (1988) for a discussion.)
I term this phenomenon the imports-as-market-discipline hypothesis.
This is a hypothesis about how firms respond to a change in trade policy. As important,
intuitive, and old-fashioned as the hypothesis may be, it appears that it has not been rigor-
ously tested with firm-level data.2 There is, though, an older body of emprirical research,
adopting what is sometimes called the "Structure-Performance-Conduct" paradigm that
addressed the imports-as-market-discipline hypothesis. An especially entertaining review
of that literature is found in Richard Caves (1985). Treating profits as directly observable
and concentration ratios as valid measures of market power, that body of literature found
that, "the larger is imports share of domestic sales, the smaller is the effect of the con-
centration of domestic producers on the profits earned by those producers." (Caves, p. 2)
Most of these studies used industry-level data and ran cross-industry regressions, although
some studies used time series.
In contrast to these earlier studies, I adopt the apporach of what has come to be called
the new empirical industrial organization. I estimate a very simple model of the npti-
Theidea certainly is anold one. According to Richard Caves, Jeffrey Frankel, and Ronald Jones
(1990), "'The tariff is the mother of the trusts' was a charge heard often in the United States at the end
of the nineteenth century."
2 Anexception brought to my attention is work in progress by Ann Harrison (2989) looking at the
effects of trade liberalization in the Ivory Coast.
9