NDER WORKING PAPERS SERIES
WHY ARE THERE SO MANY DIVIDED SENATE DELEGATIONS?
Alberto Alesina
Morris Fiorino
Howard Rosenthal
Working Paper No. 3663
NATIONAL DOREAD OF EOONOMIO RESEAROM
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Oamnriage, MA 02138
March 1991
Alesina and Rosenthal acknowledge financial support from NSF
Grant SES0921441. This paper was written when Alesina was an
Olin Fellow et the NREE and Rosenthal a Visiting Professor ar
W.I.T. Alesina gratefully acknowledges financial support from
the Olin and Sloan foundations. We thank Keith Krehbiel, John
Londregan, Eeith Poole, Kenneth Shepsie, end participants in
seminars at Hoover Institution, Oarnegie-Nellon and University of
Rochester for very useful coimsents end Gerald Oohen for excellent
research assistance Any opinions expressed are those of the
onthors and not those of the National Dnreau of Economic Raaeasch.

NDER Working Paper #3663
March 1991
WHY ARE THERE SO MANY DIVIDED SENATE DELEGATIONS?
ABSTRACT
The last three decadea have witneased a sharp increase in
the number of states with spilt Senate deiegetions, featuring two
senators of different parties. In addition, there is evidence
that
senators of different parties do not cluster in the middle:
they are genuinely polarized. We propose a model which explains
this phenomenon. Our argument builds upon the fact that when a
Sonnte election is held, there is already a sitting senator. If
thu voters care about the policy position of their state
delegation in each election, they may favor the candidate of the
party which is not holding the othuraeat. We show that, in
ganeral: (1) a candidate benefits if the non-running senator is
of thu opposing parry; (2) the more extreme the position uf the
non-running senator, the more extreme may be the position of the
opposing party candidate. Our 'opposite party advantage'
hypothesis is tested on a sample iacluding every Senate race from
1946 to 1986. After controlling for other important factors,
such as incumbency advantage, coattails end economic conditions,
we find reasonably strong evidence of the 'opposite party
advantage.'
Alherto Alesins Morris Fiorina
Harvard Universicy, Harvard University
HEER, end OSPE
Haward Essenthal
Oarnugie-Mellon University

1. Introduction
Until recently the study of Congressional elections has generally aeant
the study of HAnse elections. Rut researchers have nuw begun to focus their
attentIon on Senate electicns. This increased interest probably has multiple
sources. To some extent, the political importance of recent Senate elections
draws our attention to them. The Republicans were able to capture the Senate
in 1980 and hold it until 1986, and their Senate majority was an irpurtant
component of the legislative successes of the Reagan administration. Another
basis of renewed interest in Senate elections undoubtedly stems from their
contrast with House elections. While the Republicans held the Senate from
1981—87, the House has remained safely in Democratic hands for thirty—five
years. Contrary to the expectations of the Framers, the electoral
responsiveness of the contemporary Senate is higher than that of the House
(Alford and Hibbing, 1989mb). Specifically, the advantages of incumbency in
contemporary House elections are almost overwhelming, hut incumbent fortunes
vary greatly in Senate elections.2 And while qualified, well—funded
challengers are a rarity in House elections (Jacobson, 1990, ch.4); Senate
incumbents seldom enjoy the luxury of unknown, under—funded challengers.
Occupying a position somewhere between presidential and House elections,
Senate elections seem to incorporate some of the major features of each Like
presidential nominees, Senate candidates are highly visible and their
campaigns heavily reliant on the mass media. Like Representatives, Senators
attempt to exploit the value of their incumbency, but it does not appear to
count for as much among the electorate. Issues and ideology are thought to be
mote important ln Senate elections than in House elections. But while
sometimes Senate races appear to hinge on major national issues, at other
times, the most parochial issues are thought to make the difference.3 And,

2
finally, one cannot ignore the importance of traditional partisanship despite
two deoedes of research on its weakening.4 Apparently analyses of Senate
elections must take into account the full range of variables that appear in
both presidential and House election studies.
While the new wave of research undoubtedly wll tell us a groat doal
about the specifics of Senate elections we should keep the larger picture in
mind. In particular, Senate elections show a number of interesting features
that pose explanatory challenges for the new research. In particular recent
reaeatch identifies two developments that appear to be both politically
consequential and theoretIcally puzzling. We will refer to these as the
"split state question," and the "polarization question."
The split state question reflects the increase in the number of states
that divide their two Senate seats between the patties (Figure 1) . In recent
years state teptesentation in the Senate has been split as often as not, a
situation that oontrasts with the earlier historical tacord. In sutveying
that record Brady, Brody and Ferejohn (1989, pp. 3—4) observe
there is a dramatic rise in the number of split states begicning
in the 1960s. Prior to 19i0 (1918 on) theta were only fiva
instances of mixed state representation tising abovs 30 percent
while since 1960 no Congress has less than 30 percent and since
1966 the parcentage has nevet bean lower than 40 percent and has
been as high as 54 percent.
Poole and Rosenthal (1984b) point out that in the late seventies and early
eighties, the Senate had a distribution of delegations that was very nearly SO