NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES
RENT SHARING IN THE MULTIFIBRE ARRANGEMENT:
THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM US APPAREL IMPORTS
FROM HONG KONG
Kala Krishna
Ref ik Erzan
Ling Hui Tan
Working Paper No. 3673
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1991
We are grateful to the World Bank for research support. We would
also like to thank Ronald Chan, Carl Hamilton, Paula Holmes and
Yun- Wing Sung for providing us with valuable data; Phillip
Swagel for helpful comments; and Monique Skruzny and Christopher
Holmes for excellent research assistance. This paper is part of
NBER's research program in International Studies. The findings,.
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research or the World Bank, its Executive Directors or
the countries they represent.

NBER Working Paper 3673
April 1991
RENT SHARING IN THE MULTI-FIBRE ARRANGEMENT:
THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM U.S. APPAREL IMPORTS FROM HONG KONG
ABSTRACT
Available estimates of tariff equivalents of quotas and
welfare calculations on the costs of MFA quotas for developing
countries are based on the premise of perfect competition in both
product and license markets. It is also assumed that the
exporting countries which administer the MFA quotas receive all
the scarcity rent. We argue that in the presence of market power
on the buyers' side in the product market combined with
concentration in the license markets, the importing countries may
retain part of this rent, i.e. share it with the exporters.
We analyze US imports of apparel products from Hong Kong to
see if the data conform with all the relevant predictions of the
competitive model. Our method essentially tests whether the
license price inclusive Hong Kong price, adjusted for tariffs and
transport costs, is equal to the domestic (US) price. A
deviation between the two prices is taken to indicate rent
sharing. We test the hypothesis with homogeneous goods, modify
it to take into account compositional differences and, finally,
consider differentiated goods. We find evidence that importers
retain a substantial portion of the MFA quota rents.
Kala Krishna Refik Erzan
Harvard University World Bank
and
NEER
Ling Hui Tan
Harvard University

1 Introduction
The post-World War II era is often hailed as a period of great trade liberalization
through successive rounds of negotiations conducted under the auspices of
GATT, industrial country tariffs have been pared down to their present average
level of about 4% on manufactured goods. Unfortunately, this reduction in tariff
rates has been accompanied by a proliferation of non-tariff barriers. Among
the most important of these non- tariff barriers for developing countries is the
MFA, or Multi- Fibre Arrangement, which sanctions a structure of country- and
product-specific quotas on apparel and textiles, often the most important area
of manufacturing advantage for developing countries.
The MFA has been widely studied and much attention has been devoted
to its welfare consequences. However, this literature has been based on the
presumption of perfect competition in all relevant markets and has suppressed
dynamic aspects of the issues. In such models, as is well known, tariffs and
quotas are equivalent and license prices, when available, equal the implicit spe-
cific tariff. This makes it straightforward to calculate the welfare effects of the
system and to identify losers and winners from the MFA and any of its proposed
reforms.
The assumption of competitive markets in the study of the MFA is usually
defended on the grounds that there are a large number of producers in the
textile and apparel market. In the case of some advanced exporters, notably
Hong Kong, further justification is provided by the fact that the quotas are
efficiently implemented and are, to a large extent, transferable. For example,
Morkre (1984) estimates that US clothing import quotas on Hong Kong in 1980
spawned quota rents of $218 million, or 23% of the total value of clothing imports
from Hong Kong. The central feature of his methodology is that "... the price
of rights to export textiles from Hong Kong measures the gap between import
price and unit cost in Hong Kong. The rationale is that textile quotas are openly
traded in Hong Kong so that the market price for transfers is expected to reflect
the value of the price-cost difference." 2
Hamilton (1986) also uses Hong Kong quota prices to measure rent income.
In addition, he uses specially-compiled sets of clothing import statistics to cal-
culate f.o.b. unit values for Hong Kong exports to the US, which serve as proxies
1See, for example, the papers contained in Hamilton (1990) whichanalyze the effects of
the MFA and its proposed reforms from a variety of viewpoints.
2Morkre (1984) p.2. He dismisses the suggestion of quota monopolization on the basis of
two observations. First, he finds no evidence of concentration in quota holdings among the
top four firms in 10 product categories in 1980. (However, he does acknowledge that this
evidence may not be definitive because there may be ownership links between different quota
holders.) Secondly, the quota utilization rates in 1980 exceed 100% in all but one category,
whereas he expects quota monopolization to result in short-shipping. His first observation, as
we shall see, is not consistent with the data we have, which show high degrees of concentration
in certain categories like men's wool coats (MFA category 434) and cotton woven shirts (MFA
category 340). His second observation is not relevant because the implementation of the
restraint system creates incentives for quota holders to use up all their licenses.
1

for the rent-inclusive export prices. Dividing rent income by the rent-inclusive
US value of exports, he arrives at the US export tax equivalent rate of textile
and apparel quotas on Hong Kong, which he then converts to the import tariff
equivalent (MTE) rate by taking the ratio of c.i.f. and f.o.b. values of clothing
imports from Hong Kong. He calculates this MTE rate as 9% in 1981 and 37%
in 1982.
Trela and Whalley (1988, 1990) employ a general equilibrium model to an-
alyze the effects of bilateral quota restrictions imposed by the US, Canada and
the EC on 14 product categories from 34 developing countries (including Hong
Kong). Like Morkre, their methodology for obtaining the supply price of quota
restricted products involves the use of data on Hong Kong quota prices: they
compute the Hong Kong supply price by subtracting the quota price from the
US price, then they compute the production costs of quota restricted products
in other exporting countries by multiplying the unit cost in Hong Kong with
the ratio of the exporting country's relative wage rate in the textile and ap-
parel industry compared to Hong Kong. Using 1986 data, they estimate both
global and national welfare costs of the MFA. Their results suggest global gains
from the elimination of quotas and tariffs of more than $17 billion — ofwhich
$11 billion will accrue to developing countries —and gains to the US from the
removal of quotas of $3 billion.
We do not, in this paper, question the assumption of perfect competition
a priori. Rather, we ask if it is possible to test whether all the results of the
static competitive model are borne out in the data. Oddly enough, this basic
issue has never been addressed in the literature. Note that conceptually, there
exist two markets: the market for products and the market for licenses. In the
product market, there can be imperfect competition on the side of the buyers,
i.e. monopsony or oligopsony, and/or on the side of the sellers, i.e. monopoly
or oligopoly. In the license market, we need to consider as well who owns the
licenses —that is, whether the licenses are in the hands of the exporters (who
may or may not be the producers themselves) or the importers or buyers (be
they consumers or independent retailers). Again, there can be market power on
either or both sides of the license market. Clearly, many different combinations
of imperfections can arise in the two markets and it is beyond the scope of this
paper to study them all. Our approach is not to point to and model a particular
form of imperfection but to see whether the implications of perfect competition
in all markets do in fact hold.
It is well understood that when market imperfections exist, product prices
become endogenous, thus allowing producers to appropriate quota rents by rais-
ing their supply price. In this case, a quota has very different effects from a tariff
which generates the same level of imports. In particular, the price difference
between the quota-restricted and world markets, which we will call the potential
rent per license, need not equal the tariff which would induce this level of im-
ports. For this reason, licence prices need not reflect import-equivalent tariffs.
(See Krishna (1990a).)
2