NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES
TECHNOLOGY ADOPTION AND GROWTH
Stephen L. Parente
Edward C. Prescott
Working Paper No. 3733
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1991
Prescott's work was supported by a NSF grant and by the Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. We thank participants of Chicago's
Money Workshop for stimulating discussion. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the University of Minnesota,
the Federal Reserve System or the U.S. Department of Justice.
This paper is part of NBER's research program in Growth. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3733
June 1991
TECHNOLOGY ADOPTION AND GROWTH
ABSTRACT
Technology change is modeled as the result of decisions of
individuals and groups of individuals to adopt more advanced
technologies. The structure is calibrated to the U.S. and
postwar Japan growth experiences. Using this calibrated
structure we explore how large the disparity in the effective tax
rates on the returns to adopting technologies must be to account
for the huge observed disparity in per capita income across
countries. We find that this disparity is not implausibly
large.
Stephen L. Parente Edward C. Prescott
Northeastern University University of Minnesota,
U.S. Department of Justice Federal Reserve Bank
of Minneapolis,
and
NBER

One need only look at a copy of the World Development Report or the
survey by Summers and Heston 11988] to see how incredibly diverse per capita
income levels are across countries. Such diversity has not always been a
characteristic of the data, however. By Rosenberg and Birdzell's account
119901, income levels in the 18th century were fairly uniform across
countries. The current diversity clearly then reflects a tendency for
countries to develop at different rates and at different times.
The countries that were first to industrialize and thus break from the
rest of the world tended to be located in Western Europe. These countries
were later followed by the U.S. and Canada. Most recently, several
countries centered about the Pacific Rim have made the leap. Many of the
countries in this latter group have in the process experienced rates of
growth that are spectacular relative to historical standards. Some
countries, most notably those of sub-Sahara Africa, have yet to make the
transition.
That there is greater diversity in income levels today than three
centuries ago is clear. However, it would, we believe, be misleading to
identify this occurrence as a spreading out of the distribution of per
capita Income levels. Within the set of non—African countries, the recent
trend has been for income levels to move towards the mean. If spreading
out of the distribution were a characteristic of the data, then it should be
the case that within the set of non-African countries per capita income
levels move away from the mean as well.
Why some countries have been able to make the leap while others have
not, and why amongst those countries having made the transition performances
differ, are, we think, the central issues that confront the field of

economic growth, and the ones in which our current efforts are intended to
resolve. We believe that a theory, if it is to have any hope of accounting
for these observations, must have as its central focus technological change.
Our view differs from neoclassical growth theory, however, in that we
believe this change to occur only when individuals, or groups of
individuals, make specific decisions to adopt new technologies. For us
then, the question of why differences in growth rates and income levels
exist across countries is really a question of why all countries do not
adopt the same technologies at the same time.
While some period of time may elapse before individuals in one country
become aware of a technological discovery in another country, we do not
believe this to be the reason these differences exist. Most industry
studies suggest that the adoption of a new technology requires investment in
capital, with a substantial fraction taking the form of investment in
intangible capital. In adopting a computer, for example, a firm must not
only make the necessary investment in hardware and software, but it must
train its personnel in the use of' the new system. This training of personal
represents a substantial diversion of resources away from productive
activities.
Instead, what matters in determining whether a particular technology
will be adopted is the return that the individual, or group of individuals,
making the adopting decision expects to earn on its investment. There is,
we think, a large body of evidence that indicates that the institutional
arrangements within a country can substantially reduce this return. The
ways in which these institutional arrangements can reduce this return are
not limited to official government taxes on capital. Olson 11982]
emphasizes the role of redistributional coalitions and Krueger (1974]
2