NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF TECHNICAL TRADING-RULE PROFITS
IN THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKET: A BOOTSTRAP APPROACH
Richard M. Levich
Lee R. Thomas
Working Paper No. 3818
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1991
Leonard N. Stern School of Business, New York University; City
University Business School, London; and National Bureau of
Economic Research. Investcorp Bank E.C., Bahrain and Investcorp
Trading Limited, London. First Draft: January 27, 1991, latest
draft: August 9, 1991. Participants in seminars at the Second
Summer Symposium of the European Science Foundation, University
of Konstanz, and City University Business School provided useful
connents on earlier drafts. We thank Jo Jeff ries for diligent
research assistance. The opinions expressed in this paper are
those of the authors and not those of any of the affiliated
organizations. This paper is part of NEER's research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the NationalBureau of Economic
Research.

NBER Working Paper #3818
August 1991
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF TECHNICAL TRADING-RULE PROFITS
IN THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKET: A BOOTSTRAP APPROACH
ABSTRACT
In
this paper, we present new evidence on the profitability
and statistical significance of technical trading rules in the
foreign exchange market. We utilize a new data base, currency
futures contracts for the period 1976-1990, and we implement a
new testing procedure based on bootstrap methodology. Using this
approach, we generate thousands of new exchange rate series
constructed by random reordering of each original series. We
then measure the profitability of the technical rules for each
new series. The significance of the profits in the original
series is assessed by comparison to the empirical distribution of
results derived from the thousands of randomly generated series.
Overall, our results suggest that simple technical trading rules
have very often led to profits that are highly unusual.
Splitting the entire 15-year sample period into three 5-year
periods reveals that on average the profitability of some trading
rules declined in the 1986-1990 period although profits remained
positive (on average) and significant in many cases.
Richard M. Levich Lee R. Thomas
Leonard N. Stern School
Investcorp
of Business 65 Brook Street
New York University London W1Y lYE
100 Trinity Place
England
New York, NY 10006
and NBER

I. Introduction and Motivation
Since the advent of floating exchange rates in the early
1970s, numerous empirical studies have investigated the time series
behavior of exchange rates and the empirical distribution of
exchange rates. A null hypothesis that features prominently in
these studies is whether exchange rates can be characterized as
serially independent drawings from a stationary distribution.
Alongside these studies, tests of foreign exchange market
efficiency have examined the profitability of various trading
rules. A null hypothesis in these studies has been that mechanical
rules for generating trading signals should not result in unusual
(risk-adjusted) profits.
A variety of empirical studies (reviewed in Section II)
support the notion that mechanical trading rules are often
profitable when applied in the spot foreign exchange market. A
drawback to these studies is that most do not measure the
statistical significance of their results, while others measure
statistical significance assuming that the volatility of exchange
rates is constant. The latter assumption is questionable since
recent evidence rejects the hypothesis that exchange rates can be
described as random, independent drawings from a stationary
distribution. Evidence is more consistent with the view that
exchange rates are drawn from non—stationary distributions.
The purpose of this paper is to undertake new tests of the
random behavior of exchange rates and the profitability of
mechanical trading rules. Our tests do not rely on assumptions
1

regarding the distribution of the process underlying exchange rate
changes. Our approach involves the application of bootstrap methods
—- i.e.
the generation of thousands of new series of pseudo
exchange rates, each new series constructed from random reordering
of the original series. We measure the profitability of the
mechanical trading rules for each new series. The significance of
the results from the original series can be assessed by comparison
to the empirical distribution of results derived from the thousands
of randomly generated series.
Overall, our empirical results suggest that mechanical trading
rules have very often led to profits that are highly unusual
relative to the profits earned by the same rules when applied to
the randomly generated time series of exchange rates. Based on a
sample of five currencies over the period January 1, 1976 —
December 31, 1990 and nine trading rules, we find that in 31 cases
the original exchange rate series produced profits in the top 1% of
all times series, in eight cases the original series produced
profits in the top 5% of all time series, and the remaining six
cases produced profits that were positive but not significant.
Splitting the entire 15-year sample period into three 5—year
periods revealed that on average the profitability of mechanical
trading rules has declined in the 1986-1990 period, although
profits remained positive (on average) and significant in many
cases.
The plan for the remainder of the paper is to review some of
the earlier research on spot exchange rates and market efficiency
2