NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES
OPTIMAL LAW ENFORCEMENT WITH SELF-REPORTING OF BEHAVIOR
Louis Kaplow
Steven Shavell
Working Paper No. 3822
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1991
Both of Harvard University and the National Bureau of Economic
Research. We are grateful to A. Mitchell Polinsky for helpful
conunents, the John M. Olin Foundation for financial support, and
Brian Timmons for research assistance. This paper is part of
NBER's research program in Law and Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research

NBER Working Paper 3822
August 1991
OPTIMAL LAW ENFORCEMENT WITH SELF-REPORTING OF BEHAVIOR
ABSTRACT
- the
Self-reporting - reporting by parties of their own
is
behavior to an enforcement authority -- a commonly observed
aspect of law enforcement, as in the context of environmental and
safety regulation. We add self-reporting to the model of the
control of harmful externalities through probabilistic law
enforcement. Optimal self-reporting schemes are characterized
and are shown to offer two advantages over schemes without
self-reporting: enforcement resources are saved because
individuals who are led to report harmful acts need not be
identified; risk is reduced because individuals bear certain
sanctions when they report their behavior, rather than face
uncertain sanctions.
Louis Kaplow Steven Shavell
Harvard Law School Harvard Law School
Griswold 402 Langdell 357
Harvard University Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138 Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER and NBER

1. Introduction
A commonly observed feature of law enforcement is what we shall call self-
- the
reporting of behavior - reporting by parties of their own harm-producing
actions to an enforcement authority. For example, firms frequently report on
their behavior in the context of environmental and safety regulation,
individuals involved in accidents causing injury to others often report this
to the police, and even those who commit crimes sometimes confess their acts
to the authorities. Presumably, parties voluntarily report on their behavior
because they fear more severe treatment if they do not.1
What are the social advantages of self-reporting that may help to explain
its use in law enforcement? More broadly, how does self-reporting fit in the
theory of the control of harmful externalities? The literature on controlling
externalities, dating from Pigou (1918), suggests that activities that create
harm be taxed, but does not emphasize the costs of identifying parties who
cause harm. The more recent literature on law enforcement, however,
investigates the control of harmful activities when it is costly to identify
the parties responsible for causing harm. This literature begins with Becker
(1968), who stresses that, because of these enforcement costs, it is not
socially advantageous to identify those who cause harm all the time, but
rather to do so only with a probability (and to raise the level of sanctions
accordingly).
In this article, we add self-reporting to the model of probabilistic law
enforcement.2 Under a scheme with self-reporting, individuals can be induced
1 To illustrate, under CERCLA, 42 U.S.C. §9603(b), failure to report the
release of hazardous substances may result in fines or imprisonment, apart
from any penalty associated with the release itself. Also, under the pending
federal criminal sentencing guidelines for organizations, reporting of
violations would lead to substantial reductions in the fines that otherwise
would apply.
2 Self-reporting has not previously been considered in the literature on law
enforcement. However, a number of articles in the mechanism design literature
addressed to risk-sharing contracts, tax collection, regulation, and the
principal-agent model are relevant to our analysis because they examine the
costly auditing of reports. See, in particular, Border and Sobel (1987),

to report their harmful acts without materially affecting their incentives
whether or not to commit the acts. This can be accomplished by allowing a
person who reports committing a harmful act to pay a sanction equal to (or
slightly less than) the expected sanction he would face if he did not report
his act. Then, he will be led to report his act, but his willingness to
commit the act will be unchanged. As a consequence, enforcement schemes with
self-reporting offer society two advantages. First, enforcement resources are
saved; because those who commit harmful acts are induced to report their
behavior, enforcement effort need not be spent identifying them. Second,
risk-bearing costs are eliminated (a benefit when actors are risk-averse), for
those who commit harmful acts report their behavior and pay a certain amount.3
By contrast, under law enforcement systems without self-reporting, those who
commit harmful acts bear the risk of sanctions.
Now let us describe the organization of the article. In section 2, we
analyze a model of self-reporting in which risk-neutral individuals choose
whether to commit a single type of harmful act, and in section 3 we examine a
generalization of the model allowing for many types of harmful acts. In these
models, we characterize optimal enforcement schemes with self-reporting and
show how they differ from schemes that do not allow self-reporting. In
particular, we demonstrate that self-reporting schemes are superior to schemes
without self-reporting because the former allow enforcement costs to be
reduced. We also show that a positive level of enforcement is always
desirable with self-reporting, even when it is not necessarily desirable
without self-reporting. In section 4, we consider extensions of our analysis,
allowing for risk aversion, imprisonment as a sanction, error in examination
of behavior, and administrative costs of self-reporting. In section 5, we
offer concluding remarks.
Mookherjee and Png (1989), and Wagenhofer (1987). See also Baiman and Demski
(1980), Baron and Besanko (1984), Dye (1986), Mookherjee and Png (1990),
Reinganum and Wilde (1985), Scotchmer (1987), and Townsend (1979). We comment
on this literature in note 21.
A related advantage is that schemes with self-reporting reduce the need to
impose imprisonment, as we discuss in subsection 4B.
-2-