NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES
DO INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS DESTABILIZE STOCK PRICES?
EVIDENCE ON HERDING AND FEEDBACK TRADING
Josef Lakonishok
Andrei Shleifer
Robert W. Vishny
Working Paper No. 3846
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1991
We are grateful to Louis Chan, Jay Ritter, Jeremy Stein, and
Richard Thaler for helpful comments; and especially to Gil
Beebower and Vasant Kamath for guidance with the data. Financial
support from LOR-Nikko and Dimensional Fund Advisors is
gratefully acknowledged. This paper is part of NBER's research
program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3846
September 1991
DO INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS DESTABILIZE STOCK PRICES?
EVIDENCE ON HERDING AND FEEDBACK TRADING
ABSTRACT
This paper uses a new data set of quarterly portfolio
holdings of 769 all-equity pension funds between 1985 and 1989 to
evaluate the potential effect of their trading on stock prices.
We address two aspects of trading by money managers: herding,
which refers to buying (selling) the same stocks as other
managers buy (sell) at the same time; and positive-feedback
trading, which refers to buying winners and selling losers.
These two aspects of trading are commonly a part of the argument
that institutions destabilize stock prices. At the level of
individual stocks at quarterly frequencies, we find no evidence
of substantial herding or positive-feedback trading by pension
fund managers, except in small stocks. Also, there is no strong
cross-sectional correlation between changes in pension funds'
holdings of a stock and its abnormal return.
Josef Lakonishok Andrei Shleifer
Department of Finance Department of Economics
University of Illinois Harvard University
at Urbana-Champaign Littauer Center 315
Chicago, IL 61820 Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
Robert W. Vishny
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER

DO INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS DESTABLIZE STOCK PRICES?
1. Introduction
Contrary to the predictions of the standard asset pricing model, the vast majority
of investors do not just buy and hold the market portfolio of stocks. Instead, most
investors follow strategies of actively picking and trading stocks. When investors trade
actively, their buying and selling decisions may move stock prices. Understanding the
behavior of stock prices then requires understanding the investment strategies of
active investors.
Institutional investors hold about 50 of the equities in the United States.
percent
In 1989, their trading and that of member firms accounted for 70 percent of the
trading volume on the New York Stock Exchange (Schwartz and Shapiro 1990). It
may be the case, then, that institutionai investors' trades influence stock prices. In
this paper, we use data on the changes in a large number of institutional investors'
portfolios to fmd out whether they herd.; whether they follow positive-feedback
strategies; and whether their trading is associated with stock price movements.
Answers to these questions allow some tentative conclusions about the likely impact
of institutional activity on stock prices.
There are two extreme views of the impact of institutional investors on stock
prices. According to the first view, institutions destabilize asset prices, which usually
means that they move prices away from fundamental values, thereby increasing long-
run price volatility. This view rests to a large extent on two premises. The first
premise is that swings in institutional demand have a larger effect on stock prices
than swings in individual demand. In part, any given institution has much larger
holdings than most individuals do, and so its trades are much larger. More
importantly, this problem may be aggravated by herding, i.e., correlated trading across
institutional- investors. When large investors attempt to buy or sell a given stock at

DO INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS DESTABLIZE STOCK PRICES?
2
the same time, their effect on its price can be large indeed. A pension fund manager
has described this problem succinctly: "Institutions are herding animals. We watch the
same indicators and listen to the same prognostications. Like lemmings, we tend to
move in the same direction at the same time. And that, naturally, exacerbates price
movements" October 17, 1989).
There are several reasons why institutions might herd more than individuals.
First, institutions might tiy to infer information about the quality of investments from
each others' trades and herd as a result (Shiller and Pound 1989, Banerjee 1991).
Since institutions know more about each others' trades than do individuals, they will
herd more. Second, the objective difficulties in evaluating money managers'
performance and separating "luck" from "skill" create agency problems between
institutional money managers and fund sponsors. Typically, money managers are
evaluated against each other. To avoid falling behind a peer group by following a
unique investment strategy, they have an incentive to hold the same stocks as others
do (Scharfstein and Stein 1990). Third, institutions might all react to the same
exogenous signals, such as changes in dividends or analysts' recommendations, and
herd as a result. Because the signals reaching institutions are typically more
correlated than the signals that reach individuals, institutions might herd more. When
many large institutional money managers end up on the same side of the market, we
expect the stock price to move as long as the excess demand curve for this stock
slopes downward.
Herding by itself, however, does not necessarily mean that institutional investors
are destabilizing stock prices. As we mentioned above, they might herd if they all
react to the same fundamental information in a timely manner. If they do, they are
making the market more efficient by speeding up the adjustment of prices to new