NBER MORKING PAPERS SERIES
TAXATION AND FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT IN THE UNITED STATES:
A RECONSIDERATION OF THE EVIDENCE
Alan J. Auerbach
Kevin Hassett
Working Paper No. 3895
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 1991
This paper has been prepared for an NEER conference on
International Taxation. We are grateful to participants in the
NBER Summer Institute, participants in the International Taxation
conference, George Mundstock, Jim Poterba, Bill Gale, Joel
Slemrod and Debbie Swenson for comments and suggestions, the SEA
for providing unpublished data, Jason Cummins for superlative
research assistance and the National Science Foundation for
financial support. This paper is part of NBER's research program
in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3895
November 1991
TAXATION AND FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT IN THE UNITED STATES:
A RECONSIDERATION OF THE EVIDENCE
ABs'rRAcr
Foreign direct investment in the United States boomed in the
late 1980s. Some have attributed this rise to the Tax Reform Act
of 1986, which by discouraging investment by domestic firms may
have provided opportunities for foreign firms not as strongly
affected by the U.S. tax changes. We challenge this view on
theoretical and empirical grounds, finding that:
(1) While the argument applies to new capital investment, the
boom was primarily in mergers and acquisitions;
(2) While the argument holds primarily for investment in
equipment, there was no shift toward the acquisition of
equipment-intensive firms, and
(3) The FDI boom in the U.S. was really part of a worldwide FDI
boom - theU.S. share of outbound FDI from other countries
did not increase during the period 1987-9.
Alan J. Auerbach Kevin Hassett
Department of Economics Columbia Business School
University of Pennsylvania Uris Hall
3718 Locust Walk New York, NY 10027
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
and NBER

1. Introduction
In recent years, a large body of research, dating back to Hartman (]984,
198i) has focused on the effects of taxation on foreign direct investieent
into and from the United States Far the most part, this literature has
related capital flows to some measure ef an effective tax rate on capital
income. The empirical resulta relating to inward FDI, on which we shall
concentrate in this paper, have been mixed, While there is some evidence that
tax rates affect investment, there has been little robustness to such
findings.
We argue below that this lack of satisfactory results may be due, in
part, to the fact that past efforts have typically studied financial flows
rather than investment itself, and have failed to account adequately for the
different methods foreign multinationals can use to invest in the United
States, each of which carries its own particular tax implications. By lumping
together all forms of investment, and relating this aggregate value to some
measure of the U.S. tax rate, previous researchers have obscured the posstbe
impact of taxation on foreign investment.
A foreign multinational seeking to undertake real investment in the
United Stares can do so in three different ways: it can acquire an exiating
U.S. company, establish a new U.S. branch or subsidiary, or invest through an
affiliate branch or subsidiary already operating in U.S. markets, The
relevant tax factors affecting the decision of the multinational depend not
only upon the source of funds and the home country's tax rules, two factors
which previous authors have emphasized, but also critically -upon the chosen
method of undertaking the investment. While most authors have modefled the
taxation of FDI as if it proceeded through the acquisition of new capital

goods, the predominant channel of POT actually has been through mergers and
acquisitions. This distinction is of particular importance for the
interpretation of recent FUt behavior.
In a recent and provocative paper, Scholes and Wolfson (1990) argue that
the 1986 Tax Reform Act (TRA88) provided a strong incentive for foreign
multinationals to increase their investment activity in the United States.
Their argument rests upon the observation that foreign companies whose home
countries credit U.S. toxes (those with so-called "worldwide" tax systems) are
relatively unaffected by increases in U.S. taxes because any payments made are
credited at home upon repotriation. Since TRA86 raised effective tax rates on
certain corporate assete, the relative (to domestio ti.S. investors) tax
position of these selected foreign investors may have improved. Scholes and
Wolfson offer stylized evidence that the boom in investment predicted by these
tax effects has actually occurred, and Swenson (1989) provides some supporting
evidence with respect to the recent pattern of Pot across industries and
countries. We reevaluate the Scholes-t4olfson hypothesis in this paper,
because we view it as a litmus test for the importance of taxes in determining
POT into the United States, and because we feel that econometric analysis in
the spirit of earlier studies would be difficult to interpret given the
limited sample sizes and clear nonstationarity in the variables we feel are
important.
As we shall discuss below, a significant part of the FDI boom of the
late 1980's came through takeovers, rather than the purchase of new assets.
Yet, given the distinct tax treatment of takeovers (as opposed to new
investment) and the additional provisions of TRAS8 regarding takeovers, it is
questionable whether the boom in POT is really consistent with the 1985 tax