NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES
CHANCES IN RELATIVE WAGES, 1963-1987;
SUPPLY AND DEMAND FACTORS
Lawrence F. Katz
Kevin H. Murphy
Working Paper No. 3927
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1991
Coldin, Lawrence
We thank John Bound, Richard Freeman, Claudia
seminars arid
Summers, Finis Welch? and participants at several
to
NBER conferences for helpful consents. We are alsn grateful
Chinhui Juhn, Brooks Pierce, and Boris Simkovich for expert
Grant
research assistance. Financial support was provided by NSF
No. SES-9010759- The final data sets used in this paper are
available upon request. This paper is part of NBER's research
are those of
program in Labor Studies. Any Ofl1Ofl5 expressed
Economic
the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Research.

NBER Working Paper 113927
December 1991
CHANGES IN RELATIVE WAGES, l9631987:
SUPPLY AND DEMAND FACTORS
ABSTRACT
A simple supply and demand framework is used to analyze
changes in the U.S. wage structure from 1963 to 1987. Rapid
secular growth in the demand for more-educated workers1
more-skilled' workers, and females appears to be the driving
force behind observed changes in the wage structure. Measured
changes in the allocation of labor between industries and
occupations strongly favored college graduates and females
throughout the period. Movements in the college wage premium
in
over this period appear to be strongly related to fluctuations
the rate of growth of the supply of college graduates.
Lawrence F Katz Kevin N. Murphy
Department of Economics Gradoate School
Harvard University of Business
Cambridge, MA 02138 University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
and MBER

I. INTRODUCTION
Wage inequality among both men and women increased substantially in the United States
during the 1 980s. Changes in the wage structure along three primary dimensions played an
important role in rising inequality. First, there was an Increase in wage differentials by education
with a particularly sharp rise in the relative earnings of college graduates. Second, the average
wages of older workers increased relatrve to the wages of younger workers for those with
relatively low levels of education. The combination of these two changes generaled en increase
In the weekly wages of young male college graduates by approximately 30 pei'cent relative to
young males with twelve or fewer years of schooling from 1979 to 1987. Third, earnings inequality
also increased greatly within narrowly defined demographic and skill groups. Although the male
and female wage structures widened considerably, differences in earnings between men end
women narrowed throughout the 1980s. The average wage of women increased by about 8
percent relative lo the average wage of men from 1979 to 1987.
Although the pattern of movements in the U.S. wage structure in the 1980S Is well-
documented.1 much disagreement remains concerning the fundamental causes of the changes.
Several explanations have received much attention. One class of explanations postulates that
changes in the U.S. wage structure during the 1980s are driven primarily by shifts in the relative
demand for labor favoring more-educated and more-akillect workers over less-educated and
iess-skilled workers and tavoring females over males. One variant emphasizes technological
changes (possibly associated with the computer revolution) that are likely to have raised the
relative demand (or more-educated and flexible workers and reduced the demand for physical
labor basis and Haltiwanger, 1991; Krueger, 1991; Mincer, 1991]. A second hypothesizes that
shifts in product demand largely essociated with large trade delicits in the l980s have led to a
sharp decline in manulacturing employment and a shift in employment towards sectors that are
education and female intensive (Murphy and Welch, 19911. Alternative explanations focus on
changes in wage-setting Institutions such as ihe decline in unions (Freeman, 19911, changes in
pay norms (Mtchell, 1989] and the erosion of the real value of the minimum wage (Blackburn,

2
Bloom,andFreeman 1990].
In this paper, we examine how tar one can go towards explaining recent changes in relative
wages in the United States using a simple supply and demand framework. Ftather than focusing
on changes in relative wages during the 1 980s In Isolation, we analyze relative wage movements
over the longer 25 year time period from 1963 to 1987, By examining this longer time period, we
ara able to evaluate the ability of competing explanations to explain a wide range of wage
observations (such as both falling college wage premia in the 19705 and risIng college wage
premia in the 19805) as well as differences in timing in changes in wage differentials.
The paper is organised as follows. Section It describes the data from the March Current
Population Surveys that we use throughout the pape. Section III uses these data to describe the
basic patterns of change in real and relative wages in the United Statesover the 1963 to 1987
period. Section IV outlines the simple factor demand model that we use to interpret these relative
wage data and evaluates the ability of simple demand shift stories to explain the observed
patterns of changes in relative factor prices and supplies. Section V expands the basic model
to incorporate both within and between industry components of relative factor demands. Section
Section VI uses the basic framework to examine changes in education end experience
differentials. Section VII summarizes our conclusions.
We conclude that rapid secular growth in the relative demand for more.skilled workers is
a key component of any consistent explanation for rising inequality and changes in the wage
structure over the last twenty-five years. Although much of this shift in relative demand can be
accounted for by observed shifts in the industrial end occupational composition of employment
towards relativoty skill-intensive sectors, the majority reflects shifts in relative labor demand
occurnng within detailed sectors. These within-sector shifts arc likely to reflect skill-biased
technological changes. Differences in the time pattern of rising education differentials and rising
withln.group inequality suggest they are distinct phenomena. Our results indicate that observed
fluctuations in the rate of growth of the relative supply of college graduates combined with smooth
trend demand growth in favor of more-educated workers can largely esplsin fluctuations in the