NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES
THE APPOINTMENT-BOOK PROBLEM AND COMMITMENT,
WITH APPLICATIONS TO REFEREEING AND MEDICINE
Daniel S. Hamermesh
Working Paper No. 3928
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1991
Jeff Biddle, George Borjas, Peter Schmidt, Rachel Willis, and
participants at seminars at several universities in Australia,
Italy and the U.S., and at the National Bureau of Economic
Research, offered helpful discussions of the ideas. I am deeply
grateful to the editors and administrative assistants who kept
and provided the records that made most of the empirical work
possible. The data are available from the author on diskette in
a LOTUS work file. This paper is part of NBER's research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3928
December 1991
THE APPOINTMENT-BOOK PROBLEM AND COMMITMENT.
WITH APPLICATIONS TO REFEREEING AND MEDICINE
ABSTRACT
Markets that involve customers waiting for services or goods in
queues whose length they cannot observe are studied. In these markets
suppliers truncate queues that become so long that they jeopardize the
supplier's future relations with the customer. The length of the
queue and the probability of truncation increase with the quality of
the supplier, and this implicitly defines the price that customers are
willing to pay for quality. Queue-jumping or nontruncation can occur
if monetary payments are made or if nonmonetary specific commitments
exist between a customer and a supplier. The predictions apply to any
activity where the queue is unobservable and transactions costs make
contracts or spot pricing uneconomic.
The theory is examined on a random sample of refereeing requests
by seven economics journals. Quality, measured by experience and
citations to the referee's work, lengthens the queue and increases the
probability of truncation. Monetary bribes affect queue discipline in
the expected way; and specific commitments, measured by past
publication in the journal and location at the editor's institution,
greatly affect the truncation rate, but have no impact on the rate of
servicing the queue. The implications for truncation are also
examined on a set of data describing doctors' willingness to accept
new patients, with much the same results as in the sample of referees.
Daniel S. Hamermesh
Department of Economics
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824
and NBER

Who more busy than he that hath least to do? (Thomas
Draxe, 1633)
It's (Toots Shor's restaurant] so busy that nobody goes
there any more. (Attributed to Yogi Berra)
I. Introduction and Motivation
A wide variety of economic activity consists of services
offered by individuals or firms who are unable to ration completely
using prices. In each case the supplier is approached by a
customer demanding the service at a fixed price that may be below
that which clears the spot market. The purpose of the analysis
here is to examine the incentives facing suppliers, to infer how
differences in their characteristics affect how they treat demand,
and to study how their relations to their customers affect their
behavior.
There has been some study of markets where non—price rationing
of goods by the value of customers' waiting time takes place.
Deacon and Sonstelie (1985) analyzed how customers choose whether
to queue to purchase low—priced gasoline; Lindsay and Feigenbaum
(1984) studied the case of the British National Health Service, and
Nichols et al (1971) examined the demand for publicly—provided
services. In those cases and numerous others, including waiting
for bank tellers, obtaining a table at a crowded restaurant, etc.,
the market allocates the scarce good or service partly along the
dimension of the value of the time of actual and potential
consumers. Consumers choose whether or not to enter the queue by
comparing their desire for the service to its observable full price
that includes its time cost.
1

In a variety of other markets that have not been studied the
nature of the available information prevents the customer from
estimating the time cost of the service. This gives suppliers the
ability to allocate places in the queue for the service. Moreover,
it offers them a second margin of choice, whether to deny customers
access to the queue, in addition to the choice about the rate of
service that they have when the customer can observe the time cost.
This phenomenon, the appointment—book problem, characterizes
behavior in a fairly broad range of markets. Physicians in private
practice ration their services to potential new customers by
imposing long waits for health examinations. They may also
truncate the queue by having callers informed that they are not
accepting new patients. Senior attorneys perform work for some new
clients, but because their hourly billing rates are hard to change,
the market cannot ration their scarce time fully. The time to
completion of a fairly routine legal transaction by a senior
attorney may be much greater than by a junior lawyer. The senior
attorney may also assign the task to a junior colleague or refer
the client elsewhere.
Markets outside professional services also provide examples of
waiting and truncation, Very high-quality hair-dressers and
barbers schedule appointments with longer lead times than their
less well—known fellows. Airlines maintain no—charge (to the
caller) telephone lines for making inquiries about reservations or
flights: The inquiry may be served immediately; the caller may be
put on hold and told to wait for the next available agent; or a
2