NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES
ANATOMY OF A FINANCIAL CRISIS
Frederic S. Mishkin
Working Paper No. 3934
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1991
This paper is pan of NBER's research program in Monetary
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3934
December 1991
ANATOMY OF A FINANCIAL CRISIS
ABSTRACT
This paper provides an asymmetric information framework for
understanding the nature of financial crises. It provides the
following precise definition of a financial crisis: A financial
crisis is a disruption to financial markets in which adverse
selection and moral hazard problems become much worse, so that
financial markets are unable to efficiently channel funds to
those who have the most productive investment opportunities. As
a result, a financial crisis can drive the economy away from an
equilibrium with high output in which financial markets perform
well to one in which output declines sharply. The asymmetric
information framework explains the patterns in the data and many
features of these crises which are otherwise hard to explain. It
indicates that financial crises have effects over and above those
resulting from bank panics and therefore provides a rationale for
an expanded lender-of-last resort role for the central bank in
which the central bank uses the discount window to provide
liquidity to sectors outside of the banking system.
Frederic S. Mishkin
Graduate School of
Business
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
and NBER

Introduction
A healthy and vibrant economy requires a financial system that moves funds to
economic agents who have the most productive investment opportunities.
Financial crises interfere with this process because they can drive the economy
away from an equilibrium with high output in which financial markets perform
well to one in which output declines sharply because the financial system is unable
to channel funds to those with the best investment opportunities. This paper shows
how this occurs by outlining an asymmetric information framework for understand-
ing the precise nature of financial crises.
Earlier Views of Financial Crises
until recently, views of financial crises in the literature have split into two
Up
polar camps, those associated with monetarists versus a more eclectic view put
forward by Charles Kindleberger and Hyman Minsky. Monetarists beginning with
Friedman and Schwartz (1963) have linked financial crises with banking panics.
They stress the importance of banking panics because they view them as a major
source of contractions in the money supply which, in turn, have lead to severe
contractions in aggregate economic activity in the United States. Monetarists do
not view as real financial crises events in which, despite a sharp decline in asset
prices and a rise in business failures, there is no potential for a banking panic and
a resulting sharp decline in the money supply. Indeed, Schwartz (1986) charac-
terizes these situations as "pseudo financial crises". Government intervention in
a pseudo-financial crisis is unnecessary and can indeed be harmful since it leads
to a decrease in economic efficiency because firms that deserve to fail are bailed
out or because it results in excessive money growth that stimulates inflation.
An opposite view of financial crises is outlined by Kindleberger (1978) and
Minsky (1972) who have a much broader definition of what constitutes a real
financial crisis than monetarists. In their view, financial crises either involve
sharp declines in asset prices, failures of both large financial and nonfinancial
firms, deflations or disinflations, disruptions in foreign exchange markets, or some
combination of all of these. Since they perceive any of these disturbances as

2
having potential serious consequences for the aggregate economy, they advocate
a much expanded role for government intervention when a financial crisis, broadly
defined, occurs.
One problem with the Kindleberger-Minsky view of financial crises is that
it does not supply a rigorous theory of what characterizes a financial crisis, and
it thus lends itself to being used too broadly as a justification for government
interventions that might not be beneficial for the economy. Indeed, this is the
basis of Schwartz's (1986) attack on the Kindleberger-Minsky view. On the other
hand, the monetarist view of financial crises is extremely narrow because it only
focuses on bank panics and their affect on the money supply.
Information and Financial Structure
Asymmetric
Therecent literature on asymmetric information and financial structure, which has
been excellently surveyed recently by Gertler (1988a), on the other hand does
provide a broader view of the nature of financial crises, but it supplies a theory
which does not automatically justify government interventions when there is a
sharp drop in wealth as the Kindleberger-Minsky view might. The review of the
literature here provides a framework which can be used to understand financial
crises in the following section.
Transactions that take place in financial markets are subject to asymmetric
information in which one party often does not know all that he or she needs to
know about the other party to make correct decisions. For example, a borrower
who takes out a loan usually has better information about the potential returns and
risk associated with the investment projects he plans to undertake than does the
lender. Asymmetric information creates problems in the financial system in two
basic ways: before the transaction is entered into (adverse selection) and after the
transaction is entered into (moral hazard).
Adverse selection in financial markets occurs when the potential borrowers
who are the most likely to produce an undesirable (adverse) outcome -- the bad
credit risks -- are the ones most likely to be selected. Since adverse selection
makes it more likely that loans might be made to bad credit risks, lenders may