NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES
ANATOMY OF FINANCIAL DISTRESS:
AN EXAMINATION OF JUNK-BOND ISSUERS
Paul Asquith
Robert Gertrier
David Scharf stein
Working Paper No. 3942
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1991
This paper is part of NBER's research program in Corporate
Finance. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3942
December 1991
ANATOMY OF FINANCIAL DISTRESS:
AN EXAMINATION OF JUNK-BOND ISSUERS
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the events following the onset of
financial distress for 102 public junk bond issuers. We find
-
that out-of-court debt relief mainly comes from junk bond
holders; banks almost never forgive principal, though they do
defer payments and waive debt covenants. Asset sales are an
important means of avoiding Chapter 11 reorganization; however,
they may be limited by industry factors. If a company simply
restructures its bank debt, but either does not restructure its
public debt or does not sell major assets or merge, the company
goes bankrupt. The structure of a company's liabilities affects
the likelihood that it goes bankrupt; companies whose bank and
private debt are secured as well as companies with complex public
debt structures are more prone to go bankrupt. Finally, there is
no evidence that more profitable distressed companies are more
successful in dealing with financial distress; they are not less
likely to go bankrupt, sell assets, or reduce capital expenditures.
Paul Asquith Robert Gertner
Sloan School of Management Graduate School of Business
M.I.T. University of Chicago
50 Memorial Drive 1101 E. 58th Street
Cambridge, MA 02139 Chicago, IL 60637
David Scharfstein
Sloan School of Management
M.I.T.
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER

1. Introduction
What are the COsts of financial distress? There are as many answers as models. In
truth, no one knows, though these costs are presumed to be a central component of
capital structure decisions. Indeed, we do not even know much about what companies
do when they get into financial trouble. This paper begins to fill this gap —firstby
documenting how companies cope with financial distress, and second by analyzing
what implications these findings have for understanding the costs of financial distress.
Our study is based on a sample of 102 companies that issued high-yield "junk"
bonds, during the 1970s and 1980s and subsequently got into financial trouble. These
companies deal with distress in one or more ways. They: (i) restructure their bank and
private debt through direct negotiations; (ii) restructure their public debt with an ex-
change offer of cash and securities; (iii) get an infusion of new capital; (iv) sell major
assets or merge; (v) reduce capital expenditures; and (vi) file for Chapter 11 reorganiza-
tion.
There are a number of striking facts that emerge:
(1) Outside of formal bankruptcy proceedings, banks almost never (there is one
exception) forgive principal on their loans and they rarely provide new financing. They
often waive covenants and defer principal and interest payments, buy they also often
force accelerated payments and increase their collateral.
(2) Asset sales are an important means of avoiding bankruptcy; only 3out of 21
companies that sell over 20% of their assets go bankrupt. But, asset sales are limited by
industry factors. Consistent with Shleifer and Vishny's (1991) model, companies in
poorly performing industries or in industries with high leverage (so that there is less
debt capacity in the industry to finance an acquisition) are less likely to sell assets.
(3) Public debt restructurings through exchange offers are also crucial for avoiding
bankruptcy. Every company in the sample that simply restructures its bank debt, but
either fails to restructure its public debt or does not sell major assets or merge, goes
bankrupt.

(4) The structure of a company's liabilities affects the likelihood that it goes bank-
rupt. In particular, companies whose bank and private debt is secured as well as com-
panies with complex public debt structures are more prone to end up seeking
bankruptcy protection.
(5) There is no evidence that companies with better performance are more succes-
sful in dealing with financial distress. Better companies (measured by operating income
and cash flow shortages) are not less prone to go bankrupt, sell assets, or reduce capital
expenditures.
(6) Capital expenditure reductions are large. 83% of the firms reduce capital expen-
ditures from the year before the onset of distress to the year after. Industry factors and
company downsizing account for much, but not all, of the reduction.
We conclude that banks do not play much of a role in resolving financial distress.
This is despite the view that one of the benefits of borrowing from a bank is that the
bank is in a better position by virtue of its relationship with the firm to assist it in finan-
cial distress. Nevertheless, companies that restructure their bank debt are just as likely
to go bankrupt as those that do noL Real debt relief --whenit is obtained --comesfrom
subordinated public creditors.
In our view, banks play such a limited role because of the presence of subordinate
public debt. The reason is that bank-led bailouts primarily benefit the subordinated
creditors since they are the residual claimants. Also, because the banks are always se-
nior —and in many cases secured -- they stand to do quite well in bankruptcy. There-
fore their incentive to take unilateral steps to help the company are quite limited; this is
a variation on the familiar debt overhang problem identified by Myers (1977). Thus it is
not surprising that we find that companies whose private debt is secured are more
prone to file for Chapter 11.
What is in some ways more puzzling is why there aren't more comprehensive debt
restructurings of both the bank debt and the public debt. These would avoid costly
Chapter 11 filings that occur so often in our sample. The answer must be eitherthat