NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES
THE DEBT BURDEN AND DEBT MATURITY
Alessandro Missale
Olivier Jean Blanchard
Working Paper No. 3944
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
Decenher 1991
We thank Alberto Alesina, Stanley Fischer, Julio Roternberg and
Jean Tirole for comments. We thank the Bank of Italy for data,
and NSF for financial assistance. This paper is part of NBER'a
research program in Econonic Fluctuations. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3944
December 1991
THE DEBT BURDEN AND DEBT MATURITY
ABSTRACT
At low and moderate levels of government debt, there appears
to be little relation between the level of debt and its maturity.
But at high levels of debt, a strong inverse relation emerges.
We start the paper by documenting this inverse relation for those
OECD Countries which have reached very high levels of debt. We
then provide a theory of the joint movements of debt and maturity
which can explain both sets of facts. It is based on the idea
that, at high levels of debt, the government may need to decrease
the maturity of the debt as debt increases, in order to maintain
the credibility of its anti-inflation stance.
Alessandro Missale Olivier Jean Blanchard
Department of Economics Department of Economics
M.IT. M.1T.
50 Memorial Drive 50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02139 Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER

Maturity 2
Introduction
When one looks at OECD countries over the last 30 years, there appear . s to have
been little systematic relation between the level of debt and its maturity. One set
of countries stands however in clear exception to this general statement, namely
those countries which have now reached debt-GNP ratios approaching or exceed-
ing 100%. There, the increase in debt has been associated with a sharp reduction
in maturity. Our paper provides a tentative explanation for these two sets of facts.
In section 1, we look at debt and maturity for the three countries, Italy, Belgium
and Ireland, which have alt reached high levelso f debt. For each, we construct an
effective maturity series. By effective maturity, we mean the maturity relevant to
the effect of inflation on the value of the debt; thus for example, we treat foreign
and indexed debt as zero maturity debt (The motivation for such a definition of
maturity is given by the model we develop later). We document the strong inverse
relation between effective maturity and the debt-GNP ratio.
This leads us to develop in section 2 a simple model based on the now standard
idea of a reputation equdibnum A government which has nomina1 debt clearly
has an incentive to try to inflate it away so as to decrease the debt burdes It
will resist the urge if the rewards are small, and the cost of a lost reputation is
high. Given that the rewards from unexpected inflation are increasing in both
the level of debt and its maturity the government will keep its no inflation pledge
credible by decreasing maturity as debt increases Or more precisLi me 'naxnn urn
1. As has been noted by a number of authors (Calvo and Guidotti l1990b1) the US have exhib-
ited a positive relation between maturity and debt, with both maturity and the debt-GNP ratio
decreasing until the mid 1970's, and increasing since then. But the US appear to be very much
the exception, with most other countries exhibiting little correlation between debt and maturity
movements. A detailed review of the evidence for a number of OECD countries is given in Missale
[19911

Maturity 3
maturityc onsistenwt ith a credible no-inflation pledge will decrease with the level
of debt.
The model developed in section 2 is a barebone model, with a number of strong
simplifying assumptions. In particular it postulates rather than derives a tax rule,
assuming taxes to be set so as to yield a constant level of debt in the absence of
unexpected inflation. In section 3, we endogenize the timing of taxes by allowing
for a tax smoothing motive. We derive the joint dynamics of debt and maturity
as a tbnction of an exogenous sequence of government spending, and show that,
again, nmximum maturity moves inversely with the level of debt.
In section 4, we conclude and relate our results to the recent research on debt
and maturity. In doing so, we take up the obvious loose end in our argument, the
fact that we have derived a theory of maximum rather than actual maturity. We
argue informally that, once the other motives explored in the literature are taken
into account, the maximum maturity is likely to be binding only at high levels
of debt. This explanation can thus potentially account for the two sets of facts
presented at the beginning, the existence of a clear relation between maturity
and debt at high levels of debt, and the absence of such a relation at lower levels.
A formalization is however left to future work.
1 Evidence from three countries
In 1990, three OECD countries, Belgium, Ireland and Italy, had (gross) debt to
GNP ratios around or above 100%, a number roughly twice as high as the OECD-
Europe average. We focus in this section on the evolution of debt and maturity in
2
those three countries since 1960 To do so, we constructt wo seriesf or each of
2. A fourth countrp Greece, is fast on its way to reach those levels. We were unable however to
obtain detailed enough information on maturity and on Central Bank holdings, and thus have not
included Greece in our sample. The rough evidence is however consistent with the evidence for the