NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES
BANK EXPOSURE, CAPITAL AND SECONDARY MARKET
DISCOUNTS ON DEVELOPING COUNTRY DEBT
Sule Ozier
Harry 1-luizinga
WorkingPaper No. 3961
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge. MA 02138
January 1992
We thank Trudy Cameron, Kenneth Froot and Kenneth Rogoff for many helpful comments.
We have also benefitted from the comments seminar participants at U.C. Berkeley, Boston
University, Brandeis, Harvard, MIT, Yale, and Stanford, and participants at the NBER
Summer institute. Sule Ozler gratefully acknowledges the support provided by the Debt and
international Finance Division of the World Bank, and an NBER Ford Foundation Fellowship.
Previous drafts of this paper were entitled 'Secondary Market Prices for Developing Country
Debt: The Role of Creditor Country Factors." This paper is part of NBER's research program
in International Studies. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research or the
World Bank, its Executive Directors or the countries they represent.

396I
NBER Working Paper
January 1992
BANK EXPOSURE, CAPITAL AND SECONDARY MARKEDISCOUNTS
ON DEVELOPING COUNTRY DEBT
ABST RACT
Previous empirical studies of secondary market discounts for developing countries
have ignored important creditor country factors. The empirical evidence in this paper
indicates that, after controlling for repayment indicators of borrower countries, bank exposure
and capital are important determinants of secondary market discounts: an increase in the
exposure of large banks to a particular country leads to a decrease in the secondary market
discounts on the debt of that country, while an increase in the capital of large banks leads to
an increase in secondary market discounts. Among the repayment indicators of developing
countries, only debt ratios are found to be significant determinants of the discounts. We
suggest that the impacts of exposure and capital can be explained by the presence of deposit
insurance. l'he evidence presented on the stock market pricing of lender banks supports this
view.
SuleOzler Harry 1-luizinga
Department of Economics Department of Economics
405 Hilgard Avenue Stanford University
University of California Stanford, CA 90405
Los Angeles, CA 90024-1477
and NBER

1. Introduction
In the secondary market br developing country debt Italy Ill;in trade at
large discounts. The magnitude of these discounts is considtred to reflect a
lack of confidence that the debts will ever be fully repaid, since
secondary
market prices are regarded as indicators of the value of the outstanding debt.
In an attempt to understand the factors that influence the value of a
country's outstanding debt empirical studies have primarily focused on
economic characteristics of borrower countries that presumably affect their
repayment prospects, such as GN? per capita, and the debt—to—exports ratio.1
Some puzzles concerning the patterns of secondary market discounts,
however, remain to be explained: loans to countries with large conatercial bank
debt, such as Brazil and Mexico, sell at lower discounts than loans to smaller
debtors; debt prices fell during the eighties, even though countries were
making large repayments. Other developments of the period suggest that
characteristics of the creditors could provide some explanations for these
puzzles. In particular, during the eighties the position of commercial banks
changed substantially. banks strengthened their capital, and engaged in
significant amounts of interbank loan trading, changing the composition of
See for example Berg and Sachs (1989), Cohen (1988) Hajivassiliou
(1988), Huizinga (1989), Sachs and iluizinga (1987). These variables are
theoretical
considered to he among the empirical measures suggested by the
literature. For example seizure technology of the lenders, impatience of
various parties, the importance of future credit market access are suggested
as determinants of the value of debt (see Eaton and Cersovitz (1981), and
Bulow and Rogoff (I989b)).

2
their loan portfolios. Tnterbank trading was in fact a very important
of trading in the secondary market 2
component
objecLive of this paper is to better understand the determinants of
The
these puzzles. For
secondary market discounts and provide an explanation for
this purpose, we focus on a set of factors omitted by existing studies of
secondary market pricing of debt. In particular, we conduct an empirical
of the regulatory
analysis to determine if the degree of exposure and the size
discounts. We
capital of the lender banks have an impact on secondary market
consider the largest nine US banks. The data for exposure of these banks to
of
individual countries and their total capital are quarterly for the period
1986—1988. There are 41 countries in the sample, and the debt of 21 of these
countries has been traded in the secondary market. In order to address
potential problems due to sample selection we use a one step maximum
likelihood estimation procedure. In the estimation process we attempt to
control for countries' repayment prospects by using economic indicators of
borrower countries, in particular, their debt ratios.
Our primary findings are that bank exposure and capital are indeed
important determinants of discounts. The impacts of these variables are
substantial and they explain a significant component of the variation of
discounts across countries and over time, Specifically, a 4.1 billion 1986 US
dollars increase in the exposure of the )arge banks to a country is estimated
to reduce discounts by more than 10 cents on the dollar.3 A 2.7 billion
2 69% of all trading activity in 1986 was interbank trading, compared to
35% in 1988. Source:Quarterly Review on Financial Flows to Developing
Countries p989).
We consider the largest nine US banks (size is measured by asset
value). The sample mean of exposure to the 21 countries with traded debts is
2.7 billion in 1986 dollars, with a standard deviation of 4.1. The mean of