NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES
GLOBAL FINANCIAL MARKETS AND THE RISK PREMIUM
ON U.S. EQUITY
K.C. Chan
G. Andrew, Kamlyi
Rent M. Stulz
Working Paper No. 4074
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 1992
This paper is part of NBER's research program in Asset Pricing. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working #4074
May 1992
GLOBAL FINANCIAL MARKETS AND THE RISK PREMIUM
ON U.S. EQUITY
ABSTRACT
We document that there is a significant foreign influence on the risk
premium of U.S. assets. Using a bivariate GARCH-in-mean process for
conditional expected excess returns, we fmd that the conditional expected
excess return on U.S. stocks is positively related to the conditional covariance
of the return of these stocks with the return on a foreign index but is not
related to its own conditional variance. Further, we are unable to reject the
international version of the CAPM. Evidence is presented for different model
specifications, multiple-day returns and alternative proxies of foreign stock
returns including the Nikkei 225 Stock Average, Morgan Stanley Japan and
Morgan Stanley EAFE indices.
K.C. Chan G. Andrew Karolyi
Associate Professor Assistant Professor
Faculty of Finance Faculty of Finance
College of Business College of Business
Ohio State University Ohio State University
1775 College Road 1775 College Road
Columbus, OH 43210 Columbus, OH 43210
René M. Stulz
Riklis Chair in Business
College of Business
Ohio State University
314 Hagerty Hall
1775 College Road
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER

1. Introduction
What drives the risk premium on U.S. equity? If the U.S. capital markets
are segmented from foreign markets or if U.S. assets constitute most of the
wealth traded on internationally integrated markets, the risk premium on
U.S. assets should be determined in the U.S. and should not be affected
by foreign capital markets. Until the mid-1970s, these conditions seemed
to prevail. However, since then, capital markets have apparently become
increasingly integrated internationally and the market value of U.S. assets
has become a smaller fraction of world wealth. These developments suggest
that the risk premium on U.S. assets may now be determined primarily on
world capital markets rather than on U.S. capital markets. In this paper,
we investigate this issue and find empirical evidence of a significant foreign
influence on the risk premium of U.S. assets.
The capital asset pricing model implies that the risk of the market port-
folio is measured by the variance of its returns and that, therefore, the risk
premium for the market portfolio increases with the variance of the portfolio's
returns. Further, with risk averse investors, the addition of a mean preserving
spread to the distribution of the return of the market portfolio increases the
risk premium, so that even if the capital asset pricing model does not hold,
one would typically expect a positive relation between the risk premium and
the variance of the market portfolio. Merton (1980) estimates the relation
between the risk premium and volatility using contemporaneous variance es-
timates. French, Schwert and Stambaugh (1987) provide evidence that there
is a positive relation between the conditional expected excess returns on the
market portfolio and the conditional variance of its returns using a general-
ized autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity (GARCH) representation
developed by Engle (1982) and Bollerslev (1986). They use daily data from
January 1928 to December 1984 for the excess returns on the market with
Standard and Poor's S&P 500 index proxying for the market portfolio.
For most of the 8ample period studied by French, Schwert and Stam-
baugh (1987), foreign capital markets were substantially segmented from the
U.S. capital markets and their capitalization was small relative to the cap-
italization of U.S. markets. There is now substantial evidence that stock

markets are reasonably well-integrated. For instance, Cho, Eun and Sen-
bet (1986),Wheatley (1988), Korajczyk and Viallet (1989), Gultekin, Gui-
tekin and Penati (1989), Cumby (1990), Harvey (1991), Bekaert and Hodrick
(1992) and Campbell and Hamao (1992) provide evidence of integration, es—
pecially during the 1980s, using a variety of asset pricing models with month-
ly data. Further, as Figure 1 indicates, the capitalization of U.S. stocks has
become a smaller part of the capitalization of the world market portfolio of
common stocks. These two developments suggest that the S&P 500 is un-
likely to have been an adequate proxy for the world market portfolio over the
last decade.
Using the capital asset pricing model, the evidence that stock market-
s are fairly well integrated suggests that the risk premium on the market
portfolio of U.S. assets depends on the covariance of its returns with the re-
turns on the world market portfolio. This covariance is a weighted average
of the variance of the market portfolio of U.S. assets and the covariance of
the returns on the market portfolio of U.S. assets with the market portfolio
of non-U.S. assets, where the weights are the proportions of U.S. and for-
eign stocks in the world market portfolio. Even if the capital asset pricing
model does not hold, however, this covariance may be an important deter-
minant of the risk premium on the U.S. market portfolio. For instance, in
Merton's (1973) intertemporal capital asset pricing model, the risk premium
on a portfolio is still an increasing function of the covariance of the returns
of that portfolio with the market portfolio.
In our empirical work, we model the daily excess returns of the S&P
500 and of a portfolio of non-U.S. assets jointly using a bivariate GARCH-in-
mean representation. We find that the conditional expected excess returns on
the U.S. market portfolio are significantly related to the conditional covari-
ance of the S&P 500 with Japan's Nikkei 225 index, but not significantly to
the conditional variance of the S&P 500. We obtain a similar though weaker
result if the market portfolio of foreign assets is approximated by the Mor-
gan Stanley EAFE index (which is a value-weighted index comprising stocks
from Europe, Australia and the Far East) and the Morgan Stanley Japan
index. We also show that this result is robust to a number of alternative
econometric specifications as well as different measurement intervals for the
2