NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES
THE ECONOMICS OF BANKRUPTCY REFORM
Philippe Aghion
Oliver Hart
John Moore
Working Paper No. 4097
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1992
Paper presented at NBER Conference on Transition in Eastern Europe, 26-29 February 1992.
We thank Olivier Blanchard, Stuart Gilson, Leo Herzel, Bengt Holmstrom, John Kihn, Shan Li,
Lynn LoPucki and Andrei Shleifer for their help and comments. We acknowledge financial
support from PEW Charitable Trusts; the National Science Foundation; the Suntory-Toyota
International Centre for Economics and Related Disciplines at the LSE; and the International
Financial Services Research Center at MIT. This paper is part of NBER's research program in
Corporate Finance. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NEER Working Paper #4097
June 1992
ThE ECONOMICS OF BANKRUPTCY REFORM
ABSTRACT
We propose a new bankruptcy procedure. Initially, a firm's debts are cancelled, and cash
and non-cash bids are solicited for the 'new" (all-equity) firm. Former claimants are given
shares, or options to buy shares, in the new firm on the basis of absolute priority. Options are
exercised once the bids are in. Finally, a shareholder vote is taken to select one of the bids.
In essence, our procedure is a variant on the U.S. Chapter 7, in which non-cash bids are
possible; this allows for reorganization. We believe our scheme is superior to Chapter 11 since
it is simpler, quicker, market-based, avoids conflicts, and places appropriate discipline on
management.
Professor Philippe Aghion Professor Oliver Hart
European Bank for Reconstruction Department of Economics
and Development MIT
Level 7, 6 Broadgate E52-252D
London EC2M 2QS Cambridge, MA 02139
ENGLAND and NBER
and DELTA, Paris
Professor John Moore
Department of Economics
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
ENGLAND
and Princeton University

I. Introduction
Following the rapid demise of socialism, Eastern European countries
have been grappling with the question of what kind of market economy is best
suited to their future needs.1 Should they incorporate capitalism
whole—sale, and, If so, which kind: American, European, Japanese, or some
new version? How should problems of the transition be handled? What kinds
of institutional structures and laws are most appropriate for their
situation?
This paper is concerned with an aspect of this last question: the
choice of bankruptcy law. The decision facing Eastern European countries on
this question is both important and far from straightforward. It is
generally recognized by economists and lawyers in the West that bankruptcy
law has an important role to play in ensuring a timely resolution of the
problems of insolvent or financially distressed firms and a socially
efficient disposition of such firms' assets. Yet both practitioners and
academics are dissatisfied with current Western procedures, which are
regarded either as favoring the piece-meal liquidation of healthy firms (in
the case of Chapter 7 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code, or the receivership system
in the U.K.) or as being administratively very inefficient and costly (in the
case of Chapter 11 reorganizations in the U.S.). Nor is there any consensus
about how to improve these procedures. Thus It is far from obvious that
Eastern European countries should simply pick 'the best available Western
procedure" (whatever that may be).
1lhroughout the paper, "Eastern Europe' will be a short—hand for "Eastern
Europe and the former Soviet Union.

In this paper, we propose a new bankruptcy procedure which we believe
avoids some of the main pitfalls of existing procedures. The procedure is a
simple one. First, when a firm goes bankrupt, all of the firm's debts are
cancelled; and an individual -— a Judge, say —- is appointed to supervise the
procedure. The judge has two immediate tasks. (A) He (or she) must solicit
cash and non—cash bids for all or part of the 'new' firm. () He must
allocate rights to the shares in this new firm: each former claim—holder is
either allocated equity In the new company (in the case of senior creditors)
or given an opt ion to buy equity (in the case of junior creditors or
shareholders), according to the amount or priority of his (or her) claim.2
These two tasks could be carried out in parallel, and completed within a
prespecified period of time: e.g. , three months. After this, in the light of
the bids received, there is a further short period (of a month, say) in which
people can exercise (and even trade) their options. Finally, the
shareholders (recall that all claia—holders are now shareholders) vote on
whether to select one of the cash bids or to maintain the company as a going
concern (either under existing management or under some alternative
management team). The firm then exits from bankruptcy.
In essence, our proposed scheme is a decentralized variant on Chapter 7,
in which non—cash (as well as cash) bids are allowed; and ownership of the
firm is homogenized (to all equity),so that the owners can decide (by vote)
which of the bids to accept. What is less essential to our scheme is the
precise mechanism by which equity is allocated; in Section 8 below we present
2The precise allocation scheme —— which preserves absolute priority —— is
based on an idea of Lucian Bebchuk (1988).
2