NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MARKET CONDITIONS AND
RETIREMENT OF PHYSICAL CAPITAL:
EVIDENCE FROM OIL TANKERS
lain Cockbum
Murray Frank
Working Paper No. 4194
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1992
This paper is part of NBER's research program in Productivity. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Woiking Paper #4 194
October 1992
MARKET CONDiTIONS AND
RETIREMENT OF PHYSICAL CAPITAL:
EVIDENCE FROM OIL TANKERS
ABSTRACT
The endogeneity of capital retirements is studied for the particular case
of oil tankers from 1979-- 1989. A model is estimated to examine the effect
of changes in market conditions on the price and scrappage of tankers. Energy
price rises had a major impact on the value of ships and on which ships were
scrapped. A simple model is able to account for many features of the market.
We use the information implicit in second-hand prices to ease the
computational burden for the model that is estimated.
lain Cockburn Murray Frank
Faculty of Commerce Faculty of Commerce
University of British Columbia University of British Columbia
2053 Main Mall 2053 Main Mall
Vancouver, BC Vancouver, BC
Canada V6T 1Z2 Canada V6T 1Z2
and NBER

1 Introduction
1.1 Background
Depreciation of capital is a fundamental aspect of many dynamic pro-
cesses in economics. Areas of economics in which depreciation is central
include growth theory, business cycle analysis, dynamic oligopoly the-
ory, national income accounting, productivity measurement, and sonic
aspects of international trade and public finance. Despite the central im-
portance of depreciation, it is common to make convenient simplifying
assumptions that may have the effect of distorting the implications of
the process. In particular it is common to assume constant geometric
depreciation of capital that is independent of market conditions, almost
as if this were a technological fact. Depreciation is, however, at least
partly eudogenous and many patterns of depreciation are possible. As
stressed by Flulten (1990) and Berndt (1991), among others, given the
importance of the capital depreciation process there is surprisingly little
evidence concerning its actual character.
This paper provides some empirical analysis of one component of de-
preciation, the important but neglected issue of capital retirement. rrhe
particular case examined is the oil tanker industry, which has a number
of features that allow us to address some questions of general signifi-
cance. Firstly, what determines the decision to scrap a piece of physical
capital? Are depreciation and retirement of capital determined by engi-
Murray Frank gratefully acknowledges research support from Social Sciences and
Humanities Research Council of Canada grant 41O.91-O727. lain Cockburn's work was
supported in part by a UBC-HSS grant. We thank J. Brander, S. Das, R. J. Gordon,
Z. Griliches, R. FlaIl, T. Heaver, NI. Puterman, and S. Rosenthal for useful comments.
Mailing address for both authors: Faculty of Commerce and Business Administration,
2053 Main Mall, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada V6T 1Z2.
1

neering considerations, independent of market conditions? Secondly, did
the energy price increases of the 1970s actually affect these decisions?
To what extent can the energy price rise be understood as a negative
technological shock to this industry?
While the main focus of this study is on the economics of capital re-
tirement, it also makes a methodological point concerning the estimation
of dynamic structural models in the presence of a second hand market.
A simple partial equilibrium model is estimated, in which the ship owner
is modeled as solving a dynamic decision making problem about when
to retire a tanker. Estimation of dynamic programming models nor-
mally involves certain technical problems. One must keep track both of
the present period and also have a consistent treatment of the rest of
the program facing the decision maker, see Eckstein and Wolpin (1989),
Fakes (1991), and Rust (1992) for useful surveys. Using information from
the second hand market for ships substantially reduces the computational
and technical difficulties. By making the assumption that used ships are
efficiently priced, the analysis is drastically simplified. In essence the esti-
ination of a complex dynamic model reduces to a familiar discrete choice
model. This simplification may be of use to others who are interested in
studying assets for which efficient second hand markets exist.
1.2 The case of oil tankers
Oil tankers play a vital role in the world economy, but quite apart from
the industry's intrinsic importance (discussed in the appendix) there
a number of features of its institutions and its technology which make
it particularly well suited to examining depreciation. Firstly, ships are
traded on well-developed and closely watched markets. The institutions
of this market make it possible to easily identify and track individual
2