NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LICENSE PRICE PAThS;
I. ThEORY
II. EVIDENCE FROM HONG KONG
Kala Krishna
Ling Hui Tan
Working Paper No. 4237
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1992
We are grateful to the World Bank for research support. We would also 'ike to thank Ronald
Chan, Carl Hamilton, P.C. Leung, Peter Ngan and Yon-Wing Sung for providing us with data,
and Sweder van Wijnbergen for comments on an earlier draft. This paper is part of NBER'a
research program in Intemational Trade and Investment, Any opinions expressed are those of
the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

Working Paper #4237
December 1992
LICENSE PRICE PAThS:
L ThEORY
II. EVIDENCE FROM I-lONG KONG
ABSTRACT
Inthe first ofthe twocompanionpapers, weshowthat the dynamicaspects of thelicense
utilization decision in an uncertain environment, together with the usual policy of rewarding high
license utilization with future license allocations, creates four components of the license price.
These are the scarcity, asset, option, and renewal value components. Each of these components
are identified and explored in the context of the existing literature. The effect of imperfections
in the license market on license price paths is also explored.
tn the second paper, we use monthly data on license prices and utilization to test for the
presence of imperfect competition in the market for apparel quota licenses in Hong Kong. A
competitive structural model which respects the dynamic aspects of the problem is developed and
estimated. We argue that concentration could affect the supply side as well as the demand side
by affecting the cost associated with the search.
The regressions indicate that concentration of license holdings affect the supply of licenses
as predicted by models of imperfect competition. Since the implementation acheme encourages
full utilization, imperfect competition affects the supply path of licenses rather than total supply.
Concentration does not affect the demand side, which means that search costs are not an
important consideration.
Kala Krishna Ling fbi Tan
The fletcher School NBER
of Law and Diplomacy 1050Massachusetts Avenue
Tufts University Cambridge, MA 02138
Medford, MA 02155
and NBER

PART I
LICENSE PRICE PAThS; TFIEQRY
1. Introduction
In a static perfectly competitive model, it is well understood that a quota license has a
scarcity value. This arises because a binding quota raises the domestic price of the resirained
good above the world price, creating profits equal to this price difference for the license holders,
The size of the price difference depends on the extent of scarcity created by the quota in the
domestic market. We call this the .ccoreiiy component ofthe license price.
tn dynamic settings, the license price has two additional components. Both these are
related to the property that a license is valid for an entire year. They are the asset mar/ce!
component and the option vofue component. A quota license can be viewed as an asset with a
life of one year. Like any other asset, the price path of the license must be such that the license
is held voluntarily. For this to occur in a world without uncertainty, the price of the asset must
rise at the rate of interest as the latter represents the opportunity cost of holding the asset.
Therefore, the asset market component predicts that the price of a license will rise over the year.
The third component of the license price is the option value component. At any point in
time during the year, a quota holder can either use his license (by shipping the goods himself
or by making a temporary transfer to someone else) or defer his license application in the hope
of a higher price in the future if demand reatizations are high. The value of a license held today,
before the state tomorrow is known, can exceed the expected price of the license at any time in
the future since a license allows the decision on use to be deferred till the state is known. In

other words, a quota license has an •option" value.
In addition, the details of quota allocation mechanism can create other complications
which affect license prices. For example, quota allocations may be tied to past performance,
where firms with a high quota utilization are rewarded with an increased allocation in the next
period) This creates a renewal value contponent of the license price. In Hong Kong for
example. a legal market exists for both temporary and permanent transfers of licenses to export
textiles and apparel under the Multi-Fibre Arrangement. Under a permanent transfer, the seller
relinquishes the use of his license in the current, and all future periods. Under a temporary
transfer, however, the seller Loses the use of his license in the current period, but retains his
renewal rights. This can create negative prices for temporary transfers of licenses as pointed cot
by Anderson (1987), and further discussed in Eldor and Marcus (1988).
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides some theoretical foundations for
the different components cf the license price, namely the scarcity component, the asset market
component, the option value component, and the renewal component. Section 3 relates our work
to the existing literature. Section 4 contains some concluding remarks.
2. Some Simple Slodels
In this section, we present some simple models which help to explain the forces
endcrlying license price paths during the quota period. We will first present a simple model
which focoses on the option value component. Next, we use this model to look at the
implications of 'use-it-er-lose-it' restrictions on the price of temporary versus permanent
transfers. We then argue that this model is a very special one and that the option valoe
2