NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A TAX-BASED TEST OF THE
DIVIDEND SIGNALING HYPOTHESIS
B. Douglas Bernheim
Adam Wantz
Working Paper No. 4244
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1992
Financial support from the National Science Foundation (grant SES-8821666) is gratefully
acknowledged. This paper is part of NB ER's research programs in Corporate Finance and Public
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4244
December 1992
A TAX-BASED TEST OF THE
DIVIDEND SIGNALING HYPOTHESIS
ABSTRACT
We propose and implement a new test of the dividend signaling hypothesis that is
designed to discriminate between dividend signaling and other theories that would account for
the apparent existence of a dividend preference. Our test refines the use of data on stock price
responses to dividend announcements. In particular, we study the effect of dividend taxation on
the bang-for-the-buck, which we define as the share price response per dollar of dividends.
Most dividend signaling models imply that an increase in dividend taxation should increase the
bang-for-the-buck. In contrast, other dividend preference theories imply that an increase in
dividend taxation should decrease the bang-for-the-buck. Since there have recently been
considerable variation in the tax treatment of dividends, we are able to study dividend
announcement effects under different tax regimes. Our central finding is that there is a strong
positive relationship between dividend tax rates and the bang-for-the-buck. This result supports
the dividend signaling hypothesis, and is consistent with alternatives. The paper also provides
corroborating evidence based on the relationship between the bang-for-the-buck and bond ratings.
B. Douglas Bernheim Adam Wantz
Department of Economics Shepard International, Inc.
Princeton University 30 S. Wacker Drive, #1418
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021 Chicago, IL 60606
and NBER

1. Introduction
Economists have proposed numerous theories designed to explain corporate
dividend policy. Different views about dividend policy lead to strikingly
different conclusions about issues such as the cost of capital and the effects
of tax policy. It is, therefore, important to distinguiah between these
theories on the basis of empirical evidence. Unfortunately, this task has
proven difficult.
In an attempt to test various theories of corporate dividend policy,
Poterba and Summers (1983, 1984, 1985] assembled evidence on the relative
market value of dividends and capital gains, the effect of dividend taxation
on dividend payout, and the effect of dividend taxation on investment. Their
evaluation of this evidence was favorable to a "traditional view" of
dividends, in which firms derive an advantage from the payment of dividends,
and where this advantage is reflected in market value. This class of theories
is obviously very broad, and includes (among other things) the possibility
that firms pay dividends to signal private information about profitability,1
the hypothesis that dividends provide a mechanism for restricting managerial
discretion,2 and the conjecture that investors prefer dividends for
non-traditional, behavioral reasons.3
The fact that stock prices rise when companies announce plans to increase
dividends, and fall when companies reveal that they intend to cut dividends,
1 See
e.g. Bhattacharys (1979, 1980), Haksnsson (1982), Miller and Rock
(1985), Kumar (1988), Kumar end Spatt (1987), John and Williams (1985),
Ambarish, John, and Williams (1987), John and Nachman (1987), and Bernheim
(1991).
2 See Jensen and Meckling (1976).
3
See Shefrin and Statmsn (1984).
1

is often cited as evidence for the theory that dividends signal
profitability.4 Unfortunately, this evidence does not distinguish between the
hypothesis that tha dividend conveys good news, snd the hypothesis that the
dividend is the good news. Thus, although studies of dividend announcement
effects lend additional support to Poterba and Summers' "traditional view,"
they do not allow us to differentiate between dividend signaling and other
explanations for a dividend preference.
Under the dividend signaling hypothesis, firms that pay high levels of
dividends should be more profitable than otherwise identical firms (from the
point of view of the investor) that pay lower levels of dividends. This
observation suggests that one can teat the signaling theory by examining the
extent to which current dividends help to predict future earnings. Several
early studies (Watts (1973) and Conedes (1978)) concluded that dividends are
essentially unrelated to subsequent earnings. However, a more recent study by
Ofer and Siegel (1987) found that analysts revise their earnings forecasts in
response to unanticipated dividend changes, and moreover that these revisions
are rational.
Another empirical strategy was proposed by Lang and Litzenberger (1989).
These authors argued that, under the managerial discipline hypothesis,
dividend announcements should have larger, positive effects on share price
when firma are overinvesting. This suggests that one should find larger share
price responses among firms that have lower values of Tobin's Q. Lang and
Litzenberger present data that are consistent with this prediction, and
The literature on stock price responses to announcements of changes in
dividend policy includes papers by Pettit (1972, 1977), Laub (1976), Charest
(1978), Aharony and Swary (1980), Asquith and Mullins (1983), Eades (1982),
Brickley (1983), Kane, Lee, and Marcus (1984), and Eades, Hess, and Kim
(1983).