NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PROGRESSIVITY OF CAPITAL
GAINS TAXATION WITH
OPTIMAL PORTFOLIO SELECTION
Michael Haliassos
Andrew B. Lyon
Working Paper No. 4253
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 1993
We wish to thank Carol Bertaut for data from the Survey of Consumer
Finances and helpful discussions, and Bill Gale, Jim Poterba, Joel Slemrod,
and conference participants for helpful suggestions. We owe special thanks to
John O'Hare of the Joint Committee on Taxation for providing us with
tabulated data from the Sales of Capital Assets studies. This paper is part of
NBER's reseaith program in Public Economics. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4253
January 1993
PROGRESSIVITY OF CAPITAL
GAINS TAXATION WITH
OPTIMAL PORTFOLIO SELECTION
ABSTRACT
We provide new data on capital gains realizations using a five-year
stratified panel of taxpayers covering 1985-1989. We find, as earlier studies
have, that capital gains realizations are very concentrated among the highest
income groups. We use these data and data from the Federal Reserve Board
Survey of Consumer Finances to draw inferences from a simulation model of
the effects on progressivity and efficiency of alternative tax treatment of capital
gains.
Tax payments alone are not an accurate indication of the burden of a
tax. Taxes generally create costs beyond the dollar value collected by causing
persons to change their behavior to avoid the tax. Risk is also affected by the
tax system. Beneficial risk-sharing characteristics of the tax system are
frequently overlooked when examining the treatment of capital gains, We find
that reforms comprising reductions in the capital gains tax rate offset by
increases in the tax rate on other investment income are efficiency reducing.
Surprisingly, we find that for taxpayers for whom loss limits are not binding
a switch to accrual taxation is also efficiency reducing. For those taxpayers for
whom loss limits are potentially binding, we find that large efficiency gains can
be achieved by increasing the amount of capital losses that may be deducted
against ordinary income. These results are partly attributable to changes in
risk-sharing encompassed in these reforms.
Michael Haliassos Andrew B. Lyon
Department of Economics Department of Economics
University of Maryland University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742 College Park, MD 20742
and NBER

1. Introduction
The debate over capital gains taxes has served as a focal point for
the larger debate over the desired progressivity of the tax system. Some
argue that a reduction in the capital gains tax rate predominantly benefits
upper-income taxpayers. Others argue that taxpayers in all income groups
receive capital gains and that once-in-a-lifetime gains artificially distort the
concentration of gains by income class. In addition to the concern over
progressivity, there are debates on the efficiency consequences of capital
gains taxes: the degree to which they hinder or promote saving and
investment and their effects on portfolio behavior.
In this paper we present new data from the Internal Revenue
Service on capital gains realizations between 1985 and 1989 and data from
the Federal Reserve Board Survey of Consumer Finances on stockholding.
These data show a high concentration of stockholding and capital gains
realizations in the highest income groups.
Next, we draw upon these data to examine distributional effects
and portfolio responses to changes in the tax treatment of capital gains.
A simple analysis of tax burden focussing only on tax payments is not an
accurate indication of the burden of a tax. Taxes generally create costs
beyond the dollar value collected by causing persons to change their
behavior to avoid the tax. Economists have long noted the "lock-in' effect
as one of these additional costs. Taxes also reduce the variance in after-
tax returns. For risk-averse investors this reduction in variance is a
benefit.
We examine capital gains taxes using a model based solely on
utility-maximizing behavior. Econometric estimates of realization behavior
in response to changes in tax rates are frequently criticized for relying on
artificial or ad hoc specifications of the realization response. Kiefer

(1990) presents a simulation model which demonstrates how the realization
response can be modeled endogenously. This model, however, is
atemporal: risk-neutral agents maximize the expected value of terminal
wealth. Intertemporal models of risk-averse agents are modeled by
Slemrod (1983), Cook and O'Hare (1992), and Galper, Lucke, and Toder
(1988). This latter model is modified to estimate changes in portfolios and
trading behavior by Hendershott, Toder, and Won (1991, 1992). This
model has a considerable amount of disaggregation, including 147 separate
households, five financial assets, owner-occupied housing, and consumer
durables. A corporate sector is modeled and its financial behavior with
respect to debt-equity ratios and dividends versus retained earnings is
endogenous. A cost of working with a model of this size is that portfolio
selection and capital gains realizations decisions have to be simplified.1
We have opted instead to use a smaller, stylized model, but allow
asset demands and realizations to be derived as solutions to the
households' maximization of intertemporal utility of consumption. For
this purpose, we incorporate alternative systems of capital gains taxation
into a consumption-based model of portfolio selection. We consider a
three-period model with two financial assets: a risk-free bond and risky
stock. Our model is in the spirit of Auerbach's (1992) analysis based on
a similar model. We differ from his analysis by explicitly allowing for a
dividend component to stock returns, which analyses of historical data
1Forexample, exponential utility functions are used, because they allow
derivation of explicit solutions. This utility function, however, displays
constant absolute risk aversion (i.e., no change in the amount of risky asset
holdings for different wealth levels). In addition, changes in taxation induce
realizations in an ad hoc way, and its dependence on other factors such as
incomes and risk aversion is ignored.
2