NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
POLICIES TO ENCOURAGE INFLOWS
OF TECHNOLOGY THROUGH
FOREIGN MULTINATIONALS
Magnus Blomström
An Kokko
Working Paper No. 4289
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1993
This paper is part of NBER's research program in International Trade and
Investment. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4289
March 1993
POLICIES TO ENCOURAGE INFLOWS
OF TECHNOLOGY THROUGH
FOREIGN MULTINATIONALS
ABSTRACT
Do host counthes aiming to maximize the inflows of technology through
foreign multinationals have any policy alternatives to formal technology
transfer requirements arid performance requirements? To answer this question,
the present paper examines some possible determinants of the technology
imports of U.S. majority-owned foreign affiliates in 33 host countries. The
results show that the affiliates' technology imports increase with the host
countries' domestic investment levels and education levels, but that various
performance requirements are negatively related to technology transfer. This
suggests that policies promoting local investment, competition, and education
may sometimes be alternatives to direct controls and requirements.
Magnus BlomstrOm An Kokko
Stockholm School of Economics Stockholm School of Economics
P.O. Box 6501 P.O. Box 6501
113 83 Stockholm 113 83 Stockholm
SWEDEN SWEDEN
and NBER

Policies to Encourage Inflows of Technology through Foreign Multinationals1
Magnus Blomström and Art Kokko
1. Introduction
The debate on the role of government policies for economic perfonnance has,
in recent years, turned from discussing the choice between free markets and
government intervention to asking what types of intervention are good and bad.
One reason is that almost all governments, irrespective of their political
orientation, have chosen to play an active role in their economy (see e.g.
Bardhan, 1990). However, the definition of successful intervention is still
disputed, although an important lesson from the recent experience of several
Asian economies seems to be that governments should make use of market
forces in their efforts to influence the direction and character of economic
growth: markets and competition need to be retained to discourage wasteful
use of resources and to encourage learning and technical advances.
The distinction between good and bad intervention has been noted also
1The research reported here is part of the NBER program in International
Studies, and has been supported by the Swedish Council for Research in the
Humanities and Social Sciences and the Swedish Agency for Research
Cooperation with Developing Countries. Helpful comments from Robert Lipsey
on an earlier draft of this paper are gratefully acknowledged. Any opinions are
those of the authors, and do not necessarily represent the views of the National
Bureau or the sponsoring agencies.

2
in the trade policy debate. For instance, Bhagwati (1988) argues that policies
based on prescriptions rather than proscriptions generally produce better
economic performance. One reason is that the latter types of intervention tend
to stifle initiative and hurt entrepreneurship and growth, whereas the former
leave large areas untouched and also allow people to do what is not formally
prescribed. Another reason is that proscriptions tend to divert resources into
unproductive efforts to evade the rules.
A similar discussion is now emerging in the literature on foreign direct
investment (FDI) and technology transfer. Some of the main host country
benefits of FDI are considered to stem from the inflows of new technology to
affiliates of multinational firms (MNCs), since these flows create a potential
for technology spillovers to the host country's local firms (Blomström, 1989;
Kokko, forthcoming). What policy measures should host countries adopt to get
the MNCs to transfer more technology, and to increase the potential for
spillovers? The traditional view has been that different types of regulations are
necessary. Many governments have therefore started to frame the environment
within which multinationals operate by introducing various performance
requirements for their behavior. Special attention has been given to policies
regarding technology transfer, and a number of measures intended to
encourage or force multinational firms to increase their technology transfer
have been introduced over the years, including requirements for local content
and local R&D.