NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A UNIFIED MODEL OF INVESTMENT
UNDER UNCERTAINTY
Andrew B. Abel
Janice C. Eberly
Working Paper No. 4296
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1993
The authors thank James Foster and participants in seminars at the University
of Pennsylvania, NYU, Princeton, Vanderbilt, the University of South Florida,
the University of Maiyland, and North Carolina State University for their
comments. Eberly also thanks the Wharton Junior Faculty Research Fund for
Financial support. This paper is part of NBER's research program in
Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

Working Paper #4296
March 1993
A UNIFIED MODEL OF INVESTMENT
UNDER UNCERTAINTY
ABSTRACT
This paper extends the theory of investment under uncertainty to
incorporate fixed costs of investment, a wedge between the purchase price and
sale price of capital, and potential irreversibility of investment. In this
extended framework, investment is a non-decreasing function of q, the shadow
price of installed capital. There are potentially three investment regimes which
depend on the value of q relative to two critical values. For values of q above
the upper critical value, investment is positive and is an increasing function of
q, as is standard in the theory branch of the adjustment cost literature. For
intermediate values of q, between two critical values, investment is zero.
Although this regime features prominently in the irreversibility literature, it is
largely ignored in the adjustment cost literature. Finally, if q is below the
lower critical value, gross investment is negative, a possibility that is ruled out
by assumption in the irreversibility of literature. In general however, the
shadow price q is not directly observable, so we present two examples relating
q to observable variables.
Andrew B. Abel Janice C. Eberly
Department of Finance Department of Finance
The Wharton School The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367 Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER

I Introduction
If a firm can instantaneously and costlessly adjust its capital stock, then,
as shown by Jorgenson (1963), its decision about how much capital to use
is essentially a static decision in which the marginal product of capital is
equated to the user cost of capital. The firm's investment decision becomes
an interesting dynamic problem, in which anticipations about the future
economic environment affect current investment, when frictions prevent
instantaneous and costless adjustment of the capital stock. The investment
literature of the last three decades has focused on two types of frictions —
adjustment costs and irreversibility.
In this paper, we present a simple, more general framework that en-
compasses irreversibility as well as adjustment costs that may include a
fixed component. Within this more general framework, the optimal invest-
ment behavior of the firm is comprised of potentially three regimes: (1) a
regime of positive gross investment; (2) a regime of zero gross investment;
and (3) a regime of negative gross investment. Most of the adjustment cast
literature tends to focus, either implicitly or explicitly, on the first of these
regimes. The irreversibility literature is more explicit in its recognition of
regimes of positive gross investment and zero gross investment, and it rules
out the regime of negative gross investment by assumption. The more gen-
eral model presented here allows a simple characterization of the conditions
giving rise to each of these regimes.
In the adjustment cost literature, based on the seminal work of Eisner
and Strotz (1963), the adjustment cost function is typically assumed to
be strictly convex and to have a value of zero at zero. Although a few
studies mentioned the possibility of fixed costs,1 there was virtually no
formal analysis of these fixed costs. The model presented in this paper
incorporates fixed costs.
During the 1970s and 1980s, the adjustment cost literature began to
merge with the literature on Tobin's q. Tobin (1969) argued that the opti-
mal rate of investment is an increasing function of the ratio of the market
value of the firm to the replacement cost of the firm's capital —a ratio that
he called q, and that has come to be known as "average q." Mussa (1977)
showed in a deterministic model, and Abel (1983) showed in a stochastic
model, that the optimal rate of investment is the rate that equates the
marginal adjustment cost with the marginal value of installed capital, a
concept known as marginal q. While average q is a potentially observable
number, it is marginal q that is relevant for investment decisions. Hayashi
(1982) presented conditions under which average q and marginal q are equal.
As indicated earlier, the assumption that investment is irreversible is
another type of friction that makes the investment decision an interesting
dynamic problem. In a seminal paper on irreversibility, Arrow (1968, pp.
'See Nickell (1978) and Rothschild (1971).
1

8—9) argued that "there will be many situations in which the sale of capital
goods cannot be accomplished at the same price as their purchase. For
simplicity, we will make the extreme assumption that resale of capital goods
is impossible, so that gross investment is constrained to be non-negative."
Arrow showed that in a deterministic model, optimal investment behavior
under irreversibility will be characterized by alternating intervals of time
corresponding to regimes of positive gross investment and regimes of zero
gross investment. When the shadow price of capital is smaller than the cost
of new capital, the firm will have zero investment; when the firm undertakes
positive gross investment, the shadow price of capital equals the cost of new
capital.2
We incorporate both adjustment costs and irreversibility in an extended
model of adjustment costs. We note that adjustment costs and irreversibil-
ity are examined together in a deterministic model by Lucas (1981) and in
a stochastic model by Lucas and Prescott (1971). Curiously, both of these
papers introduce the constraint that gross investment is non-negative in the
formal optimization problem, yet neither paper comments on this assump-
tion, nor does either paper use the term "irreversibility." In effect, these
papers take as a postulate that gross investment cannot be negative. In
contrast, our model incorporates Arrow's observation that the resale price
of capital may be below the price of new capital, and the model includes
the special case in which the resale price is zero.
If we were to simply postulate that gross investment cannot be nega-
tive, then it would be easy to impose irreversiblity in an adjustment cost
framework by simply assuming that infinite adjustment costs are incurred
at any negative rate of investment, as in Caballero (1991, p. 281). Our
approach avoids treating irreversibility as a postulate but rather allows for
(and characterizes) cases in which the optimal investment behavior of the
firm is never negative. We introduce an augmented adjustment cost func-
tion that includes the traditional convex adjustment costs as well as the
possibility of fixed costs and the possibility that the resale price of capital
goods is below their purchase price and may even be zero. In this augmented
adjustment cost framework, investment is a non-decreasing function of the
shadow price q, which is always positive. There are three regimes of opti-
mal investment behavior characterized by two critical values of q, qi (cid:17) q.
Optimal gross investment is positive for q > q, zero for values of q be-
tween q, and q, and negative for values of q < If the lower critical
qj..
2The same relationship among gross investment, the shadow price of
capital and the price of new capital was derived in a stochastic general
equilibrium model by Sargent (1980). Similarly, Bertola and Caballero
(1991) examine the behavior of an individual firm under uncertainty and
find that the firm equates the marginal product of capital and the user cost
of capital whenever it is undertaking gross investment; when the firm is not
investing, the marginal product of capital is below the user cost.
2