NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DOES FOREIGN EXCHANGE
INTERVENTION SIGNAL FUTURE
MONETARY POLICY?
Graciela L. Karninsky
Karen K. Lewis
Working Paper !'ln. 4298
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1993
The views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System or other members of its staff. Work on this paper was partly done
while Kaminsky was visiting the Institute for International Economic Studies, Stockholm
University. Kaminsky thanks the Institute for the hospitality. Lewis acknowledges research
support from the National Science Foundation. Both authors also thank seminar participants at
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Georgetown University, the Institute for
International Economic Studies, NBER, New York University, Queen Mary & Westfield College
at the University of London, Rutgers University, and Wharton School for helpful suggestions.
We are also grateful to 1-lali Edison, Joshua Feinman, Dale Henderson, Athana.sios Orphanides,
Carmen Reinhart, Vincent Reinhart, Ralph Smith, and Paul Wood for helpful discussion. This
paper is part of NEER's research programs in International Finance and Macroeconomics and
Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4298
March 1993
DOES FOREiGN EXCHANGE
IM'ERVENTLON SIGNAL FUTURE
MONETARY POLICY?
ABSTRACT
A frequently cited explanation for why sterilized interventions may affect exchange rates
is that these interventions signal central banks' future monetary policy intentions. This
explanation presumes that central banks in fact hack up interventions with subsequent changes
in monetary policy. We empirically examine this hypothesis using data on market observations
of U.S. intervention together with monetary policy variables, and exchange rates. We sirongly
reject the hypothesis that interventions convey no signal. However, we also find that in some
episodes, intervention signalled changes in monetary policy in the opposite direction of the
conventional signalling story. This finding can explain why in some periods exchange rates
moved in the opposite direction of that suggested by intervention.
Graciela L. Kaniinsky Karen K. Lewis
Division of Monetary Affairs Wharton School
Board of Governors of the University of Pennsylvania
Federal Reserve System Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
Washington, DC 20551 and NEER

1. Introduction
The potential effects of foreign exchange intervention upon exchange rate behavior
has been an important issue of debate in both academic and policy—making circles since the
end of the Bretton Woods system. As a result, a great deal of research has documented
how exchange rates respond to foreign exchange intervention, finding quite mixed results)
For example, depending upon the sample period, regressions of exchange rate movements
upon intervention have either found strong effects of intervention, no effects of
intervention, or even movements of exchange rates in the opposite direction of that
suggested by the intervention.
Understanding these varied results clearly requires an explanation for how
interventions affect the exchange rate. Since major central banks typically sterilize the
monetary effects of interventions, changes in the relative money supphes cannot provide
the explanation. One proposition that recognizes that interventions are sterilized is the
so—called "signalling hypothesis," first proposed by Mussa (1981)2 Subsequently, some
empirical studies have emphasired that intervention may affect the exchange rate by
signalling and Federal Reserve publications have even claimed signalling to be a reason for
intervening.3
This explanation posits that intervention signals changes in future monetary policy.
It says that central banks signal a more contractionary future monetary policy by buying
domestic currency in the foreign exchange market today. The expectations of future
tighter monetary policy will make the exchange rate appreciate, even though the monetary
1For a survey of this literature, see Edison (1993).
2As drscribed inEdison (1993), an alternative explanation is the portfolio balance channel, Overall, the
studies discussed in this survey findlittle empirical support for the proposition that intervention could
havean econonically important effect through its portfolio effects upon private sector net wealth.
3For empirical studies discussing signalling, see tlominguez (1992) s.s well s-s other references in the
survey by Edison (1993). Signalling has bcen noted as a reason for intervening in the New York Federal
Reserve Bulletin (1991) and has been used as a reason against intervention at Federal Open Market
Connittee meetings (Record of Policy Actions of the Federal Open Market Cornorsittee, August 1989).

effects of the intervention are offset. Of course, this explanation presumes that central
banks in fact back up interventions with subsequent changes in monetary policy.
In this paper, we empirically examine this last hypothesis. We test the signalling
story using data on market observations of U.S. intervention together with U.S. monetary
policy variables from 1985 to 1990. We test whether interventions by the Federal Reserve
today imply changes in monetary policy in the future.4 We then ask whether intervention
provides a significant signal of future changes in monetary policy rnterestingly, we
strongly reject the hypothesis that intervention provides no information about future
monetary policy.
However, intervention can provide useful information about future monetary policy
even if current interventions are systematically associated with changes in monetary policy
in the opposite direction to the one suggested by the signalling story. For example, laying
domestic currency in the foreign exchange market today may be correlated with future
expansionary monetary policy. In this case, interventions may provide a signal in the
oppotlc direction to that suggested by the standard signalling story.
To examine this possibility, we develop a methodology in which interventions can
signal correctly or incorrectly the change in future monetary policy. Strikingly, when we
back out the time—varying behavior of the information process inherent in the intervention
signals, we find that most of the information content comes from incorrect signaJs.5 Thus,
altbough interventions provide significant information about future monetary policy during
our sample, this information is frequently inconsistent with the direction suggested by the
signallIng hypothesis.
This evidence suggests a possible interpretation for the typical empirical findings
4lCIein and Rosengren (195t) also erarnine this question by looking at the relationship between
intervention and discount rate rhanges across the Group of Three countries.
5Domiogues (19s2) alas investigates whether foreign exchange intervention signals correctly future
monetarypolicy by studying the Fed interventionpolicyitsthe 1977—1981 period. Intercstingly, she also
finds that intervention did not always conveythecorrectinformation aboutfuture monetary policy.
2