NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MONETARY POLICY
AND BANK LENDING
Anil K. Kashyap
Jeremy C. Stein
Working Paper No. 4317
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1993
Paper prepared for NBER Conference on Monetary Policy. We thank Ben Bernanke, Martin
Eichenbaum, Mark Gertler, Bruce Greenwald and Eugene Fama for helpful conversations. Owen
Lamont for research assistance, Michael Gibson for kindly providing data, and Maureen
O'Donnell for help in preparing the manuscript. We are also grateful to the Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago, University of Chicago IBM Faculty Research Fund, the National Science
Foundation and MiT's International Financial Services Research Center for research and financial
support. We gratefully acknowledge the Bradley Foundation for financial support. This paper
is part of NBER's research program in Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

Working Paper #4317
April 1993
MONETARY POLICY
AND BANK LENDING
ABSTRACT
This paper surveys recent work that relates to the "lending" view of monetary policy
transmission. It has three main goals: 1) to explain why it is important to distinguish between
the lending and "money" views of policy transmission; 2) to outline the microcconomic
conditions that arc needed to generate a lending channel; and 3) to review the empirical evidence
that bears on the lending view.
Anil K. Kashyap Jeremy C. Stein
University of Chicago Sloan School of Management
Graduate School of Business M.I.T.
1101 East 58th Street E52-448
Chicago. IL 60637 50 Memorial Drive
and NBE.R Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER

1. Introduction
In this paper, we survey recent theoretical and empirical work that relates to the
"lending" channel of monetary policy transmission. To begin, we.need to define clearly what
is meant by the lending channel. It is perhaps easiest to do so by contrasting the lending view
of monetary policy transmission with the simpler, and better-known, money" view.
In what we take to be the polar, pure money version of the monetary transmission
mechanism, there are effectively only two assets -- moneyand bonds. In this world, the banking
sector's only special role has to do with the liability side of its balance sheet --thefact that it
can create money by issuing demand deposits. On the asset side of their balance sheets, banks
do nothing unique --like the household sector, they too just invest in bonds.
In this two asset-world, monetary non-neutrality arises if movements in reserves affect
real interest rates. The transmission works as follows: a decrease in reserves reduces the
banking sector's ability to issue demand deposits. As a matter of accounting, this implies that
the banking sector must also hold (on net) fewer bonds. Thus the household sector must hold
less money, and more bonds. If prices do not adjust fully and instantaneously, households will
have less money in terms, and equilibrium will require an increase in real interest rates.
This in turn can have real effects on investment, and ultimately, on aggregate economic activity.
Note that as we have defined the pure money view of the transmission mechanism --
solely
by reference to the fact that it is characterized by the simple two-asset feature --thereare
a wide range of alternative formulations that capture its essence. These include the texthook IS-
LM model, as well as the dynamic equilibrium/cash-in advance models of Rotemberg (1984),
Grossman and Weiss (1983), Lucas (1990) and Christiano and Eichenbaum (1992). Although
1

these two classes of models differ along a number of dimensions, (e.g., in the way they generate
incomplete price adjustment) they share the two-asset feature.
By contrast, we say there is a distinct lending channel of monetary policy transmission
when the two-asset simplification is inappropriate in a specific sense. In the lending view, there
are three assets —money, publicly issued bonds, and intermediated 1oans" --thatdiffer from
each other in meaningful ways and must be accounted for separately when analyzing the impact
of monetary policy shocks. The banking sector now can be special in two relevant ways: in
addition to creating money, it makes loans, which (unlike buying bonds) the household sector
cannot do.
In this three-asset world, monetary policy can work not only through its impact on the
bond-market rate of interest, but also through its independent impact on the supply of
intermediated loans. To think about the distinction between the money and lending channels,
take an extreme example where households view the two assets that they do hold — and
money
bonds —asvery close substitutes. In this case, a decrease in reserves that leads to a decline in
the money supply will have a minimal impact on the interest rate on publicly-held bonds. Thus
the money channel is very weak. However, the decrease in reserves can still have important real
consequences, if it leads banks to cut back on loan supply: the cost of loans relative to bonds
will rise, and those firms that rely on bank lending (say because they do not have access to
public bond markets) will be led to cut back on investment. Put differently, monetary policy
can have significant real effects that are not summarized by its consequences for open-market
interest rates.
A couple of points about the lending view should be emphasized right away, to prevent
2