NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CONTRARIAN INVESTMENT,
EXTRAPOLATION, AND RISK
Josef Lakonishok
Andrei Shielfer
Robert W. Vishny
Working Paper No. 4360
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 1993
University of Illinois, Harvard University, and University of Chicago.
respectively. We are indebted to Eugene Fama, Kenneth French, K. C. Chan,
Louis Chan, and Jay Ritter for helpful comments and Han Qu for outstanding
research assistance. This paper has been presented at the University of
California (Berkeley), the University of Chicago, the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, the National Bureau of Economic Research (Asset Pricing
Group), New York University, Stanford University, and Tel Aviv University.
The research was supported by the National Science Foundation, Bradley
Foundation, Russell Sage Foundation, and the National Center for
of
Supercomputing Applications, University of Illinois. This paper is part
NBER's research program in Asset Pricing. Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4360
May 1993
CONTRARIAN INVESTMENT,
EXTRAPOLATION, AND RISK
ABSTRACT
For many years, stock market analysts have argued that value
strategies outperform the market. These value strategies call for buying stocks
that have low prices relative to earnings, dividends, book assets, or other
measures of fundamental value. While there is some agreement that value
strategies produce higher returns, the interpretation of why they do so is more
controversial. This paper provides evidence that value strategies yield higher
returns because these strategies exploit the mistakes of the typical investor and
not because these strategies are fundamentally riskier.
Josef Lakonishok Andrei Shielfer
Department of Finance Department of Economics
University of Illinois
Harvard University
Chicago, IL 60637 Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
Robert W. Vishny
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER

3
I. INTRODUCTION
For many yeazs, stock market analysts have argued that value strategies
outperform the market (Graham and Dodd, 1934). These value strategies call for
buying stocks that have low prices relative to earnings, dividends, historical prices,
book assets or other measures of value. In recent years,, value strategies have
attracted academic attention as well. Basu (1977); Jaffe, Keün, and Westerfleld
(1989); Chan, Hamao, and Lakonishok (1991); and Fan]a and French (1992*) have
shown that stocks with high earnings price ratios earn higher returns. De Bondt and
Thaler (1985, 1987) have argued that extreme losers outperform the market over the
subsequent several years. Despite considerable criticism (Chan, 1988; and Ball and
Kothari, 1989), their analysis has generally stood up to the tests (Chopra,
Lakonishok, and Ritter, 1992). Rosenberg, Reid, and Lanstein (1984) show that
stocks with high book relative to market values of assets outperform the market.
Further work (Chan, Hamso, and Lakomshok, 1991; Fama and French, 1992*), has
both extended and refined these results. Finally, Chan, Hamao, and Lakonishok
(1991) show that a high ratio of cash flow to price also predicts higher returns.
Interestingly, many of these results have been obtained for both the U.S. and Japan.
Certain types of value strategies, then, appear to beat the market.
While there is some agreement that value strategies work, the interpretation
of why they work is more controversial. Value strategies might work because they
are contrarian to naive2 strategies followed by other investors. These naive
strategies might range from extrapolating past earnings growth too far into the
future, to assuming a trend in stock prices, to overreacting to good or bad news, or
to simply equating a good investment with a well-run company irrespective of price.
Regardless of the reason, some investors tend to get overly excited about stocks that
have done very well in the past, buy them up, and these glainour stocks become
2What we call naive strategies is also sometimes referred to as upopular
models (Shiller, 1984) and anoise (Black, 1986).

4
overpriced. Similarly, they overreact to stocks that have done very badly, oversell
them, and these out-of-favor value stocks become underpriced.
Contrazian
investors bet against such naive investors. Because contrarian strategies invest
disproportionately in stocks that are underpriced, and undennvest in stocks that are
overpriced, they outperform the market (sec De Bondt and Thaler, 1985).
An alternative explanation of why value strategies work, argued most
forcefully by Fama and French (1992), is that they are fundamentally riskier. That
is, investors in value stocks, such as high book to market stocks, tend to bear higher
fundamental risk of some sort, and their higher average returns arc simply
compensation for this risk. This argument was also used bycriticsofDcBondtand
Thater (Chan, 1988; and BaIL and Kothaii, 1989) to dismiss the overreaction
story.
Whether value strategies work because they are contrarian to naive strategiesor
because they are fundamentally riskier remains an
open question.
In this paper, we try to shed further light on the two potential
explanations
for why value strategies work. We do so along two directions. First,we examine
more closely the predictions of the contrarian model. In particular, one natural
version of the contrarian model argues that the overpriced Liamour stocks are those
which, first, have performed well in the past, and, second, arc
expected by the
market to perform weli in the future. Similarly, the
underpriced out-of-favor or
value stocks arc those that have performed poorly in the
past and arc expected to
continue to perform poorly. Value strategies that betagainst those investors who
extrapolate past performance produce superior returns. In principle, this version of
the contrarian model is testable because
past performance and expectation of future
performance are two separate and separately measurable characteristics of
glamour
and value.
In this paper, past performance is measured using information on past
growth in sales, earnings, operating income, and cash flow, and
expected
performance is measured by multiples of price to current earnings,
operating income,
and cash flow. We then examine the predictions of the contrarian
model, namely
that out-of-favor or value stocks indeed
outperform glamour stocks. We start with