NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INTERNATIONAL EVIDENCE ON TRADABLES
AND NONTRADABLE INFLATION
Jose De Gregorio
Alberto Giovannini
Holger C. Wolf
Working Paper No. 4438
NATIONALBUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1993
We are grateful to Roger de Mni1, Jeffrey Frankel, Robert Gordon, Richard Marston, Jorge
Roldós, Linda Tesaj-, and participants at the International Seminar on Macroeconomics, and the
NBER Summer Institute for valuable discussions and comments. We are also grateful to Reuven
Glick, Xavier Sala-i-Martin, and Linda Tesar for helping us with the data. This paper is part of
NB ER's research program in International Finance and Macroeconomics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4438
August 1993
INTERNATIONAL EVIDENCE ON TRADABLES
AND NONTRADABLES INFLATION
ABSTRACT
Using 1970-1985 sectoral data for the OECD we find that inflation in nontradable goods
is higher than in tradables. We identify a demand shift towards nontradables and faster growth
of total factor productivity in the tradable goods Sector as the prime causes of higher nontradables
inflation. In addition, disinflation attempts and the exchange rate regime appear to have had
significant influence on the relative inflation rate.
Jose Dc Gregorio Alberto Giovannini
International Monetary Fund Graduate School of Business
700 19th Street, NW. Columbia University
Washington. DC 20431 and CEPR and NBER
Holger C. Wolf
Management Education Center
New York University
44 W 44th Street, Suite 7-78
New York. NY 10012-1126
and NBER

1 Introduction
The disinflation experiences of the 1970s and 1980s, both within the group of OECD
countries and outside it, have highlighted the role of international markets. Inflation
appears to behave differently across sectors. Indeed, exchange-rate based stabiliza-
tions have been characterized by a higher rate of inflation in sectors sheltered from
international competition.1 A difference in the behavior of inflation across sectors
are also the definining feature of fluctuations in the real exchange rate (the relative
price of nontradable goods2 )in two-sector models of small open economies.3 Hence,
discussions of exchange-rate misalignment have to focus on sectoral inflation.
In this paper we take a closer look at the determinants of differentials in sectoral
inflation rates. We examine the time series and cross-sectional behavior of the relative
price of nontradables in terms of tradables in a sample of fourteen OECD countries
during the period 1970—85. We begin with the traditionally dominant supply side
explanations, resting on the assumption of faster productivity growth in the tradables
sector [Balassa (1964) and Samuelson (1964)]. The supply side approach yields a
negative correlation between relative prices and relative production across sectors.
In contrast, we find that in most OECD countries the increase in the relative price
of nontradable goods has been accompanied by an increase in the share of output
produced in the nontradable goods sector. We hence consider demand side shifts
as additional determinants of relative price movements. Finally, we compare the
evidence for the quasi-fixed exchange rate regime in the core EMS and the managed
flexible exchange rate system in non-core European and non-European economies to
determine whether the exchange rate regime played a role in addition to the demand
and supply side factors.
'See, for example Kravs, Heston and Summers (1983), Summers and Heston (1991) Dc Gregorio, Giovannmi and
Krueger (1993), and Micossi and Milesi-Ferretti (1993).
For specillcity, we will throughout the paper use the expression "relative pnce of nontradables". Nevertheless, it
is useful to bear in mind that an increase in this relative pnce corresponds to a real appreciation.
3Developed originally by Salter (1959) and Swan (1960), and extended to incorporate intertemporal effects by
Dornbusch (1983), Edwards (1989), Frenkel and Basin (1992) and Rogoff (1992), among others.
Kravis and Lipsey (1983) and Bhagwati (1984) presents an alternative supply-side view based on factor endowment
differentials. The fairly narrow distribution of relative factor endowments across OECD economies [Wolf (1992)1
renders this approach more relevant for discussion of relative price movements between LDC8 and DCs than for the
dato.sets underlying our analysis.

The paper is divided into seven sections. We begin in section 2 by discussing the
basic theoretical framework underlying our analysis. In .ections 3 and 4 we describe
the data and propose a measure of tradability underlying our later empirical work. In
section 5 we discuss the time series and cross sectional properties of relative prices and
their determinants. Section 6 reports regression results aimed at disentangling the
supply, demand and macroeconomic determinants of the relative price of nontradable
goods. Section 7 concludes.
2 A Conceptual Framework
Balassa (1964) and Samuelson (1964) formalized—see also Harrod (1939), chapter IV,
for an earlier discussion of this idea—what has since become the benchmark model of
real exchange rate determination: faster productivity growth in the tradable than in
the nontradable goods sector leads, via wage equalization, to a decline in the relative
price of tradables.
To illustrate their proposition, consider the following production functions for the
two sectors:
=
9TLTTKTlT,
(1)
and
YN =ONLNNKNIN
(2)
where the subscripts T and N denote tradable and nontradable goods, Y denotes
output, L labor inputs, and K capital. Under perfect competition prices in each
sector are thus given by:
PT = T)(1aT)
(3)
and
PN = _WR1aNN(1— aN)1''
(4)
where W is the unit cost of labor and R the rate of return on capital. Consider the
case of a small open economy with perfect capital mobility, and express all prices in
2