FiBER WORKING PAPERSERIES
SUBJECTIVE PERFORMANCE MEASURES
IN OPTIMAL INCENTIVE CONTRACTS
George Baker
Robert Gibbons
Kevin J. Murphy
Working Paper No. 4480
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1993
We are
very grateful for helpful discussions with Gary Becker. David Besanko. Bengt
Holmsutm, Kevin Lang, Kevin M. Murphy, Canice Prendergast, JamesRebitzer, Richard Thaler,
Karen Van Nuys, and Michael Waldrnan, as wellas for useful comments from participants at
numerous seminars. We also appreciate financial
support from the Division of Research at
Harvard Business School (Baker and Murphy); and the NSF(SES-9010759) and an A.P. Sloan
Reseaith Fellowship (Gibbons). This paper is part of FiBER's research program in Labor
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors andnot those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NEER Working Paper #4480
September 1993
SUBJECTIVE PERFORMANCE MEASURES
IN OPTIMAL INCENTIVE CONTRACTS
ABSTRACT
Objective measures of performance are seldom perfect. In
response, incentive contracts
often include important
subjective
components that mitigate incentive distortions caused by
imperfect objective measures. This paper explores the combineduseof
subjective and objective
performance measures in (respectively) implicit and explicit incentive
contraôts.
Naturally, objective and subjective measures often are substitutes,
sometimes strikingly
so: we show that if objective measures are sufficiently close to
perfect then no implicit contracts
are feasible (because the rum's failback position after
reneging on an implicit contact is too
attractive). We also show, however, that objective and
subjective measures can reinforce each
other: if objective measures become more accnrate then in some circumstances the optimal
contract puts more weight on subjective measures (because the
improved objective measures
increase the value of the ongoing relationship, and
so reduce the firm's incentive to renege). We
also analyze the use of subjective weights on objective
performance measures, and provide case-
study evidence consistent with our analyses.
George Baker Kevin J. Murphy
Harvard Business School
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field Road
Soldiers Field Road
Boston, MA 02163
Boston, MA 02163
Robert S. Gibbons
Johnson Graduate School of Management
Cornell University
507 Mallott Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER

Subjective Performance Measures in Optimal
Incentive Contracts
by
GeorgeBaker, Robert Gibbons, and Kevin J. Murphy
1. Introduction
IA. Motivation
Businesshistory is littered with firms that got what they paidfor. At the H.J. Heinz
Company, for example, division managers received bonuses only if
earnings increased from
the prior year. The managers delivered consistent
earnings growth by manipulating the
timing of shipments to customers and by prepaying for services not
yet received) At Dun &
Bradsireet, salespeople earned no commission unless the
customer bought a larger
subscription to the finn's credit-report services than in the previous
year. In 1989, the
company faced millions of dollars in lawsuits following charges that its salespeople deceived
customers into buying larger subscriptions by fraudulentlyoverstating their historical usage.2
In 1992, Sears abolished the commission plan in its
auto-repair shops, which paid mechanics
based on the profits from repairs authorized by customers. Mechanics
misled customers into
authorizing unnecessary repairs, leading California officials toprepare to close Sears' auto-
repair business statewide.3
In each of these cases, employees took actions to increase their
compensation, but
these actions were seemingly at the expense of long-run firm value. AtHeinz, for example,
prepaying for future services greatly reduced the firm's future flexibility, but the
compensation system failed to address this issue. Similarly, at Dun & Bradstreet and Sears,
although short-run profits increased with the increases in subscription sizes and auto
repairs,
the long-run harm done to the firms' reputations was significant
(and plausibly much larger
than the short-run benefit), but the compensation
system again ignored the issue. Thus, in
each of these cases, the cause of any dysfunctional behaviorwas not pay-for-performance
perse, butrather pay-for-performance based on an inappropriate performancemeasure.
Post, Richard 3. and Kenneth B. Goodpaster, "HI. Heinz Company: The Administration of
Policy,"
liES Case #382.034.
2
Roberts, Johnnie L., "Credit Squeeze: Dun& BradstreetFaces Flap Over How It Sells Reports on
Businesses," Walt Street Journal, March 2,1989.
Patterson, Gregory, "Distressed Shoppers, Disaffected Workers Prompt Stores to Alter Sales
Commission," Watt Street Journal, June 1, 1992.

2
Many firms mitigate the effects of distortionaiy objective performance measures by
augmenting objective measures with subjective assessments of performance. Investment
bankers involved in corporate fmance, for example, could be measured by several objective
performance measures, such as fees generated. Nonetheless, most investment banks devote
significant resources to subjectively assessing other factors such as the "quality of the deals,
the bankers' contributions to customer satisfaction, training of
younger associates, and
marketing" (Eccles and Crane, 1988, p. 166). Even in the sales and trading function of an
investment bank, where more accurate objective aspects of an individual's contribution to
firm value are easily measured on a daily basis, banks again deliver a significant amount of a
trader's compensation through a subjectively determined bonus (Eccles and Crane,p. 170).
Lincoln Electric, the dominant manufacturer of arc welding equipment, provides
another example of the combined use of objective performance measurement and subjective
performance assessment. Since its founding in 1895, the firm has continuously reduced
costs and increased quality; it drove General Electric from the arc-welder market and reduced
Westinghouse to a bit player. Lincoln has been called "the holy shrine of incentive pay"
(Perry, 1988, p.51), in part because the firm creates strong incentives through piece-rate
pay
based on objective performance measures. A second element of Lincoln's
compensation
package also creates strong incentives, however in a typical year, half a worker'spay comes
from a bonus based on management's assessment of the worker's
cooperation, innovation,
dependability, and other subjective aspects of performance.
18. Analytical Framework
An ideal performance measure would reflect an employee's contribution to firm
value, including both static externalities across business units and dynamic effects ofcurrent
actions on long-run value. Basing pay on an employee's contribution to firm value would
have prevented the seemingly dysfunctional behaviors at Heinz, Dun &Bradsireet, and
Sears. Unfortunately, for most employees, contribution to firm value isnot objectively
measurable: market-adjusted stock-price performancemay be a useful measure of a CEO's
contribution but typically is an extremely noisy measure of the contributions of lower-level
employees.
When an employee's contribution to firm value is not objectivelymeasurable, it often
can be subjectively assessed by managers or supervisors who are well placed to observe the
subtleties of the employee's behavior and opportunities. Even if suchsubjective assessments
of an employee's contribution to finn value
are imperfect, they may complement or improve
on the available objective measures. Thus, an implicit contract based on subjective