NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A TEST OF EFFICIENCY FOR ThE
S&P 500 INDEX OPTION MARKET
USING VARIANCE FORECASTS
Jaesun Noh
Robert F. Engle
Alex Kane
Working Paper No. 4520
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November, 1993
This paper is part of NBER's research program in Asset Pricing. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4520
November 1993
A TEST OF EFFICIENCY FOR THE
S&P 500 INDEX OPTION MARKET
USING VARIANCE FORECASTS
ABSTRACT
To forecast future option prices, autoregressive models of implied volatility derived
from observed option prices are commonly employed [see Day and Lewis (1990), and Harvey
and Whaley (1992)]. In contrast, the ARCH model proposed by Engle (1982) models the
dynamic behavior in volatility, forecasting future volatility using only the return series of an
asset. We assess the performance of these two volatility prediction models from S&P 500
index options market data over the period from September 1986 to December 1991 by
employing two agents who trade straddles, each using one of the two different methods of
forecast Straddle trading is employed since a straddle does not need to be hedged. Each
agent prices options according to her chosen method of forecast, buying (selling) straddles
when her forecast price for tomorrow is higher (lower) than today's market closing price, and
at the end of each day the rates of return are computed. We find that the agent using the
GARCH forecast method earns greater profit than the agent who uses the implied volatility
regression (IVR) forecast model. In particular, the agent using the GARCH forecast method
earns a profit in excess of a cost of $0.25 per straddle with the near-the-money straddle
trading.
Robert F. Engle Alex Kane
Department of Economics Graduate School of International
University of California, San Diego and Pacific Studies
San Diego, CA 92093-0508 University of California, San Diego
and NBER San Diego, CA 92093-0508
Jaesun Noh
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
San Diego, CA 92093-0508

1 Introduction
In efficient capital markets, when the volatility of the rate of return on an asset is
constant over time, the asset's volatility is reflected in its option price. Schmalensee
and Trippi (1978) and later many others have shown that call-option implied volatilities
yield better forecasts of standard deviation than do simple estimates using the standard
deviation estimated from past returns.
Market volatility, however, can change dramatically when it is affected by stock mar-
ket crashes or monetary policy. For example, the standard deviation of S&P 500 daily
returns increased from about 1.2% to 9.4% in the ten days surrounding the stock market
crash of October 1987. Changes in volatility of this magnitude may have large effects on
the level of stock prices and thus the option prices. Under changing volatility, it is still
possible to compute the expected implied volatility over the life of an efficiently priced
option if unexpected changes in volatility over the life of the option are non-systematic
(see Wiggins (1987) and Hull and White (1987)). However, such a circumstance is not
guaranteed, particularly when the asset in question is a well-diversified portfolio, and.
with time-varying volatilities, we cannot even take for granted that the option market
is efficient with respect to any volatility forecast.
The autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (ARCH) model proposed by Engle
(1982) allows the conditional variance to change over time as a function of past errors.
leaving the unconditional variance constant. Many authors, Bollerslev (1986), Coulson
and Robins (1985), Engle and Lilien (1987), and Domowitz and Hakkio (1985), have
successfully applied ARCH models to financial and macro-economic data to explain
changing risk premiums and inflation volatilities. ARCH models capture the dynamic
behavior of market volatility using specific volatility equations of the asset return se-
1

ries without presupposing any option pricing formula, or using observed option prices.
Hence, option price estimates derived from ARCH models can be used to test whether
observed market options are efficiently priced.
The usual way to measure the performance of a volatility prediction model is to
assess its ability to predict future volatilities. However, since volatility is unobservable,
there is no natural metric for measuring the accuracy of any particular model. But
realized rates of return allow us to test the efficacy of variance driven option prices and
provide a test for market efficiency with respect to volatility forecasts.
Engle, Hong, Kane and Noh (1993a) proposed a framework to assess profits from
options trading for competing algorithms to forecast the volatility of an asset in a
simulated market. They evaluated four separate volatility forecast models by comparing
cumulative profits from options trading and found that profits earned by the GARCH
forecast model dominate those earned by any of the other three alternatives. Engle,
Kane and Noh (1993b) extended the analysis of one-day options trading to long-term
options trading and assessed profits for the GARCH estimation using the S&P 500
option data in European style options trading. Recently, Harvey and Whaley (1992)
conducted an S&P 100 index option market efficiency analysis using an implied volatility
measure, and found that the implied volatility method fails to make significantly positive
profits after transaction costs. They used one pair of call and put near-the-money
options each day and delta-hedged using an S&P 500 futures contract.
In this paper, we test the efficiency of the S&P 500 index option market based on
the performance of these two volatility prediction models. We use one type of straddle,
which has maturity above 15 days and is nearest to the money, each day rather than
trade different types of call and put options separately. There are two advantages of
2