NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CONTINENTAL TRADING BLOCS: ARE
THEY NATURAL, OR SUPER-NATURAL?
Jeffrey Frankel
Ernesto Stein
Shang-jin Wei
Working Paper No. 4588
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December, 1993
This paper draws on an earlier paper written forthe Sixth Inter American Seminar in Economics,
organized by Sebastian Edwards and Gustavo Marquez, sponsored by the National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA, and held in Caracas, Venezuela, May 28-29, 1993. The
authors would like to thank Benjamin Chiu and Xiong Bai Fan for research assistance, and
Warwick McKibbin, Gary Saxonhouse and Alan Winters, for supplying data. They would also
like to thank for support the Center for International and Development Economics Research,
funded at U.C. Berkeley by the Ford Foundation, and the Japan-United States Friendship
Commission, a U.S. government agency. This paper is part of NBER's research program in
International Trade and Investment. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4588
December 1993
CONTINENTAL TRADING BLOCS: ARE
THEY NATURAL, OR SUPER-NATURAL?
ABSTRACT
Using the gravity model, we find evidence of three continental trading blocs: the
Americas, Europe and Pacific Asia. Intra-regional trade exceeds what can be explained by the
proximity of a pair of countries, their sizes and GNP/capitas, and whether they share a common
border or language. We then turn from the econometrics to the economic welfare implications.
Krugman has supplied an argument against a three-bloc world, assuming no transport costs, and
another argument in favor, assuming prohibitively high transportation costs between continents.
We complete the model for the realistic case where intercontinental transport costs are neither
prohibitive nor zero. If transport costs are low, continental Free Trade Areas can reduce welfare.
We call such blocs super-natural. Partial liberalization is better than full liberalization within
regional Preferential Trading Arrangements, despite the GATT's Article 24. The super-natural
zone occurs when the regionalization of trade policy exceeds what is justified by natural factors.
Estimates suggest that trading blocs like the current EC are super-natural.
Jeffrey Fraakel Ernesto Stein Shang-jin Wei
Department of Economics Department of Economics Kennedy School of Government
787 Evans Hall 787 Evans Hall Harvard University
University of California University of California 79 JFK Street
Berkeley, CA 94720 Berkeley, CA 94720 Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER and NBER

1
Continental Trading Blocs: Are They Natural, or Super-Natural?
In the 1980s, the world saw an upsurge of movements toward Free Trade Areas and
other special regional trading arrangements, from the European Community (EC), to the
Association of SouthEast Asian Nations (ASEAN), to the Canadian-U.S. Free Trade
Agreement.'
In the 1990s, the talk has moved to expansion of the regional Free Trade Agreements
within their respective continents. The North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)
was negotiated between the U.S., Mexican and Canadian governments in 1992. It is
scheduled to go into effect January 1, 1994, provided it is ratified by the three countries.
There are provisions to add other Western Hemisphere countries, which is consistent with the
Enterprise for the Americas Initiative proposed by the U.S. government in June 1990. In
Europe, the talk is of enlarging the EC to a European Economic Space that would include
members of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA), and eventually countries from
Central and Eastern Europe. Some are concerned that the world is dividing into three
continental trading blocs, one in the Americas centered on the U.S., one in Europe centered
on the EC, and one in Pacific Asia, centered on Japan.2
1. Introduction
Table 1 presents statistics on the intra-regional share of trade undertaken by members
De la Tone and Kelly (1992) and Fieleke (1992) survey the post-war history of
regional trading arrangements.
2 For example, Thurow (1922, pp.16,65).

2
ofthese groupings. Intra-regional shares increased during the 1980s in each of the three
major parts of the world: from 23 per cent to 29 per cent in East Asia, from 27 per cent to
29 per cent in the Western Hemisphere, and from 54 per cent to 60 per cent in Europe.
This paper seeks to examine the question: Is this apparent movement toward
regionalization of the world trading system good or bad? Let us begin by reminding
ourselves that such a question is an exercise in the "second best.' (The first-best, world-
wide free trade, is assumed not possible politically.)
Since its founding, the GATT has been predicated on the assumption that second-best
is a regime where each member accords others the status of Most-Favored Nation (MFN),
i.e., treats its trading partners equally. The MFN system was seen as an antidote to the
disaster of the l930s, when the world was divided up into trading blocs: a Sterling bloc,
GoldlFranc bloc, Central European bloc, dollar bloc, etc. The GAU incorporated an
important exception to the MFN principle in its Article 24: a subset of members could form
a Free Trade Area (FTA), provided certain conditions were met, including that barriers
within the PTA were removed completely, rather than only partially, and that barriers against
non-members not be raised.
Arguments for the merits of the MFN-cum-Article 24 system could take either of two
possible tacks. (See Bhagwati, 1992.) First one might try to argue, in a static economic
sense, that the formation of FTA5 under the conditions specified in Article 24 is likely to
Bhagwati (1992), Deardorff and Stern (1992), and de Melo, Panagariya, and
Rodrik (1993) review the literature.