NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PRICE VOLATILITY AND VOLUME
SPILLOVERS BETWEEN ThE TOKYO
AND NEW YORK STOCK MARKETS
Takatoshi Ito
Wen-Ling Lin
Working Paper No. 4592
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December, 1993
We are grateful to Jeffrey Frankel, Allan Kleidon, Bruce Lchmann, George von Furstenberg,
Campbell Harvey, and participants at the NBER Summer Institute and the NBER Conference on
the Internationalization of Equity Markets. This paper is part of NBER's research program in
International Finance and Macroeconomics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4592
December 1993
PRICE VOLATIUTY AND VOLUME
SPILLOVERS BETWEEN THE TOKYO
AND NEW YORK STOCK MARKETS
ABSTRACT
This paper presents a comprehensive study of the mtcractions among returns, volatility,
and trading volume between the U.S. and Japanese stock markets by using intradaily data from
October 1985 to December 1991. By examining the effect of foreign price volatility and trading
volume on correlations between foreign and domestic stock returns, the paper aims to distinguish
between the market contagion and informational efficiency hypotheses in order to explain the
cause of international transmission of stock returns and volatility. Major findings are three-fold:
(1) contemporaneous correlations of stock returns across these two markets axe significant and
tend to increase during a high volatility period, which support the informational efficiency
hypothesis; (2) lagged volatility and volume spillovers are not found across the two markets; (3)
the effect of the New York stock returns on the Tokyo returns exhibits a structural change in
October 1987.
Takatoshi Ito Wen-Ling Lin
John F. Kennedy School of Government Department of Economics
79 John F. Kennedy Street University of Wisconsin-Madison
Harvard University 1180 Observatory Drive
Cambridge, MA 02138 Madison, WI 53706
and NBER

1. Introduction
Since the stock market crash of October 1987 there has been substantial interest in research
on why stock returns and volatility are propagated across world markets. One possible interpretation
for such interdependence of stock returns and volatility is an informational link across markets: news
revealed in one country is perceived as informative to fundamentals of stock prices in another
country. This view can be attributed to real and financial linkage of economies.2 Another
possible interpretation for this issue is market contagion: stock prices in one country are affected by
changes in another country beyond what is conceivable by connections through economic fundamentals.
According to this view, overreaction, speculation, andior noise trading (e.g., Delong, Shleifer,
Summers, and Waldman (1990)) are transmissible across borders.
This paper studies the interdependent relationship between the Tokyo and New York stock
markets by focusing on interactions of intradaily returns, volatility, and trading volume from October
1985 to December 1991. The principal objective of this paper is to disentangle the two possible
interpretations by using the following three approaches. First, unlike other papers which analyzes'
only price changes and volatility, this paper examines the effect of trading volume on intermarket
dependence in stock returns. Second, unlike several papers which study a causal relationship between
price volatility and trading volume using one (domestic) market (usually the New York market), this
paper is an international extension of volatility and volume studies. Third, unlike many academic and
journalistic papers on the world-wide transmission of the price declines after Black Monday of 1987
in New York, this paper attempts to extend the literature of crashes by encompassing different
episodes in the international transmission of large shocks in prices and volume, including the periods
before and after Black Monday and the periods of the forming and bursting of the bubble of the Tokyo
market.
The focus on trading volume in this paper is owing to the view that trading volume is a good
proxy for the degree of heterogeneity in investors' opinions and beliefs. (See the model built by Epps
and Epps (1976) and Tauchen and Pitt (1983).) Most studies have reported a positive relationship
1

between volatility and trading volume in the (domestic) stock market (see Karpoff (1987) for an
excellent survey and Gallant, Rossi, and Tauchen (1992) for the empirical regularities). According
to the mixture-of-distribution hypothesis, this positive relation is often attributed to the rate of
information which drives both volatility and volume.
Another line of research on the price and volume relationship (in the domestic market)
attempts to explain why correlations in stock returns depend on volume and price volatility. Morse
(1980) found a positive effect of trading volume on the degree of autocorrelations in domestic stock
returns. He interpreted this evidence as traders' revisions of prior beliefs of shocks. (See also Harris
and Raviv (1991) for a theoretical model.) By contrast, Campbell, Grossman, and Wang (1993)
uncovered a negative effect of trading volume on the autocorrelation of stock returns. They associated
this phenomenon with the increased expected returns that compensate for informed traders'
accommodation of liquidity traders' sales, which induce higher trading volume.
This paper extends these two views of autocorrelations of stock returns to an international
context. In particular, the following two hypotheses for explaining the cause of international
transmission of stock returns and volatility will be examined. First, if correlations between
international stock returns are caused by international contagion of liquidity traders' sentiments or
by resolution of heterogenous interpretations of foreign news, such correlations will be positively
influenced by foreign trading volume. We call this the market contagion hypothesis. Second, if
international return correlations are associated with the informativeness of stock price changes in one
market to another market, these correlations are likely to be positively influenced by foreign price
volatility, but not by foreign trading volume. For instance, the domestic traders' extraction of a global
factor from the observed foreign price change (e.g., King and Wadhwani (1990), and Un, Ito, and Engle
(1993)) implies such a relation. The reason is that volatility is a better measure of the rate of
information flow than volume. We call this the informational efficiency hypothesis. The use of
trading volume enables us to assess the two possible channels of international transmission of
international stock returns and volatility by examining the causal relation between the correlations
2