NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
JUMPS AND STOCHASTIC VOLATIUTY:
EXCHANGE RATE PROCESSES IMPLICIT
IN PHLX DEUTSCE-IEMARK OPTIONS
David S. Bates
Working Paper No. 4596
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050Massachusetts Avenue
MA 02138
Cambridge,
December, 1993
Financial supportfromthe Geewax-Terker Research Program in Financial Instruments and from
theWeissCenter forInternationalFinancial Researchis gratefullyacknowledged. Iam indebted
toSandyGrossman for helpful comments on ah earlierdraft ofthispaper, andforprovision of
some of the data used in this study. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Asset
Pricing. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4596
December 1993
JUMPS AND STOCHASTIC VOLATILITY:
EXCHANGE RATE PROCESSES IMPLICIT
IN PHLX DEUTSCHEMARK OPTIONS
ABSTRACT
Anefficient method is developed for pricing Americanoptions oncombinationstochastic
volatility/jump-diffusion processes when jump risk and volatility, risk are systematic and
nondiversifiable, thereby nesting two major option pricing models. The parameters implicitin
PHLX-tradcd Deutschemark options of the stochastic volatility/jump-diffusion model and various
submodelsare estimated over 1984-91, and are tested for consistency with the $/DM futures
process and the implicit volatility sample path. The parameters implicit in options are found to
be inconsistent with the time series properties of implicit volatilities, but qualitatively consistent
with log-differenced futures prices. No economically significant implicit expectations of
exchange rate jumps were found in full-sample estimation, which is consistent with the reduced
leptokurtosis of $/DM weekly exchange rate changes over 1984-91 relative to earlier periods.
David S. Bates
Finance Department
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NEER

A considerable amount of evidence has been amassed regarding the conditional and
unconditional moments of exchange rate processes, from time series studies and from option prices.
It is undisputed that volatility is time-varying, as evinced in plots of implicit volatiities over time
and in the extensive literature on ARCH and GARCH models. Time series studies also indicate
that the unconditional distribution of log-differenced exchange rates is leptokurtic, and that there
is an inverse relationship between excess kurtosis and the length of the holding period! Conditional
leptokurtosishas also been found, in time series studies (fat-tailed residuals from ARCH/OARCH
models) and implicit in option prices.' The evidence regarding unconditional and conditional
skewness is more ambiguous, with time series estimates sensitive to the currency and period used.
Studies of option prices have found evidence of substantial positive implicit skewness in options on
foreign currencies during 1983-85, but less evidence during more recent periods.'
'For instance, I-lsieh (1988) estimated unconditional kurtosis of 12.8 for daily changes in the $/DM
exchange rates, while Meese (1986) estimated kurtosis of 4.2 for monthly returns.
'The U-shaped pattern in implicit volatijities across different strike prices documented in Shastri and
Wethyavivorn (1987) and Ben Khelifa (1991) is evidence of a conditionally leptokurtic distribution implicit
in foreign currency options. Model-specific daily estimates of the implicit distribution in Bates (1988a)
found excess kurtosis in options on 1DM futures over 1984-87.
'Bodurtha and Courtadon (1987) document the tendency of an American option version of the Black-
Scholes model to overprice in- and at-the-money calls and underprice out-of-the-money calls on foreign
currencies during 1983-85, indicating an implicit distribution more positively skewed than the lognormal.
Bates (1988a), using a jump-diffusion model, found substantial positive implicit skewness in options on
Deutschemark futures during 1984-85 but not during 1986 and 1987.

Different time series models have been employed to capture these salient features. Assorted
stationary fat-tailed distributions such as the stable Paretian (Westerfield 1977), Student-t (Rogalski
and Vinso 1978) and jump-diffusions (Akgiray and Booth 1988) have improved on the unconditional
distribution relative to a Gaussian benchmark. Stochastic volatility/ARCH models have been used
to capture the time-varying variances and some --
though
not all -- ofthe leptokurtosis.' More
recent approaches in the time series literature have tended to combine fat-tailed distributions and
time-varying variances; for instance the Student.tJGARCH model of Baillie and Botlerslev (1989)
and the jump-diffusion/ARCH model of Jorion (1989).
Option theory has developed in parallel with the various time series models of exchange
rates. Stochastic volatility models have been used by Melino and Turnbull (1990) and Chesney and
Scott (1989) to price foreign currency options, while Bates (198Sa) and Jorion (1989) have used
Merton's (1976) jump-diffusion model to capture the conditional leptokurtosis. Given substantial
computing costs in pricing options, a standard approach when testing option pricing models has
been to take time series estimates and to examine their implications for the resulting option prices.'
The objective of this study is to proceed in the opposite direction, and to examine the
evidence from option prices regarding the conditional distribution of log-differenced exchange rates.
Given that foreign currency options involve direct bets on the distribution of exchange rate changes.
option prices offer valuable insights into the perceived conditional distribution that are not
necessarily available from time series studies. For instance, implied volatiities from option prices
'Bollerslev, Chou, and Kroner (1992) provide an excellent survey of the ARCH/GARCI-1 literature,
including the applications to foreign exchange rates.
'Examples include Chesney and Scott (1989), Jorion (1989), Melino and Turnbull (1990), and Cao
(1992).
2