NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
QUALITY IMPROVEMENTS IN
MODELS OF GROWTH
Robert J. Barro
Xavier Sala-i-Martin
Working Paper No. 4610
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC.RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January, 1994
This research has been supported by grants from the National Science Foundation. This paper
is part of NBER's research programs in Growth and Productivity. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4610
January 1994
QUALITY IMPROVEMENTS IN
MODELS OF GROWTH
ABSTRACT
Technological progress takes the form of improvements in quality of an array of
intermediate inputs to production. In an equilibrium that is standard in the literature, all research
is carried out by outsiders, and success means that the outsider replaces the incumbent as the
industry leader. The equilibrium research intensity involves three considerations: leading-edge
goods are priced above the competitive level, innovators value the extraction of monopoly rents
from predecessors, and innovators regard their successes as temporary. We show that, if industry
leaders have lower costs of research, then the leaders will do all the research in equilibrium.
However, if the cost advantage is not too large, then the equilibrium research intensity and
growth rate dependonthe existence of the competitive fringe and take on the same values as in
the standard solution. We discuss the departures from Pareto opdmality and analyze the
detennination of the economy's rate of return and growth rate.
Robert J. Barro Xavier Sala-i-Martin
Department of Economics Department of Economics
Littauer Center 120 Yale University
Harvard University 28 Hillhouse
Cambridge. MA 02138 New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER and NBER

Some recent contributions to the endogenous-growth literature model technological
progress as either an increase in the number of types of products (Romer [1990],
Grossmanand Helpman [1991, Ch. 3]) or an improvement in the quality of products
(Aghion and Howitt [1992], Grossman and Helpman [1991, Ch. 4fl. Wecan think of
increases in the number of types, N, as basic innovations that amount to dramatically
new kinds of goods or methods of production. In contrast, increases in the quality or
productivity of the existing goods involve a continuing series of improvements and
refinements of products and techniques.
Figure 1 shows the basic setup. We consider intermediate inputs, as in Ethier
(1982) and Romer (1990), and assume that these come in N varieties, arrayed along the
horizontal axis. In models of expanding variety, N can increase over time, but we treat
N as fixed in the present analysis. The leading-edge quality of each type of intermediate
good is currently at the level shown on the vertical axis. We specify later the precise
meaning of the ladder numbers indicated on this axis. Since the process of quality
improvement turns out to occur at different rates (and in a random manner), the figure
shows that the levels currently attained vary in an irregular way across the sectors.
For analyses of basic innovation, a common assumption is that the new types of
intermediate inputs do not interact directly with the old ones. In particular, Romer
(1990) uses the Spence (1976)/Dixit-Stiglitz (1977) functional form in which inputs enter
into the production function in an additively separable manner. This specification turns
out to imply that the introduction of a new kind of good does not tend to make any old
goods obsolete. (Young [1993] takes a different approach, in which the newly discovered
goods are complements of some existing goods and substitutes for others.)
In contrast, when a product or technique is improved, the new good or method
tends to displace the old one. That is, it is natural to model different quality grades for
a good of a given type as close substitutes. We follow Aghion and Howitt (1992) and

2
Grossman and Helpman (1991, Cli. 4) and make the extreme assumption that the
different qualities of a particular type of intermediate input are perfect substitutes;
hence, the discovery of a higher grade turns out to drive out completely the lower
grades. For this reason, successful researchers along the quality dimension tend to
eliminate the monopoly rentals of their predecessors, the process of "creative
destruction" described by Schumpeter (1942) and Aghion and Howitt (1992). This
feature of the quality-improvement model is the key distinction from the models of
expanding variety, as formulated by Romer (1990) and Grossman and Helpman (1991,
Ch. 3).
A. Sketch of the Mode!
Before we get into the technical details, we provide a sketch of the structure of the
model that we shall develop to analyze improvements in quality. Producers of final
product use N varieties of intermediate inputs, but N is constant. Each type of
intermediate good has a quality ladder along which improvements can occur.
Improvements build on the currently best technology and derive from efforts by
researchers. A successful researcher retains exclusive rights over the use of his or her
improved intermediate good.
At each point in time, the knowledge exists to produce an array of qualities of each
type of intermediate good. In the equilibrium, however, oxily the leading-edge quality is
actually produced in each sector and used by final-goods producers to generate output.
The researcher who has a monopoly over the use of the latest technology receives a
flow of profit We begin with a standard model in which the latest innovator is a
different person from the previous innovator, so that a research success terminates the
predecessor's flow of profit. Therefore, in considering how much resources to devote to
research, entrepreneurs consider the size of the profit flow and its likely duration. This