NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE NEW YORK STOCK MARKET IN
THE 1920s AND 1930s: DID STOCK
PRICES MOVE TOGETHER TOO MUCH?
Peter Rappoport
Eugene N. White
Working Paper No. 4627
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 1994
This paper is part of NBER's research program in the Development of the American
Economy. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4627
January 1994
ThE NEW YORK STOCK MARKET IN
ThE 1920s AND 1930s: DID STOCK
PRICES MOVE TOGEThER TOO MUCH?
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we re-examine the stock market of the 1920s and 1930s for evidence of a
bubble, a "fad" or "herding" behavior by studying individual stock returns. One story often
advanced for the boom of 1928 and 1929 is that it was driven by the entry into the market of
largely uninformed investors, who followed the fortunes of and invested in "favorite" stocks. The
recent theoretical literature on how "noise traders" perturb financial markets is consistent with
this description. The result of this behavior would be a tendency for the favorite stocks' prices
to move together more than would be predicted by their shared fundamentals. Our results
suggest that there was excess comovement in returns even before the boom began, but
comovement increased significantly during the boom and was a signal characteristic of the
tumultuous market of the early 1930s. These results are thus consistent with the possibility that
a fad or crowd psychology played a role in the rise of the market, its crash and subsequent
volatility.
Eugene N. White Peter Rappoport
Department of Economics do Eugene N. \ Lte
Rutgers University Department of Economics
New Brunswick, NJ 08903-5055 Rutgers University
and NBER New BrUnSWiCIç NJ 08903-5055

Financial economists have invested an enormous amount of time
and effort in tasting whether the efficient markets hypothesis
holds for the stock market. When tests for efficiency have failed,
the results have been explained either as deficiencies in the tests
or as evidence for the bubbles, manias and fads of historical
accounts, depending on the convictions of the researchers. Yet,
despite this extensive tasting of the markets, there has been
relatively little effort to examine in detail the specific episodes
that historians have identified as departures from fundamentals.
In this paper, we re—examine the stock market of the 1920s and
l930s for evidence of a bubble by studying individual stock
returns. Most studies examining bubbles, "fads," or "herding"
behavior have focused on stock market indices, but there is no
reason why such departures from an efficient market should be
spread evenly across th. market. One story often advanced for the
boom of 1928 and 1929 is that it was driven in part by the entry
the
into the market of largely uninformed investors, who followed
fortunes of and invested in a ralativsly narrow group of certain
"favorit&' stocks. Th. result of this behavior would be a tendency
be
for th. favorite stocks' prices to move together more than would
predicted by their fundamentals. In view of this, a symptom of the
in crash
type of mispricing believed to have occurred the boom and
of 1928 to 1929, would be evidence on the tendency of individual
stock prices or returns to move in sympathy for reasons that cannot
be accounted for by shared fundamentals. Our results, which are
based on Pindyck and Rotamberg's (1990, 1992) approach, suggest
that there was excess comovement in returns even before the bcon

began, but comoveinent increased significantly during the boom and
was a signal characteristic of the tumultuous market of the early
193 Os
1. The New Crowd in the Market
Most historians and some economists treat the bull market of
the 1920s as an episode when crowd psychology overwhelmed the
fundamentals that should have driven stock prices. The chief
characteristic of these accounts is that it became fashionable to
invest in the stock market——a fad——and a new generation of
unsophisticated investors entered the market eager to make their
fortunes. Allen (1931) and Galbraith (1954) recount how this
enthusiasm, perhaps led by some big speculators, started with two
stocks in early 1928.
Beginning with General Motors and RCA, the market started to
rise with enthusiasm spreading to a larger number of stocks. The
increase in prices was not uniform, and the larger firms seemed to
be more favored.
Both the Dow Jones index, an index of selected
large firms, and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve's
index, a value weighted index show the market rising, with an
occasional brief retreat, to a peak in September 1929.
However,
Fisher's (1966) equally weighted index, which reveals the fate of
smaller companies, grew much more slowly and reached its peak in
February 1929. Furthermore, not all large firm's stock prospered,
although certain groups, like banks and utilities, boomed. What
2