NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE IMPLICATIONS OF FIRST-ORDER
RISK AVERSION FOR ASSET
MARKET RISK PREMIUMS
Geert Bekaert
Robert J. Hodrick
David A. Marshall
Working Paper No. 4624
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January, 1994
This paper is part of NBER's research program in Asset Pricing. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4624
January 1994
THE IMPLICATIONS OF FIRST-ORDER
RISK AVERSION FOR ASSET
MARKET RISK PREMIUMS
ABSTRACT
Existing general equilibrium models based on traditional expected utility preferences have
been unable to explain the excess return predictability observed in equity markets, bond markets,
and foreign exchange markets. In this paper, we abandon the expected-utility hypothesis in favor
of preferences that exhibit first-order risk aversion. We incorporate these preferences into a
general equilibriumtwo-countrymonetary model, solve the model numerically, and compare the
quantitative implications of the model to estimates obtained from U.S. and Japanese data for
equity, bond and foreign exchange markets. Although increasing the degree of first-order risk
aversion substantially increases excess return predictability, the model remains incapable of
generating excess return predictability sufficiently large to match the data. We conclude that the
observed patterns of excess return predictability are unlikely to be explained purely by time-
varying risk premiums generated by highly risk averse agents in a complete markets economy.
Geert Bekaert Robert I. Hodrick David A. Marshall
Graduate School of Business Kellogg Graduate School Kellogg Gniduaie School
Stanfonl University of Management of Management
Stanford, CA 94305 Northwestern University Noflhestn University
Evanston, IL 60208 Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER

1. Introduction
It is generally accepted that excess returns on a variety of assets are predictable. This is
true for returns in the equity markets, bond markets, and foreign exchange markets of various
countries. One interpretation of this evidence is that equilibrium risk premiums on all assets are
highly variable. Yet, existing rational expectations general equilibrium models based on
traditional expected utility preferences have been unable to generate risk premiums that are
sufficiently variable to be consistent with the observed predictability of returns.
Consequently, in this paper we abandon the expected-utility hypothesis in favor of
preferences that exhibit first-order risk aversion.' With these preferences, agents are
substantively averse to even small gambles. Hence, a small degree of uncertainty in the
exogenous environment of economic agents can potentially induce relatively large fluctuations
in agents' intertemporal marginal rates of substitution. This, in turn, implies large fluctuations
in expected rates of return on a variety of assets. Our goal is to determine whether a general
equilibrium model incorporating preferences that exhibit first-order risk aversion is quantitatively
consistent with the predictability of returns and with other time series properties observed in the
data from the foreign exchange market, the equity markets, and the bond markets of the U.S. and
Japan.
Other papers that propose first-order risk aversion as an explanation for asset pricing
anomalies include Epstein and Zin (1990, 1991) and Bonomo and Garcia (1993). In particular,
Epstein and Zin (1991) are unable to reject the overidentifying restrictions implied by a closed
economy model, analogous to. the model of Hansen and Singleton (1982), when first-order risk
The concept of first-order risk aversion was intmduced by Segal and Spivak (1990).

aversion is assumed. Their approach requires the researcher to choose a proxy for the
unobservable rate of return on aggregate wealth,and their inference about the validity of the
model depends on this choice. In an open economy setting, the choice of a proxy for the return
on aggregate wealth is problematic. Hence, we do not follow the approach of Epstein and Zin
(1991). Instead of testing the first-order conditions of the model, we explicitly solve a two-
country monetary model for the endogenous moments of interest.
In our model, consumption of two goods equals the outputs of two countries, which are
assumed to be exogenous endowment streams. The two money supplies are also exogenous. The
growth rates of these exogenous processes follow a discrete Markov chain that is estimated from
U.S and Japanese data using the method of Tauchen and Hussey (1991). The equilibrium
processes for returns and other endogenous variables are found by numerically solving a system
of Euler equations. Having solved the model, we generate a variety of statistics that provide
evidence on the predictability of the model's returns. The performance of the model is evaluated
by comparing these statistics to the corresponding statistics in the data.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we present evidence
on the predictability of excess rates of return in the dollar-yen foreign exchange market, in the
dollar and yen discount bond markets, and in the equity markets. These stylized facts provide
the set of statistics that we would like the model to match. In section 3, we discuss intuitively
why time-varying equilibrium risk premiums could be an explanation of the statistics described
in section 2. Section 4 introduces the concept of first-order risk aversion, and section 5
incorporates these preferences into a formal dynamic model. In section 6 we derive the model's
equilibrium conditions for endogenous financial variables. Section 7 describes our procedure for
2