NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PREVENTING FINANCIAL CRISES:
AN INTERNATIONAL PERSPECTIVE
Frederic S. Mishkin
Working Paper No. 4636
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 1994
Prepared for the Harry Johnson Lecture at the Money, Macro and Finance Research Group
Annual Conference, September 8-10, 1993, University of St. Andrews, Scotland. Research
support has been provided by the Faculty Research Fund of the Graduate School of Business,
Columbia University. This paper is part of NBER's research
program in Monetary
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4636
February 1994
PREVENTING FINANCIAL CRISES:
AN INTERNATIONAL PERSPECTIVE
ABSTRACT
In recent years the possibility of an international fmancial crisis has increased because of
greater liquidity of international fmancial markets, an increase in corporate indebtedness and the
decline of the banking industry. Using an asymmetric information analysis, thispaper outlines
what signals a central bank might look for to determine if a financial crisis is occurring and then
describes how central banks might operate and cooperate to prevent financial crises.
Frederic S. Mishkin
Graduate School of Business
Uris Hall, 619
Columbia University
New York, NY 10533
and NBER

INTRODUCTION
In recent years there has been a growing concern with the fragility of the
international financial system. The stock market crash in October 1987was a
world-wide phenomenon that created fears of a major financial collapse which
could severely damage the global economy. The recent collapse of the real estate
market has also been a world-wide phenomenon and has led to bankruptcies of
major real estate developers both in the United States and abroad.
Because of the rapid growth of nonperforming loans, bank failures in the
United States occurred at a record pace for the post World War II period in the
1980s and early 1990s. Unfortunately, the problems in the banking industry have
not been restricted to the United States. Norway recently experienced the near
failure of several of its banks including some of the largest, while even in
countries like Switzerland and Germany, banks have been running into trouble.
Regional banks in Switzerland have failed and in January 1993, BfG Bank, a
German bank needed a capital infusion from its parent
company, Credit Lyonnais,
because it suffered a DM 1.1 billion ($700 million loss) in 1992. The collapse
of real estate values in Japan has left
many Japanese banks with huge losses, with
the result that the Japanese government has even considered a bank bailout plan.
In September 1992, a speculative crisis in the foreign exchange market
almost brought down the Exchange Rate Mechanism of the European Monetary
System. The system was saved, but only after intervention by European central
banks which is estimated to have cost them anywhere from four to six billion
dollars in foreign exchange losses. As a result, the prospects for European
monetary union have been substantially diminished.
Given these events, it is not surprising that government policymakers,
especially central bankers, have been growing more concerned about the potential
damage that an international financial crises might have on the global economy.
Several questions with regard to international financial crises have thus become of
paramount importance in recent years: What actions need to be taken to prevent
international financial crises? How can we identify financial crises that require
government intervention from other events in financial markets, although quite
dramatic, in which intervention is not needed. What principles should guide how
policymakers respond to an international financial crisis? What are the costs of

2
policies designed to prevent or limit the spread of an international financial crisis?
Fortunately, the new literature on asymmetric information and financial
structure which has developed in the last twenty years can help provide answers
to these questions. In this lecture, I will outline how this literature provides a far
more precise definition of what a financial crisis is than earlier literature does.
Then with an understanding of the nature of financial crises, we can go on to
examine how policymakers might best prevent international financial crises.
WHAT IS A FINANCIAL CRISIS?
Earlier Views on Financial Crises
Up until recently, views of financial crises in the literature have split into two
polar camps, those associated with monetarists versus a more eclectic view
put
forward by Charles Kindleberger and Hyman Minsky. Monetaristsbeginning with
Friedman and Schwartz (1963) have linked financial crises with
banking panics.
They stress the importance of banking panics because they view them as a major
source of contractions in the money supply which, in turn, have lead to severe
contractions in aggregate economic activity in the United States. Monetarists do
not view as real financial crises events in which, despite a sharp decline in
asset
prices and a rise in business failures, there is no potential for a banking panic and
a resulting sharp decline in the money supply. Indeed, Schwartz (1986) charac-
terizes these situations as "pseudo-financial crises". Government interventionin
a pseudo-financial crisis is unnecessary and can indeed be harmful since it leads
to a decrease in economic efficiency because firms that deserveto fail are bailed
out or because it results in excessive
money growth that stimulates inflation.
An opposite view of financial crises is outlined
by Kindleberger (1978) and
Minsky (1972) who have a much broader definition of what constitutes a real
financial crisis than monetarists. In their view, financial crises either
involve
sharp declines in asset prices, failures of both large financial and nonfinancial
firms, deflations or disinflations, disruptions in foreignexchange markets, or some
combination of all of these. Since they perceive
any of these disturbances as
having potential serious consequences for the aggregate
economy, they advocate