NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE
FUND THAT DIDNT BARK
IN THE NIGHT
Edward I. Kane
Robert Hendershoct
Working Paper No. 4648
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge. MA 02138
February 1994
The authorswishto thank Albert Burger and Thomas Cargill for helpful comments and to
acknowledge financial support from the Filene Research Institute and the Center for Credit
Union Research at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Opinions expressed are those of the
authors and should not be construed to represent the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Corporate Finance.

NBER Working Paper #4648
February 1994
THE FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE
FUND ThAT DIDN'T BARK
IN THE NIGHT
ABSTRACT
Unlike the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation and the Bank Insurance Fund,
the National Credit Union Share Insurance Fund (NCUSIF) entered the 1990s in a state of
accounting solvency. This paper develops evidence to show the more important fact that
NCUSIF remained solvent in a market-value sense as well. Differences in institutional product
lines and risk-taking opportunities between credit unions and banks and thrifts are not
consequential enough to explain the differences in their funds' health. This paper explains how
differences in decisionmaking environments made managerial and regulatory risk-taking
incentives in the credit-union industry diverge substantially from those governing banks and
S&Ls. The differences in incentive mucture support the hypothesis that private coinsurance
could lessen taxpayer loss exposure elsewhere in the federal deposit insurance system.
Edward I. Kane Robert Hendershott
Finance Department Finance Department
Boston College Santa Clara University
Chestnut Hill, 02167 Santa Clara, CA 95053
and NBER

2
THEFEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE FUND
THAT DIDN'T BARK IN THE NIGHT
During the last decade, the United States' two major deposit insurance funds were
tested severely. After accumulating a negative net worth of roughly$200 billionin
present value, the Federal Savings & Loan Insurance Corporation (FSLIC) became
defunct in 1989. Although it has since recovered, at the turn of the decade the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation's Bank Insurance Fund (RIP) showed a shortfall in the
accounting value of its net assets as well.
The question of how these deposit insurance funds become insolvent is hotly
disputed. One school of thought blames the accessiori of incompetent and dishonest
managers to positions of control at insured institutions. A second school associates fund
losses with unlucky movements in important economic variables: interest rates, federal
tax laws,andreal-estate prices. Athirdschoolblamesfederal legislation for
"deregulating" simultaneously the explicit interest rates deposit institutions could pay on
deposits and the range of risky activities in which they could engage. A fourth school of
thought fingers politicians and regulators for "desupervising" undercapitalized
institutions in an environment that was rich in opportunities to shift risk to their deposit
insurance fund.
To account for delays in identifying and adequately disciplining insolvent banks
and thrifts, each explanation appeals to information blockages and incentive
incompatibilities across an array of deposit-institution stakeholders. So far, little effort
has been devoted to studying why these same blockages and incompatibilities failed to
forte the insolvency of a third federal deposit insurance fund. Just as the other funds, the
National Credit Union Share Insurance Fund (NCUSIF) was exposed to managerial
turnover, unlucky economic events, and financial deregulation. This paper's tide implies
that analysis of the incentive structure in which NCUSIF is embedded might give

3
onomistdetectives evidence of the type that the fictional Sherlock Holmes gleaned
from observing a watchdog that failed to bark during a nocturnal raid by horse thieves.
To establish that NCUSJF remained economically solvent, our paper offers
straightforward measures of the market value of the fund's net worth during 1987-1990.
Analysis focuses on how managerial and regulatoiy incentives in the credit union
industry differ from those for banks and S&Ls. This analysis of differential incentives
sparks a concluding discussion of whether and how increased privatization might improve
the federal deposit insurance system for intermediaries of any stripe.
L Estimating NCUSIF Net Worth
a. Opportunity-Costversus Accounting Values ofCredit-Union Net Worth
Creditunions are tax-exempt deposit institutions that are owned and operated
cooperatively by a community of "member customers. Net earnings from loans that are
not distributed to depositors flow into a capital account. As at a bank or S&L, capital is
the value of an institution's assets net of its nonownership liabilities.
However, the beneficial ownership of a credit union's net worth is not fixed by
ontract. At each institution, the flow of benefits depends on how far loan and deposit
interest rates vary respectively from members' opportunity costs (Smith, Cargill, and
Meyer, 1981). A credit union's interest-rate policies vary dynamically with community
politics. Boards and committees are nominated from the membership and elected on a
one-member, one-vote basis. Even if each member's influence on loan and deposit
pricing varied proportionately with the volume of business each member has currently
booked with the credit union, large borrowers
may have small deposits and large
depositors may have small loans.
In 1970, a system of federal deposit insurance for credit unionswas established
and assigned to a newly created National Credit Union Administration(NCUA). Until
then, federal responsibility for regulating credit unions lacked apermanent home.