NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ASSET SALES, FIRM PERFORMANCE,
AND THE AGENCY COSTS OF
MANAGERIAL DISCRETION
Lany Lang
Annette Poulsen
René It StuLz
Working Paper No. 454
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 1994
We are grateful for useful comments from David Brown, Gailen Rite, Ravi Jagannathan,
Michael Jensen, David Mayers, Robert McCormick. Craig Lewis, Ieffiy Netter, Tim Opler
Eli Ofek, an anonymous referee, participants at seminars at Clemson University, New York
University, the University of Michigan, the WFA meeting in San Francisco, the A?A
meetings in Anaheim, and especially Harry DeAngelo. This paper is part of NBER's research
programs in Asset Pricing and Corporate Finance. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NEER Working Paper #4654
February 1994
ASSET SALES, FIRM PERFORMANCE,,
AND THE AGENCY COSTS OF
MANAGERIAL DISCRETION
ABSTRACT
We argue that management sells assets when doing so provides the cheapest funds to
pursue its objectivesratherthan for operating efficiency reasons alone. This hypothesis suggests
that (1) firms selling assets have high leverage and/or poor performance, (2) a successful asset
sale is good news and (3) the stock market discounts asset sale proceeds retained by the selling
firm. In supportofthis hypothesis, we find that the typical firm in our sample performs poorly
before the saie and that the average stock-price reaction to asset sales is positive othnely when
proceeds are paid out.
Larry Lang Annette Poulsen
Department of Economics Department of Economics
New York University University of Georgia
269 Mercer Street, 7th floor Athens, GA 30602-6251
New York, NY 10003
René M. Stulz
College of Business
The Ohio State University
1775 College Road
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER

1. Introduction.
Existing empirical evidence shows that asset sale announcements are associated with
positive stock-price reactions. Alexander, Benson and Kampmeyer (1984), Hue, Owers and
Rogers (1987) and Jam (1985) document significant average abnormal returns between 0.5% and
1.66%. A theory advanced in the literature to explain this empirical evidence, most explicitly by
Hite, Owers and Rogers (1987), is that asset sales promote efficiency by allocating assets to
better uses and sellers capture some of the resulting gains. With this view, which we call the
efficient deployment hypothesis of asset sales, firms only manage assets for which they have a
comparative advantage and sell assets as soon as another firm can manage them more
efficiently.
In this paper, we provide empirical results inconsistent with the efficient deployment
hypothesis and advance an alternative explanation for asset sales consistent with our new results.
First, we show that firms selling assetstend to be poor performers and/or have high leverage. In
particular, for our sample, median net income normalized by total assets is insignificantly different
from zero in the year before the sale, even though we exclude from the sample bankrupt finns
and firms in default. This result suggests that the typical firm selling assets is motivated to do
so by its financial trouble rather than by the discovery that some other firm has a comparative
advantage in operating the assets. Second, contrary to the efficient deployment hypothesis, we
find that the stock-price reaction to successful asset sales is strongly related to the use ol the
proceeds. In our sample, the stock-price reaction to asset sales is positive for those firms
expected to use the proceeds to pay down debt but negative and insignificant for firms which are
expected to keep the proceeds within the firm.
We argue that our results are inconsistent with the efficient deployment hypothesis
because asset sales are undertaken by management which pursues self-serving objectives and
1

views asset sales as a source of funds. We call this alternative hypothesis the financing
hypothesis of asset sales and show that it is supported by our empirical results. If management
values firm size, diversification or its reputation, one expects it to be reluctant to sell assets for
efficiency reasons alone.' For such management, a more compelling motivation to sell assets is
that asset sales provide funds when alternative sources of financing are too expensive,
possibly
because of agency costs of debt or because information asymmetries make equity sales
unattractive. With this view, the completion of an asset sale is good news about the value of the
asset because if the value of the asset had turned out to be low, the sale would not have taken
place. Moreover, when agency costs of managerial discretion are high, one expects the market
to discount proceeds of asset sales retained by the firm.
Section 2 provides a theoretical analysis of the information content of asset sales.Section
3 presents our sample of large asset sales and reports the characteristics of the firms in our
sample. Section 4 shows that abnormal returns associated with asset sale
announcements differ
substantially between firms that have performed poorly and use the proceeds torepay debt and
those that do not. Section 5 uses cross-sectional
regressions to explore the robustness of our
main results. Concluding remarks are presented in section 6.
SectIon 2. The Information content of assetsales.
Part 2.1 discusses the information content of
asset sales in the absence of agency costs.
Part 2.2 presents the financing hypothesis.
Finally, part 2.3 collects our testable hypotheses and
relates them to the existing empirical evidence
on asset sales.
Boot (1992) and Weisbach (1993)
argue that management postpones asset sales because
abandoning an unsuccessful strategy impacts the market's
assessment of managers' ability.
Weisbach (1993) shows that divestituresare concentrated around management changes.
2