NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE D1PACFOFTHE FEDERAL
RESERVE BANK'S OPEN
MARKET OPERATIONS
Campbell R. Harvey
Roger D. Huang
Working Paper No. 4663
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 1994
Part of this paper was written while the first author
was visiting the University of Chicago
and the second author was visiting MIT. We have benefited fromdiscussions with William
Christie, Louis Ederington, Douglas Foster, Ruth Freedman, Gordon
Gemmill, Spence Hilton,
Randall Kroszner, Geoffrey Luce, Stephen Schaeffer, SusanaReyes, Tom Smith and seminar
participants at the European Finance Association Meetings in Rotterdam and the Conference
on Recent Developments in Finance at the University of St. Gallen. We
are especially
indebted to an anonymous referee and Ren6 Stulz. Jefferson
Fleming, Rob Kiesel, Chris
Kirby, Chris Miller and Akhtar Siddique provided excellent research assistance.
Roger Huang
acknowledges fmancial support from the Dean's Fund for Research and from the Financial
Markets Research Center at the Owen Graduate School of
Management, Vanderbilt
University. Harvey's work is supported by the Batterymarch Fellowship. This
paper is part
of NBER's research programs in Asset Pricing and
Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER Working Paper #4663
February 1994
THE IMPACT OF ThE FEDERAL
RESERVE BANK'S OPEN
MARKET OPERATIONS
ABSTR ACT
The Federal Reserve Bank has the ability to change the
money supply and to shape the
expectations of market participants through their open market operations. These operations
may
amount to 20% of the day's volume and are concentrated during the half hour knownas 'Fed
Time'. Using previously unavailable data on open market operations, ourpaper provides the first
comprehensive examination of the impact of the Federal Reserve Bank's trading on both fixed
income instruments and foreign currencies. Our results detail a dramatic increase in
volatility
during Fed Time. Surprisingly, the Fed Time volatility is higher on days when
open market
operations are absent. In addition, little systematic differences in market impact arc observed for
reserve-draining versus reserve-adding operations. These results suggest that the financial
markets correctly anticipate the purpose of open market operations but are unable to forecast the
timing of the operations.
Campbell R. Harvey Roger D. Huang
The Fuqua School of Business Department of Economics
Duke University Vanderbilt University
Durham, NC 27706 Box 1819, Station B
and NBER
Nashville, TN 37235

1. Introduction
The goal of this paper is to investigate the impact of the Federal Reserve
Bank's
open market operations on the financial markets. These operations typically in-
volve the purchase or sale of Treasury securities and can
represent a substantial
amount of any day's trading volume. Using new daily data on the
operations, we
are able to assess the impact on eight different financial markets: Treasury
bill,
Eurodollar, Treasury bond, and five U.S. dollar exchange rates.
The Federal Reserve Bank can be viewed as a trader with private information.
This information is revealed to the market in
many different ways: remarks by
the Chairman of the Federal Reserve, testimony before the House and Senate
Banking Committees, the release of the Beige book, the minutes of the Federal
Open Market Committee meetings, changes in reserve requirements, changes in
the discount rate, and open market operations. The last method
is, by far, the
primary and most actively employed policy tool of the Federal Reserve Bank
in implementing its monetary policy. Therefore, our analysis provides a rare
opportunity to study the effects of private information trading. Data on private
trades are often unavailable and the identity of the informed traders is seldom
known. In contrast, we are able to identify a major market participant with
private information. We know the time of the day when this participant trades.
We know the volume and the type of trade. With this information, we are in
a position to assess the impact of the Federal Reserve Bank's operations on a
number of important markets.'
Our analysis reveals that the Federal Reserve Bank's
open market operations
result in dramatic increases in volatility during the trading-time window, 11:30am—
12:00 EST, known as 'Fed Time'. However, the elevated volatilities are surprisingly
more pronounced on days when there are no open market operations. We also
examine the effects on the returns and the volatilities of specific operations that
are designed to increase or decrease money supply. Contrary to expectations,
Formal models of market microstructure with privately informed traders are
provided by Kyle (1985), Admati and Pfieiderer (1988), Foster and Viswanathan
(1990), and others.
1

the effects on returns of reserve-adding and reserve-draining operations cannot be
reliably differentiated from one another. These results suggest that the market
participants correctly forecast whether the Federal Reserve Bank intends to add
or to drain reserves. However, the market participants are unable to anticipate
the specific days when open market operations are conducted.
The importance of information about the Federal Reserve Bank's intentions is
highlighted by a recent incident. On February 4, 1994, the Federal Reserve Bank's
Chairman Greenspan made the unusual move of announcing the Fed intentions
to "tighten" one half-hour before Fed Time. This is the first "tightening" since
February 1989. The action caused prices in the fixed income markets to plummet.
The Fed's New York desk calmed the market by trading a $1.5 billion dollar
customer repurchase agreement which is a reserve-adding operation during Fed
Time. The Chairman's experiment has added new impetus to thosetrying to
understand the role of the Fed in the country's economic strategy, the
specific
actions available to the Fed as well as the impact of these actions.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In the secondsection, we
describe the mechanisms through which the Federal Reserve Bank'sopen market
operations affect financial markets. In this section, we detail the type of
open
market operations that are available to the Federal Reserve Bank and the
expected
effect of each operation. The data sources and the econometric
methodology are
outlined in the third section. In the fourth section, the results
are presented.
Some concluding remarks are offered in the final section.
2.The Federal Reserve Bank's
open market operations
2.1. Policy and implementation
Much has been written about the role of the Federal Reserve Bank in the
economy. By exercising some control over the money supply, most believe that
the Federal Reserve Bank has the ability to influence financial
prices, in particular,
the short-term interest rates. This
paper aims to provide direct evidence on the
2