NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
REVERSE ENGINEERING THE
YIELD CURVE
David K. Backus
Stanley E. Zin
Working Paper No. 4676
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1994
The authors thank Ned Elton, Stephen Figlewski, Silverio Foresi, James MacKinnon, Fallaw
Sowell, and Chris Tebner for helpful comments and suggestions. Backus thanks the National
Science Foundation for financial support. This paper is part of NBER's research program in
Asset Pricing. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureauof Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4676
March 1994
REVERSE ENGINEERING ThE
YIELD CURVE
ABSTRACT
Prices of riskfree bonds in any arbitrage-free environment are governed by a pricing
kernel: given a kernel, we can compute prices of bonds of any maturity we like. We use
observedpricesof multi-period bonds to estimate, in a log-linear theoretical setting, the pricing
kernel that gave rise to them. The high-order dynamics of our estimated kernel help to explain
why first-order, one-factor models of the term structure have had difficulty reconciling the shape
of the yield curve with the persistence of the short rate. We use the estimated kernel to provide
a new perspective on Hansen-Jagannathan bounds, the price of risk, and the pricing of bond
options and futures.
David K. Backus Stanley E. Zin
Stern School of Business Graduate School of Industrial
Management Education Center Administration
New York University
Carnegie-Mellon University
New York, NY 10012-1126 Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890
and NBER and NBER

1 Introduction
A newcomer to the theory of bond pricing would be struck by the enormous
variety of models used by academics and practitioners alike. Prominent ex-
amples include Black, Derman, and Toy (1990), Brennan and Schwartz (1979),
Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross (1985), Heath, Jarrow, and Morton (1992), Ho and Lee
(1986), and Vasicek (1977), and one could easily add many others to the list.
The common element linking these diverse theories is what Sargent (1987) terms
the pricing kernel: the stochastic process governing prices of state-contingent
claims. A theory of bond prices that does not admit pure arbitrage opportu-
nities implies that a pricing kernel exists. Hence a theory of bond prices is
essentially a choice of pricing kernel.
Given a pricing kernel, we can compute prices of bonds and related assets.
We describe and implement a procedure for doing the reverse: of using prices
of riskfree government bonds to deduce the pricing kernel. We do this in a
discrete-time log-linear theoretical framework that has been used by) among
others, Campbell (1986), den Haan (1993), and Turnbull and Mime (1991), and
is closely related to the one-factor Gaussian interest rate model of Jamshidian
(1989) and Vasicek (1977). This framework does not encompass all of the mod-
els in the literature, or even all of those listed above, but its simple structure
makes the relation between bond yields and the pricing kernel relatively trans-
parent. Given this structure, we can trace observed properties of bond prices
to properties of the kernel. We show, for example, that the upward slope of
the mean yield curve and the positive autocorrelation of interest rates provide
information about the pricing kernel that bear on the pricing of related assets.
Our estimated pricing kernel provides a useful perspective on both the gen-
eral equilibrium foundations of asset pricing and the properties of interest-rate
derivative assets. With respect to the foundations of asset pricing, the widely-
documented discrepancies between representative agent theories and observed
asset prices have been linked, most notably by Hansen and Jagannathan (1991),
to variability of the pricing kernel. Like them, we find that the pricing kernel
has substantially greater variability than theory based on a representative agent
with power utility. We find, in addition, that most of this variability is short
term. With respect to derivative assets, our estimated kernel provides some
insight into their pricing. One example concerns bond options. In our theoret-
ical framework, an increasing mean yield curve implies mean reversion in the
kernel and the short rate. As a result, approaches to option pricing that do
not incorporate mean reversion must compensate by positing a declining term

structure of volatility. A second example concerns the relation between forward
and futures prices. Although these prices need not bear any particular relation
to each other in our framework, our estimated kernel implies that futures prices
are less than forward prices, as they seem to be in the data. This property is a
general consequence, in our framework, of kernels that imply a positively auto-
correlated short rate, and holds even when the mean yield curve is decreasing.
These examples illustrate, we think, the benefits of reducing the theory of bond
pricing to its least common denominator, the pricing kernel.
We develop these issues in the following pages, starting with a quick look at
the salient properties of bond yields and forward rates.
2 Properties of Bond Yields
We review two features of yields and forward rates on US government bonds:
the tendency for long rates to be higher than short rates, on average, and the
high degree of persistence in yields and forward rates of all maturities. The
data are monthly, and were constructed by McCulloch and Kwon (1993).
To fix the notation, let b' denote the dollar price at date i of an n-period
discount bond: the claim to one dollar in all states at date t + n. The dollar
yield on a bond of maturity n, for n > 0, is
yfl = —n1logb. (1)
The yield on a one-period bond is simply the short rate: rg =
—logb.
Forward rates are implicit in the prices of n- and (n + 1)-period bonds:
f =
log(b/b1).
(2)
From definitions (1) and (2) we see that yields are averages of forward rates:
yfl__lfJ_l
(3)
Thus we can express the maturity structure of riskfree bonds in three equivalent
ways: with prices, yields, or forward rates.
The most common method of representing the term structure is with yields,
to which we turn now. The first feature of interest is the slope of the yield curve.
2