NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE TYRANNY OF NUMBERS:
CONFRONTING THE STATISTICAL
REALiTIES OF THE EAST ASIAN
GROWTH EXPERIENCE
Aiwyn Young
Working Paper No. 4680
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1994
This paperwas supported by a grant from the M1T-NTLJ Collaboration Agreement and an
NBER Olin Fellowship. I am indebted to (Iris Paxson for providing data tapes on Taiwan,
to Chan Wing-Kwong, Chao Bi-Tsyr, Ho Kun-Lon, Peter Kisler, John Sharon and Woo
Hyun-Sook for help in gathering and entering data, and, most especially, to Ho Veng-Si and
Yang Shin-Kyu for extraordinary research assistance. Thanks are due the governments of
Hong Kong, South Korea and Taiwan for providing unpublished data and answering queries.
Special appreciation is due the government of Singapore which, while disagreeing with most
of my analysis and all of my conclusions, has generously supplied me with both published
and unpublished data on the Si.ngaporean economy. This paper is part of NBER's research
programs in Growth and International Trade and Investment. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4680
March 1994
THE TYRANNY OF NUMBERS:
CONFRONTING THE STATISTICAL
REALITIES OF THE EAST ASIAN
GROV/TH EXPERIENCE
ABSTRACF
This paper documents the fimdamental role played by factor accumulation in explaining
the extraoixlinary postwar growth of Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan.
Participation rates, educational levels and (with the exception of Hong Kong) investment rates
have risen rapidly in all four economies. In addition, there have been large intersectoral
reallocations of labour, with (again, excepting Hong Kong) non-agricultural and manufacturing
employment growing one and a half to two times as fast as the aggregate working population.
Thus, while the growth of output per capita in these economies has averaged 6% to 7% per
annum over the past two and a half decades, the growth of output per effective worker in the
non-agricultural sector of these economies has been only 3% to 4% per annum. If one then
allows for the doubling, tripling and even quadrupling of the investment to GDP ratio in these
economies, one arrives at total factor productivity growth rates, both for the non-agricultural
economy and for manufacturing in particular, which are well within the bounds of those
experienced by the OECD and Latin American economies over equally long periods of time.
While the growth of output and manufacturing exports in the newly industrializing economies
of East Asia is virtually unprecedented, the growth of total factor productivity in these economies
is not.
Aiwyn Young
Sloan School of Management
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER

I. Introduction
This is a fairly boring and tedious paper, and is intentionally so. This paper provides no
new interpretations of the East Asian experience to interest the historian, derives no new
theoretical implications of the forces behind the East Asian growth process to motivate the
theorist, and draws no new policy implications from the subtleties of East Asian government
intervention to excite the policy activist. Instead, this paper concentrates its energies on
providing a careful analysis of the historical patterns of output growth, factor accumulation and
productivity growth in the Newly Industrializing Countries of East Asia, i.e. Hong Kong,
Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan.
Tables 1-1 and 1-2 and figure 1 below present some basic information on growth in the
NICs, drawn from national accounts and census sources.' As seen in table 1-1, the
extraordinarily rapid and sustained growth of output per capita in all four economies, averaging
some 6% to 7% per annum for two and a half decades, is trnly remarkable. It is this record of
growth, along with its apparent association with the rapid growth of manufactured exports, that
has led most economists to believe that productivity growth in these economies must be
extraordinarily high, particularly in their manufacturing sectors. This view, however, ignores an
equally remarkable record of factor accumulation.
As table 1-1 shows, one important area of factor accumulation has been labour input. The
rapid post-war decline in birth rates (changing dependency ratios) and rising rates of female
labour force participation have led to a substantial rise in the aggregate participation rate in each
'The appendix provides a full description of sources. All growth rates reported in this
paper are logarithmic, rather than geometric, growth rates. The labour force estimates for Korea
and Taiwan exclude their large (predominantly conscript) armies, whose measured output (in the
form of wages) is comparatively small. Section VI below examines the sensitivity of the results
reported in this paper to the inclusion/exclusion of military personnel.
1

of the NICs.2 In moving to measures of output per worker, rising participation rates remove an
average of 1% per annum from the per capita growth rate of Hong Kong. 1.2% and 1.3% per
annum from Korea and Taiwan, respectively, and a stunning 2.6% per annum (for 24 years!)
from the growth rate of Singapore. Interscctoral transfers of labour have also been
extremely
important Thus, removing agriculture from the analysis lowers the growth rate of output
per
worker in Taiwan and South Korea by .6% and .7% per annum, respectively, reflecting the
rapid
decline in the share of agricultural employment in total employment in both economies.3
Although the growth of manufacturing output has been unusually rapid in these economies, so
has the growth of manufacturing employment Once one accounts for the transfer of labour into
manufacturing one finds, surprisingly, that, as regards labour productivity growth, manufacturing
in both Singapore and Taiwan actually underperformed the
aggregate economy.
Capital input has also grown rapidly in the NICs. As shown in figure 1. although the
investment to GD? ratio has remained roughly constant in HongKong, in the other NICs it has
risen substantially over time. In Singapore, the constant price investmentto GD? ratio, at 11%
in 1960 had reached 38% by 1980 and an extraordinary 47%
by 1984, after which it declined
substantially, only to begin another rise in the late 1980s. In South Korea, investmentrates,
which were around 5%(inconstant
prices) in the early 1950s, exploded upto 20% in the
mid-60s, reached 30% in the early 1980s, and were approaching 40% by 1991.
Finally, in
Taiwan, the constant price investment to GD? ratio, at around 10% in the
early 1950s, grew
steadily to a high of 27% in 1975, after which it fluctuated around a value of 20%.
2Changes in age specific male participation rates are minimal in all foureconomies, while,
with the exception of Hong Kong (where they fell), reported hours of work have remained
roughly constant. This suggests that the increase in participation is genuine, and not some
statistical artifact.
31'his intersectoral transfer was strongest in Taiwanduring the 1970s, when the difference
in the growth of output per worker was 2.2% (5.7% vs. 3.5%), and in Koreaduring the 1980s,
when the difference in growth rates was 1.6% (6.7% vs. 5.1%).
2