NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
OUTWARD DIRECF INVESTMENT
AND THE U.S. ECONOMY
Robert E. Lipsey
Working Paper No. 4691
NATIONAL BUREAU CE ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1994
This paper was originally prepared for the NBER conference of International Taxation held in
Cambridge, January 14-15, 1994. It is a part of the NBER program in International Trade
and Investment. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Reseaivh.

NBER Working Paper #4691
March 1994
OUTWARDDIRECT INVESTMENT
AND THEU.S. ECONOMY
ABSTRACT
Investmentin production outside the United States is a method by which U.S. finns raise
their shares in foreign markets and defend them against foreign rivals from the host countries and
from other countries. The investing firms are exploiting their firm-specific assets such as
proprietary technologies, patents, or skills in advertising or marketing, and the opportunity to
produce abroad raises the value of these assets and encourages firms' investment in them by
extending the range of markets and the length of time over which they can be exploited.
Overseas production has contributed to the ability of American multinationals to retain
world market shares in the face of the long-term decline in the share of the U.S. as a country and
short-term changes such as exchange rate fluctuations. It has performed the same functions for
Swedish firms and, more recently, for Japanese firms.
Within U.S. multinationals, those with higher shares of their production overseas have
higher employment at home relative to home production. Foreign production appears to require
larger numbers of employees in headquarters activities such as R&D and supervision.
Robert E. Lipsey
Queens College and Graduate Center
CUNY
Rushing, NY 11367
and NBER

Lipsey, Robert E.
Outward Direct Investment and the U.S. Economy
Robert E. Lipsey
Any judgjeent about the wisdom of tax changes that raise or lower the
profitability of American firms' foreign operations, must involve some
judgment as to the desirability of increasing or decreasing the extent of
these operations. The purpose of this paper is to review past research on the
effects of U.S. firms' overseas activities on the U.S. economy and to report
some further analysis with more recent data.
The first question to be answered is what we mean by the U.S. economy.
The ambiguity of the term troubles appraisals of many policies. One way of
looking at it is to ask whether the object is to maximize Cross National
Product or Cross Domestic Product. The former is an ownership-based concept
that includes the profits from overseas operations of U.S. firms and other
income earned overseas by U.S. residents, but excludes profits earned in the
United States by foreign residents. The latter is a geographically-based
concept that covers production that takes place in the United States,
regardless of ownership. It thus excludes profits and other income earned
overseas (from overseas production), but includes all income earned in the
U.S. (from production in the U.S.) by both U.S. and foreign residents. One
way in which the distinction surfaces in policy discussions is over whether
various types of assistance or preferences are to be applied to U.S. -
controlled firms, regardless of where they operate, or to firms producing in
the U.S., whether domestically' or foreign-owned.

-2-
I will try to construe the issue broadly. That means I will consider
effects of outward foreign direct investment on the labor employed in the U.S.
by the investing companies and also those on the companies themselves,
including their stockholders, and more generally on the trade and other
aspects of the U.S. economy.
Various studies of the behavior of multinational firms, including some
of my own, view the firms as facing fixed or relatively fixed, worldwide
markets for their products and making decisions mainly about how to supply
that demand most profitably. The firm is pictured as choosing whether to
supply the demand by exporting from the U.S., by producing abroad, or by
licensing technology, patents, or other assets owned by the firm to foreign
licensees who would produce outside the United States.
The assumption of a fixed market for a firm tends to bias conclusions
toward finding that foreign production by U.S. firms substitutes for
production in the United States. An alternative view is that production
abroad is often mainly a way of enlarging a fin's share of foreign markets,
or of preventing or slowing a decline in that share. The inadequacy of the
fixed market assumption is obvious in any attempt to examine the impact of
direct investment in service industries, since the nature of most of these
industries precludes substantial exporting trot one country to another and
market share is almost completely contingent on production at the site of
consumption. While this is most obvious for service industries, it applies
equally to the service component of manufacturing industries, a major part of
the final value of sales of manufactured products.