NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MONETARY POLICY RULES AND
FINANCIAL STABILITY
Bennettt McCaflum
WorkingPaper No. 4692
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1994
This paper was prepared for the Bank of Japa&s October 1993 cOnference on Financial
Stability in a Changing Environment. I am indebted to John A. Carison, Tim Cook, Bob
Hetzel, Hiroo Taguchi, Michael Bordo, Tom Humphrey, Ken Matheny, Allan Meltzer, and
especially Marvin Goodfriend for enemely helpful discussions and suggestions. Thoughtful
comments were provided by Mervyn King. Thomas Meizer, and Jean-Pierre Patat. Thanks
are also due to Sandra Baker for help with the data. This paper is a part of the NBER.'s
research program in Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and noj those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER. Worklng Paper#4692
April 1994
MONETARY POLICY RULES AND
FINANCIAL STABIUTY
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates empirically the possibility that a central bank could adhere to a
macro-oriented monetary policy rule while also providing lender-of-last-resort services to the
financial system. The method considered involves smoothing week-to-week movements of an
interest rate instrument so as to achieve quarterly-avenge intermediate targets for the monetary
base, with these specified so as to keep aggregate nominal spending growing steadily at a
noninflationary rate. Simulations utilizing weekly U.S. data are conducted with a system
consisting of a policy rule for the federal funds rate—one designed to hit monetary base targets
obtained from a quarterly macroeconomic rule--and an empirically-based model of the response
of base growth to funds rate movements. Results for the periods 1974-1979 (Sept.) and 1988-
1991 suggest that such a procedure could succeed in reconciling macroeconomic goals with the
provision of lender-of-last-resort services.
Bennett T. McCallum
Graduate School of Industrial Adminisntion
Carnegie-Mellon University
PittsburgJ. PA 15213-3890
and NBER

I. Introduction
The subject matter of this session is the relationship between the two
ultimate goals recognized by most central banks, namely, macroeconomic
stability and financial—system stability.1 This is an extremely broad topic
and one that could be approached by various distinct methods of
analysis——evolutionary/historical, welfare theoretic, institutional, etc.
But given my own experience relative to others on the program, it seems most
appropriate for me to narrow the scope of the assignment by focusing
on one limited but extremely important set
primarily of issues.
These issues, which are closely interrelated, concern macro—oriented
rules for monetary policy and the central bank's role as a lender of last
resort. Are macro—oriented rules——such as those advocated by KcCallum (1988,
1993), Meltzer (1987), or Taylor (1988, 1993)——inappropriate because of their
neglect of financial market conditions? If so, might these rules be modified
so as to overcome that neglect? What are the implications concerning
lender—of—last—resort responsibilities? Does acceptance of these
responsibilities require the operation of a discount window? Or could they
be satisfied, as suggested by Goodfriend and King (19881, by means of open
market operations that involve smoothing of interest rates?
As here formulated, the answers to these questions depend to a large
extent upon the accuracy with which it is possible for the central bank to
for the monetary base by means of an
hit intermediate quarterly targets
interest rate instrument while practicing smoothing——i.e.. while avoiding
large week—to—week changes in the interest rate. Consequently, a substantial
portion of the paper is attempt to measure this accuracy
devoted to an
empirically. As the econometric methods utilized are rather rudimentary, our
results must be regarded as exploratory, rather than definitive, in nature.
But estimation of a fully structural model is inhibited by data limitations
1

and identification problems, so our first—pass analysis may be difficult to
improve upon substantially, in any event, it will provide a starting point
for further consideration of the issue.
Organizationally, the analysis begins in Section II with an overview
discussion of the broad topic of this session, a discussion which serves to
Justify our attention on the narrower set of issues described above. Section
III is then devoted to a backgrotmd review of some results relating to
monetary policy rules, formulated at the quarterly frequency, in which the
monetary base is treated as a policy instrument. Section IV develops a
framework for the study of a system in which quarterly-average base values
are viewed as targets to be achieved by manipulation at the weekly frequency
of an interest rate instrument. Basic simulation results
pertaining to this
system are given in Section V while Section VI takes
up some alternative
formulations. Finally. Section VII contains a brief
recapitulation.
jJ Monetary Policy Rules for the Lender of Last Resort?
Before focusing our attention as described above it will be useful to
justify that strategy by reference to the broader topic assigned for this
session: the relationship between the goals of macroeconomic and financial
stability. The tension between these goals has recently been expressed
by
Folkerts-Landau and Garber (1992), writing about the design of the European
Central Barth, in terms of the aphorism1 "A bank or a monetary policy rule?"
More generally, many economists have expressed doubts as to the compatibility
of a strict monetary policy rule——or in any case one featuring a monetary
base instrument-—with central bank acceptance of lender—of—last—resort
(LLR)
responsibilities,2 The achievement of a base path as dictated by the rule
would conflict, according to this position, with the need to supply liquidity
at times of crisis in accordance with the central bank's role as a LLR.
2