NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW MUCH DII) CAPITAL
FORBEARANCE ADD TO THE TAB
FOR ThE FSUC MESS?
Edward J. Kane
Min-Teb Yu
Working Paper No. 4701
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge,MA 02138
April 1994
For helpful comments on an earlier draft, the authors wish to thank Rebel Cole, Robert
Prasch, and James Thomson. This paper is part of the NBER's research program in
Corporate Finance. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4701
April 1994
HOWMUCH DID CAPITAL
FORBEARANCE ADD TO THE TAB
FOR THE FSLIC MESS?
ABSTRACT
Federal regulators characterize capital forbearance as an efficient way of nursing weak
banks and thrifts back to health. An alternative hypothesis is that forbearance reflects inefficient
costs of agency that fall on federal deposit-insurance funds.
Divergences between regulatory measures of a troubled institution's net worth and OAAP
and market-value measures relieved FSLIC from having to book de facto encumbrances that
industry losses were imposing on the FSUC fund. This omission protected the reputations and
careers of top officials.
Delays in insolvency resolution intensified FSLIC exposure to future losses by distorting
management and risk-taking incentives and squeezing profit margins for surviving thrifts.
Besides accumulating projects with negative net present value, delay hurt FSLIC indirectly by
undermining the average profitability of the industry it insured.
This paper seeks to measure the opportunity cost of FSLIC forbearance during 1985-1989.
Although the opportunity cost of delay did not increase every year, it did increase on avenge.
Had opportunity-cost standards of capital adequacy been routinely enforced, FSLIC guarantees
would not have displaced private capital on a mammoth scale, surviving members of the industry
would have proven more profitable, and investments in commercial real estate would have been
restrained.
Edward J. Kane Min-Teb Yu
James F. Cleary Professor in Finance Department of Finance
Boston College National Central University
Finance Department Chung-Li, 32054
Chestnut Hill, MA 02167 Taiwan, ROC
and NBER

How Much Did Capital Forbearance Add to the Tab
for the FSLIC Mess?
I. Introduction
In financial usage, forbearance describes a policy of leniency or indulgence in
enforcing a collectableclaimagainst another party. Deposit-institution regulators engage in
capital forbearance when they do not require recognizable shortages of private ownership
capital at decapitalized institutions to be resolved in quick order either by new injections of
ownership capital, by government takeover, or by liquidation.
In the late 1970s and 1980s, troubled institutions were almost never resolved when
they first became insolvent. On average, Cole (1993) finds that thrifts resolved dtiring
1980-88 had been insolvent on a GAAP accounting basis for roughly 18 months. Kane
(1987), Kaufman (1987), Brumbaugh (1988), Barth (1991), and others have argued that
FSLIC (the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation) adopted forbearance as a
strategy of regulatory gambling that sought to buy time to expand opportunities for growth
and good luck to make crippled thrifts well again.
Federal regulators of depository institutions characterize capital forbearance as an
efficient way of nursing weak banks and thrifts back to health. But Kane (1987, 1989)
argues that the let-it-ride speculative strategy that FSLIC followed is a poorly balanced bet
Both cx ante and cx post the strategy rewarded managers and owners of a few lucky
institutions and increased the aggregate bill to taxpayers for resolving insolvencies.
Analysis of the cost and benefits of FSLIC forbearance has begun to narrow this
disagreement. Bartholomew (1991), DeGennaro and Thomson (1992), and Benston and
Carhill (1992) each analyze the cx post costs of FSUC forbearance.
For 1130 thrifts that were resolved during the period 1980 through 1990.
Bartholomew (1991) compares cx post resolution costs with projected costs of prompt
regulatory intervention. Bartholomews calculations assign substantial cost to forbearance
policies, but neglect potential benefits to FSLIC from gambles placed on troubled thrifts
that managed to return to health. Studying costs of forbearance only for failed thrifts
creates a selection bias because returns from insolvent thrifts that manage to recover are
systematically excluded. Although accounting for this class of net returns could lower
For helpful comments on an earlier draft, the authors wish to thank kebel Cole, Robert Praseb, and
James Thomson.

2
estimated net costs of forbearance, gains accruing to recovering thrifts flow
disproportionately to private stalceholders.
DeGennaro and Thomson (1992) avoid selection bias by studying longitudinally the
fates of 952 thnfts that failed to meet regulatory capital standards at the end of 1979. They,
too, find a cost discrepancy ($6 billion to $12 billion) between a hypothetical strategy of
prompt resolution and the present value of the delayed resolution costs experienced in these
thrifts. Their sample's starting date seems aptly chosen, in that it captures the immediate
effect on thrift net worths of the increased interest volatility created by the Voicker Fed's
post-October 6, 1979 attack on inflation and precedes 1980 and 1982 legislation that
intensified supervisory forbearance. Nevertheless, whether earlier or later starting dates
might produce different qualitative results is an open question. It is particularly desirable to
confront White's claim (1991, p. 141) that "by 1986 it was too late for the FSLIC to cut its
losses by much."
Although Rudolph (1989) does not measure forbearance costs per se. her work
may be interpreted as showing that DeGennaro and Thomson's results may be insensitive
to a 3-year delay in starting point. She finds that, by 1987, of 237 thrifts that were
insolvent by Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) in 1982, 92 had been
merged or closed and 77 more remained insolvent and still supported by government-
contributed capital. Only 68 had regained GAAP solvency, and some of these had done so
(as a nonforbearance policy would have required) by raising external capital.
These studies measure a thrift's initial capital shortage by accounting standards.
Many thrifts that were book-value solvent during FSLICs last decade could be proved to
have been economically insolvent by more comprehensive methods of measurement. The
effects of using still-later starting dates and a mom-inclusive market-value standard for
solvency is investigated in Benston and Carhill (1992) and in this paper. Analyzing
forbearance costs with data from 1985-1989 Thrift Financial Reports, Benston and Carhill
interpret regression evidence to support regulators' presumption that, as away of nursing
hundreds of damaged thrifts back to health, forbearance proved expost to be a profitable
strategy for taxpayers. The heart of their argument is demonstrating that many troubled
institutions chose not to pursue excessively risky strategies.
This paper uses the same data source as Benston and Carkill, but measures
aggregate opportunity costs of forbearance directly. A narrative description of capital
adequacy restrictions for U.S. thrifts is presented in Section II. How to benchmark an
appropriate loss-resolution strategy is discussed in Section III. The data set is introduced