NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EXECUTIVE PAY AND
PERFORMANCE: EVIDENCE FROM
THE U.S. BANKING INDUSTRY
R. Glenn Hubbard
Darius Palia
Working Paper No. 4704
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge. MA 02138
April 1994
We thank Franklin Edwards, Jordi Gali, William Greene, Kevin Hassett Charles Himmelberg,
Michael Jensen, Edward Kane. Frank Lichtenberg, Richard Lyons. Kevin Murphy, Sam
Peltzman, Elizabeth Strock, lake Thomas, the seminar participants at Boston College.
Columbia University, and Georgetown University for their helpful discussions and comments.
We also thank Carlene Held and Takeshi Furukawa for their reseasvh assistance, and Chris
James for providing us with some data. All enors remain our sole responsibility. This paper
is part of NBER's research programs in Corporate Fmance and Monetary Economics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau ofEconomic
Reseaxvh.

NBER Working Paper #4704
April 1994
EXECU'UVE PAY AND
PERFORMANCE: EVIDENCE FROM
THE U.S. BANKING INDUSTRY
ABSTRACF
This paper examines an effect of deregulating the market for corporate control on CEO
compensation in the banking industry. Given that each state's banking regulation defines the
competitiveness of its corporate control market, we examine the effect of a state's interstate
banking regulation on the level and structure of bank CEO compensation. Using panel data on
147 banks over the decade of the 1980s, we find evidence supporting the hypothesis that
competitive corporate control markets (i.e.,whereinterstate banking is permitted) require talented
managers whose levels of compensation are higher. We also find that the compensation-
performance relationship is stronger than for managers in markets where interstate banking is not
permitted. Further, CEO turnover increases substantially after deregulation, as does the
proportion in performance-related compensation. These results suggest strong evidence of a
managerial talent market --thatis. one which matches the level and sflcture of compensation
with the competitiveness of the banking environment.
R, Glenn Hubbard Darius Palia
Graduate School of Business Graduate School of Business
Columbia University Columbia University
609 Uris Hall 613 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027 New York, NY 10027
and NBER

EXECUTIVE PAY AND PERFORMANCE: EVIDENCE
FROM THE U.S. BANKING INDUSTRY
R. Glenn Hubbard and Darius Palia'
1. Introduction
In recent years, much attention has been focused on whether managers indeed
maximize shareholder wealth. Beginning with seminal works by Berle and Means (1932)
and Jensen and Meckling (1976), researchers have addressed the agency costs incurred by
the separation of ownership and control. Many devices have been suggested to help align
the incentives of the managers with the interests of shareholders, including such devices as
high corporate leverage (Jensen, 1986), more effective monitoring by the board of directors
(Hermalin and Weisbach, 1988; Shleifer and Vishny, 1988; Weisbach, 1988), and
managerial compensation.
Managerial compensation (more specifically, chief executive officer compensation) has
come under increasing scrutiny in the popular press. On one side of the debate are critics
who suggest that CEO compensation is not related to performance and is largely
"excessive." Suggestions have ranged from capping CEO pay to making pay a prescribed
multiple of the lowest worker's salary. On the other side of the debate are proponents of
moderate reform of the current executive compensation system. For example, in a recent
article in Business Week, Peter T. Chingos, a compensation consultant at KPMG Peat
Marwick, comments that high pay reflects the limited number of executives who can run
large organizations successfully, stating:
We're reaching hysterical levels of concern. It's more of a knee-jerk reaction and a
paranoia. There are clear ezamples of abuses out there ... but they make up only a
small minority How many Michael Eisners are there in the world? Companies
have to pay a premium for business luminaries. (March 1992, page 56)
We use the banking industry to examine these conflicting views in whether CEO
compensation is excessive or used to attract the requisite managerial talent.
Chief executive officer (CEO) compensation has been examined empirically by Jensen
and Murphy (1990a), Murphy (1985,1986), Rosen (1992), Ba.rro and Barro (1990), Joskow,
Rose, and Shepard (1993), and Houston and James (1992) who find a positive relationship
1We thank Franklin Edwards, Jordi Gali, William Green., Kevin Haaett, Charles Himmeiberg, Michael Jensen.
Edward Kane, Frank Lichtenberg, Richard Lyon., Kevin Murphy, Sam Peltsm.n, Elkabeth Stroclt, Jake Thomas. the
seminar partkipant. at Boston College, Columbia University, and Georgetown University for their helpiul discussions and
comments. We also thank Carlene Held and Takeshi Funikawa for their research assistance, and Chris James (or providing
us with some data. All enon remain our sole responsibility.

2
between pay and performance for samples of publicly-held corporations. Jensen and
Murphy (1990a) employ first-differences in shareholder wealth and the pay of chief
executive officers (CEOs) and find a significant positive relationship between pay and
performance. They find the sensitivity between pay and performance to be small, however
-- a $3.25 change in CEO wealth per $1,000change in shareholder wealth. They attribute
this small sensitivity to public and private political forces influencing the managerial
compensation market, given that managerial compensation is highly visible and attracts
"implicit regulation" that truncates the upper tail of managerial compensation. Murphy
(1985) also finds a positive relationship between pay and performance, whereas
Murphy(1986) finds that the pay-performance sensitivity is negatively influenced by CEO
experience. These results are confirmed by Barro and Barro (1990) using a sample of
commercial banks. Joskow, Rose, and Shepard (1993) examine the differences in CEO
compensation between regulated firms (not including banks) and unregulated firms, and
find that regulated firms have lower levels of CEO compensation while offering
compensation packages that are less sensitive to CEO performance. Houston and James
(1992) compare banks with nonbanking firms, and find no evidence of greater
compensation-performance sensitivity in banks than in nonbanking firms. In addition,
they find that banks are less reliant on managerial stock options and ownership than
nonbanks, and no differences in CEO turnover rates between banking and nonbanking
firms. Accordingly, those authors suggest that the compensation arrangement does not
reward bank CEOs for taldng excessive risks —whichis inherent in the fixed-rate deposit
insurance contract offered by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
While most of the previous academic research has examined CEO compensation in
industrial firms, only Barro and Barro (1990) and Houston and James (1992) analyze CEO
compensation in commercial banks. This paper extends existing studies by examining the
effect of the market for corporate control on both the levels and structure of CEO
compensation in commercial banks. Banking is an industry where some variations of the
corporate control market can be easily identified. In particular, the bank corporate control
market is defined by the regulations legislated by each state, and is largely influenced by
whether banks from other states are allowed to compete in local banking markets.
Historically, most states did not allow mergers or any sort of branching activity across
states, and the McFadden Act of 1927 required national banks to conform to state
branching restrictions. Interstate banking became more widespread in the 1980s, when a
number of states broadened the boundary restrictions that had originally been imposed on