NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A STOCK INDEX MUTUAL
FUND WITHOUT NET CAPITAL
GAINS REALIZATIONS
Joel M. Dickson
John B. Shoven
Working Paper No. 4717
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1994
We would like to thank Jeremy Bulow, John Andrew McQuown, Charles Schwab, and
seminar participants at Boston University, Northwestern, Penn State, Stanford, the Federal
Reserve Board of Governors, and the NBER's Public Economics Meetings for helpful
comments and discussions. We would also like to thank George Sauter at The Vanguard
Group for providing us with key data and insight into the management of Vanguard's Index
500 Fund. Financial support was provided by Charles Schwab & Company. The research
presented, the opinions expressed, and any remaining errors are solely those of the authors.
This paper is part of NBER's research program in Public Economics.

NBER Working Paper #4717
April 1994
A STOCK INDEX MUTUAL
FUND WITHOUT NET CAPITAL
GAINS REALIZATIONS
ABSTRACT
This paper reconsiders the literature on tax options by examining the ability to defer net
capital gains realizations within an equity portfolio whose constituents change over time. Unlike
previous studies on the value of tax options, this paper examines after-tax returns to shareholders
within an equity mutual fund. The mutual fund context allows certain features of the United
States' tax laws -- namely,wash-sale rules and the offsetting of short-term and long-term capital
gains and losses --tobe incorporated in assessing the potential improvement in post-tax returns
to investors engaging in tax minimization strategies.
Specifically, this paper examines the feasibility of managing open-end and closed-end
Standard and Poor's 500indexfunds which defer net capital gains realizations. A combination
of HIIFO (highest in, first out) accounting procedures and the systematic booking of significant
losses in portfolio constituents would have allowed the open-end fund variant to match the annual
pre-tax return of Vanguard's Index 500 Fund while improving annual after-tax performance by
as much as ninety-seven basis points through the elimination of all capital gains realizations
between 1977 and 1991. Deferring capital gains is shown to be easier for open-end funds
relative to closed-end funds while the additional turnover required to implement these strategies
is quite modest. The authors name the tax-sensitive funds in this paper "SURGE (Strategies
Using Realized Gains Elimination) funds."
Joel M. Dickson John B. Shoven
Department of Economics Department of Economics
Stanford University Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305 Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER

A Stock Index Mutual Fund Without Net Capital Gains Realizations
Mutual fund prospectuses provide a great deal of information about the operation, style,
investment philosophy, and past performance of funds. These disclosures, most required by the
Securities and Exchange Commission, are meant to provide prospective investors with the
necessary information to compare mutual funds in order to make informed financial allocation
decisions. One principal drawback of the current disclosure laws, however, is that all
performance data are reported as pre-tax values even though many shareholders are subject to
federal, state, and local taxation on the dividend and realized capital gains distributions made
by different funds.
Many popular sources of investment analysis and advice, such as financial newspapers and
magazines, use the pre-tax measures to rank the past performance of mutual funds. Dickson and
Shoven (1993), however, find that tax management policies across equity mutual funds differ
widely, causing the post-tax rankings to deviate significantly from their pre-tax counterparts.
Even if past before-tax performance may not be indicative of future before-tax performance, the
after-tax calculations allow investors to identify better those funds which systematically manage
their portfolios to minimize their shareholders' current tax liability by taking advantage of the
ability to defer taxation until capital gains are realized.
Some mutual funds recognize the importance of maximizing after-tax returns for their
investors. The prospectus of the Schwab 1000 Fund, for example, states that 'the Fund's
investment policies are designed to minimize current capital gains tax liability" (p. 4).
Furthermore, Dickson and Shoven (1993) show that if an index fund, such as Vanguard's Index

500 Fund which replicates Standard and Poor's 500 Stock Index (S&P 500), could manage its
portfolio to eliminate all capital gains distributions to its shareholders, after-tax performance
would have been greatly enhanced.
In this paper, we consider the feasibility of creating and implementing a tax-conscious
"index" fund which eliminates all realized capital gains distributions for long horizons. The
accounting and trading strategies used to minimize realized capital gains taxes in our stock
portfolio are motivated with the theoretic research on capital gains tax minimization by
Constantinides (1983) and Stiglitz (1983). Our specific aim is to replicate the S&P 500 index
from August, 1976, when Vanguard's Index 500 Fund commenced, through December, 1991.
We name our constructed fund a SURGE fund (Strategies Using Realized Gains Elimination) and
consider both closed-end and open-end SURGE variants.
The analysis in this paper provides a number of interesting additions to the literature on the
value of tax options. Constantinides (1984) and Dammon, Dunn, and Spatt (1989) consider
trading strategies on individual stocks which have survived for some specified time period. By
focusing on the S&P 500,wecan analyze the benefits of tax-motivated trading within a portfolio
of stocks whose constituents are changing over time (i.e., forced realizations) and where
only
net capital gains on the entire portfolio are considered. In addition, simulations of closed-end
and open-end S&P 500 mutual funds allow insight about the advantages of competing investment
company structures to engage in tax-minimization strategies.
A number of additional questions must also be addressed. First, is the fund we create able
to track the S&P 500 successfully? That is, are we able to match the annual pre-t.ax return while
improving after-tax performance relative to a mutual fund which completely replicates the index?
2