NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FIRM DWERSIFICATION AND
CEO COMPENSATION: MANAGERIAL
ABILITY OR EXECUTIVE
ENTRENCHMENT?
Nancy L. Rose
Andrea Shepard
Working Paper No. 4723
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1994
We are grateful to the National Science Foundation, the MiT Center for Energy and
Environmental Policy Research, and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation for financial support of
this project This research was undertaken while Rose was a fellow at the Center for
Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences. We thank Severin Borenstein, Ben Hermalin,
Paul Joskow, Richard Lambert, Edward Lazear, James Poterba, Garth Saloner and Mark
Wolfson, and participants in the Stanford Brown Bag Lunch and the NBER Industrial
Organization program for helpful discussions, and Justin Adams for data assistance.
This paper is part of NBER's research program in Industrial Organization. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER Working Paper #4723
April 1994
FIRM DIVERSIFICATION AND
CEO COMPENSATION: MANAGERIAL
ABILITY OR EXECUTIVE
ENTRENCHMENfl
ABSTRACF
Data for a sample of 558CEOsover 1985-1990 suggest substantial compensation premia
for managers of diversified firms. The CEO of a firm with two distinct lines of business
averages 10 to 12 percent more in salary and bonus and 13 to 17 percent morn in total
compensation than the CEO of a similar-sized but undiversifled firm, all else equal. This
corresponds to average 1990 salary gains of $115,000 to $145,000 per year for our sample.
Diversification may raise pay because the CEO's job requires higher ability or because it is
associated with CEO entrenchment, If ability explains the correlation, we would expect the
diversification premium to be invariant to tenure. Entrenchment models suggest higher premia
for more experienced (more entrenched) CEOs, and an increase in compensation when the CEO
diversifies the firm, The data support an ability model over an entrenchment explanation. The
diversification premium is unaffected by tenure, and increasing diversification reduces
compensation for incumbent CEOs, all else equal.
Nancy L. Rose Andrea Shepard
MIT Sloan School Stanford GSB
50 Memorial Drive, E52-434 Stanford University
Cambridge, MA 02142 Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER arid NBER

I. INTRODUCTION
The economics and strategic management literatures of the past decade
have grown increasingly skeptical about the value of combining several lines
of business within a single firm. The positive literature has noted the
negative response of the stock markets to diversifying mergers in the 1 980s
(e.g., Morck, Shleifer and Vishny, 1990) and the relatively poor
performance of diversified firms (e.g., Lang and Stulz, 1993). The
normative literature has shifted from an enthusiasm for portfolio
management within diversified firms in the 1 970s to a more tempered
discussion of how corporate managers might make the diversified whole
more valuable than the sum of its parts (e.g., Porter, 1985).
The effort to understand why diversification failed to produce the
performance gains anticipated during the 1 960s conglomerate merger wave
has produced two sharply divergent classes of explanations. One focuses
on the difficulty of managing diversified enterprises, the other on managerial
entrenchment. Both imply a connection between CEO compensation and
firm diversification. This study uses information on 558 CEOs in 418 firms
over 1985-1990 to explore this connection. We find evidence of significant
compensation premia for managers of diversified enterprises. We use
patterns in these premia to distinguish entrenchment explanations from
those based on managerial ability.
Ability-based explanations focus on the difficulty of managing a diversified
firm. Diversification is undertaken if it increases the expected value of the
firm through some type of synergy or spillover across the lines of business.
Realizing the potential value of these synergies depends on the ability of top
management. If diversification increases the value the firm places on
managerial talent, more diversified firms will hire more able CEOs. Because
1

ability earns a premium in the market for corporate talent, CEOs at
diversified firms will be more highly compensated than are their
counterparts at less diversified firms. Ability models imply that the
diversification premium will be invariant to CEO tenure, and that incumbent
CEOs who diversify their firms will be paid less than CEOs who are
optimally matched to the firm's new, higher level of diversification.
Proponents of managerial entrenchment explanations argue that
diversification frequently is undertaken by self-serving managers to increase
the value of their compensation packages, even when diversification
reduces the value of the firm. One simple story is that diversification is an
easy way to increase firm size when antitrust constraints restrict
acquisitions within a firm's existing lines of business. If Boards of Directors
reward CEOs for firm size, CEOs may have an incentive to diversify even
when it does not contribute to shareholder wealth. A more subtle
argument, and the one on which we focus here, is that top executives
change the scope of the firm to match their particular talents. If
diversification creates a uniquely good match between top executives and
the firm, it creates managerial rents that may be captured by the CEO
(Shleifer and Vishny, 1989). These models predict compensation increases
for incumbent CEOs who diversify their firms, a positive correlation
between compensation and diversification in .the cross-section, and smaller
diversification premia for new CEOs than for incumbent CEOs.
Both entrenchment and ability explanations imply a positive cross-sectional
correlation between compensation and firm diversification, holding constant
firm scale and other variables known to affect compensation. This is
confirmed in our sample of 480 "experienced" CEOs— those who have been
in the position for more than two years. These results, which are
dominated by interfirm variation, suggest economically and statistically
2