NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE VALUATION OF CASH
FLOW FORECASTS: AN
EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS
Steven N. Kaplan
Richard S. Ruback
Working Paper No. 4724
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1994
Lori Kaufman, Betsy McNair, and Kelly Welch provided able research assistance. Eugene
Fama, Wayne Ferson, Wayne Mikkelson, Mark Mitchell, Kevin M. Murphy, Daniel Nelson,
Mitch Petersen, Jay Ritter, Theo Vermaelen, and seminar participants at the NBER Summer
Institute, illinois, North Carolina, Oregon, Vanderbilt, and Washington provided helpful
comments. This research is supported by the William Ladany Faculty Research Fund, the
Center For Research in Security Prices (Kaplan), and the Division of Research at Harvard
Business School (Ruback). This paper is part of NBER's research program in Corporate
Finance. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4724
April 1994
THE VALUATION OF CASH
FLOW FORECASTS: AN
EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS
ABSTRACT
This paper compares the market value of highly leveraged transactions (HLTs) to the
discounted value of their corresponding cash flow forecasts. These forecasts are provided by
management to investors and shareholders in 51 HLTs completed between 1983 and 1989. Our
estimates of discounted cash flows are within 10%, on average, of the market values of the
completed transactions. Our estimates perform at least as well as valuation methods using
comparable companies and transactions. We also invert our analysis and estimate the risk
premium implied by transaction values and forecast cash flows, and the relation of the implied
risk premium to firm-level betas, industry-level betas, firm size, and firm book-to-market ratios.
Steven N. Kaplan Richard S. Ruback
Graduate School of Business School of Business
University of Chicago Harvard University
1101 East 58th Street Boston, MA 02163
Chicago, IL 60637 and NBER
and NBER

1. Introduction
This paper compares the market value of management buyouts and leveraged
recapitalizations to the discounted value of their corresponding cash flow forecasts.
Most economists readily accept the concept of estimating market values by calculating
the discounted value of the relevant cash flows. However, there is little preexisting
empirical evidence that shows that discounted cash flows provide a reliable estimate of
market value. This study provides evidence of a strong relation between the market
value of the highly leveraged transactions (HLTs) in our sample and the discounted
value of their corresponding cash flow forecasts.
Our tests compare the transaction values in HLTs to estimates of the present
value of the relevant cash flows. We use a sample of management buyouts and
leveraged recapitalizations because these transactions typically release the cash flow
information and transaction value required for the analysis. We use the cash flow
forecasts to estimate the cash flows that will accrue to all capital providers, including
different classes of debt and equity. We estimate a terminal value when the cash flow
information ends. We value the capital cash flows using a discount rate based on the
CAPM. We use three CAPM-based approaches to estimate discount rates corresponding
to firm-level, industry-level, and market-level measures of risk. Each of these
approaches works well: the median estimates of discounted cash flows are within 10%
of the HLT transaction values.
We compare the performance of our discounted cash flow estimates to that of
estimates obtained from alternative valuation approaches that rely on companies in
similar industries and companies involved in similar transactions. Such alternative
valuation approaches — known as comparable approaches — are commonly used in
practice. The discounted cash flow (DCF) methods, individually, perform at least as
well a. the comparable methods. We also find, however, that using the DCF and
comparable methods together explains significantly more variation in transaction values
than either method alone.
Overall, our DCF valuations generally parallel the basic techniques taught in
most business schools. The fact that our resulting values are approximately equal to the

transaction values suggests that the basic approach to valuation is both useful and
reliable. We stress that our valuations rely on several ad hoc assumptions that readers
(both academics and practitioners) should be able to improve on in a specific valuation.
We would expect such improved assumptions to bring DCF valuations closer to
transaction values.
We also invert our analysis to calculate an implied discount rate or internal
cost of capital — the discount rate that equates the discounted cash flow forecasts to the
transaction value. The median implied risk premium is 7.55%which is comparable to
the historic arithmetic average risk premium. We also examine the relation of the
implied risk premiums to firm size, firm book-to-market ratios, and systematic risk
measures to determine if our results are consistent with Fama and French (1992) who
find that firm equity returns are unrelated to firm-level measures of systematic risk
when firm size and book-to-market ratios are taken into consideration. We fmd that the
implied risk premiums are not significantly related to firm size nor to the pre-transaction
book-to-market ratio. The implied risk premiums are positively related to firm and
industry betas. For this sample, therefore, we favor CAPM-based approaches to
discount rates over those based on size or book-to-market ratios.
The success of the discounted cash flow valuations is impressive because
HLTs pose additional complications beyond the general concerns about capital market
imperfections and intertemporal asset pricing models that arise in any valuation
problem. First, the cash flow forecasts we rely on come from published legal filings
and may not be constructed to be estimates of expected cash flows. Second, even if the
cash flow forecasts are intended to be expected cash flows, the forecasting process is
likely to involve substantial errors because major changes in organizational form and
asset deployment accompany the HLTs. Third, since these firms have extremely
leveraged capital structures, they may be limited in their access to capital markets and
in their ability to use interest tax shields. Finally, the securities of these firms —
particularly high yield debt and private equity —arelikely to be substantially less liquid
than the liabilities of most large public corporations. Greater attention to these
2