NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TRANSACTION COSTS IN DEALER
MARKErS: EVIDENCE FROM
THE LONDON STOCK EXCHANGE
Peter C. Reiss
Ingrid M. Werner
Working Paper No. 4727
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 1994
Quality of
We thank Stephen Wells and Graham Hart of the London Stock Exchange's
Markets Groupfor providingdata and answering questions. Goldman Sachs, Preferred
Technology, SalomonBrothers, andUBS graciouslygranted US access to their trading
Xavier Ro1e Richard O'Hare and Dan Pizza
operations. We had the good fortune to observe
Kathleen Tyson
make markets and to discuss the UK securities industry with George Gray.
of UK security regulations.
of the UK Securities Investment Board explained the intricacies
NBER conterence on "Industrial
Helpful comments were provided by participants at the
1994, and the
Organization and Regulation of Securities Markets," Key Largo. Januazy
March 1994. Special
conference on "Competition for Orderflow," University of Memphis,
Stanford Graduate
thanks go to our discussants Bernard Black and Douglas Foster. The
School of Business fundedpart of this research through its FinancialServices Research
Werner also
Initiative and a Robert M. and Ann t Bass Faculty Fellowship to Werner.
acknowledges her stay at the London School of Economics. The authors are responsible for
the paper's analysis and conclusions. This paper is part ofNBER's research programs in
those of the authors
Asset Pricing and Industrial Organization. Any opinions expressed are
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4727
May 1994
TRANSACTION COSTS IN DEALER
MARKETS: EVIDENCE FROM
THE LONDON STOCK EXCHANGE
ABSTRACT
dealers on
This paper describes regularities in the intraday spreads and prices quoted by
transaction costs, one that
the London Stock Exchange. It develops a measure of spread-related
This measure of
recognizes dealers' willingness to price trades within their quoted spreads.
trade's size,
transaction costs shows that trading costs are systematically related to a
the full
characteristics of the trading counterparties, and security characteristics. Customers pay
spread on small trades while medium to large trades receive morefavorable execution. Market
medium to large
makers only discount very large customer wades while dealers regularly discount
increase in size.
trades. Inter-dealer trades generally receive favorable execution, and discounts
do discount when
Market makers do not discount trades with each other over the phone, but
falling in the
wading anonymously using inter-dealer-brokers. Quoted and touch spreads are
economies of scale in
number of market makers. The rate of decline is interpreted as reflecting
market making.
Ingrid M. Werner
Peter C. Reiss
Graduate School of Business
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
Stanford. CA 94305-5015
and NBER

Reiss and Werner: Text 3
1. Introduction
New electronic trading technologies have drastically reduced the costs of financial
transactions and put tremendous pressure on financial exchanges to lower their costs.
The London Stock Exchange [LSE] is a prominent example of the changes being made in
response to this pressure- In 1986, theLSE switched from a closed, floor-based, broker-
dealer market to an open electronic quotation system dubbed SEAQ. The LSE's SEAQ
system operates much like the NASD's NASDAQ dealer system. On SEAQ, compet-
ing market makers post bid and ask prices and guaranteed trading volumes. Although
SEAQ also displays trade information, brokers and dealers still negotiate trades by phone.
Besides changing its systems, the LSE enacted new rules designed to encourage compe-
tition and narrow quoted spreads. These included the elimination of fixed commissions
and member entry barriers, and the adoption of best execution rules. The Exchange
also imposed what it calls mandatory quote volumes. Mandatory quote volumes require
market makers to accept trades equalling two or more percent of a security's average
daily trading volume. To reduce the capital risks associated with large trades, the Ex-
change granted market makers the right to delay their disclosure. During 1991, SEAQ
market makers could delay releasing information on large trades for up to ninety minutes.
Currently, they may delay disclosing them for up to one week!
The LSE's emphasis on liquidity over transparency has renewed debate about whether
such rules affect the costs of financial transactions. A recent IOSCO report (1993) ob-
served that few studies have studied the determinants of transaction costs in dealership
markets. Several empirical studies report substantial inter-security and inter-day vari-
ation in NASDAQ and SEAQ dealer spreads. Few examine the relationship between
spreads and transaction prices, or consider how exchange rules might affect spreads.
This paper uses newly available SEAQ intra-day quotation and transaction data to ana-
lyze the relationship between investor transaction costs and best bid-ask spreads. Using
unique information in the SEAQ data, we show that LSE rules lead dealers tooffer sys-
tematic discounts from posted prices. These discounts vary across traders, securities and
trade characteristics.
We also argue that conventional transaction cost measures do not recognize important
institutional features of dealership markets. On SEAQ, these include mandatory quote
their
volumes and best execution rules. These rules affect dealers' quoted prices and
theoretical
willingness to offer traders discounts. Contrary to the assumptions of many

Reiss and Werner: Text 4
models, SEAQ market makers do not compete by narrowing (symmetric) quotes. Indeed,
they almost never narrow the quoted spread between their bid and ask prices. They
instead compete by positioning their bid or ask on or at the market bid or offer. Curiously,
they may maintain these positions for hours or days, offering traders discounts instead
of changing what they advertise on SEAQ screens. We find, as some theoretical models
do, that dealer discounts usually increase with the size of a trade. We also find puzzles.
Surprisingly, discounts for customers, brokers and market makers all decrease with market
maker concentration and increase with market depth. These heterogeneities raise new
theoretical and empirical questions about how dealer competition affects the relation
between quoted prices and transaction prices.
Section 2 begins with a review of prior research on transaction costs, particularly
transaction costs in dealer markets. We then show that several standard transaction cost
measures may over- or under-represent dealer discounts from quoted spreads. We illus-
trate our arguments using SEAQ and NASDAQ intra-day trade and quotation data for
Cadhury & Schweppes, a heavily traded FTSE-100 equity. We find that SEAQ Cadbury
quoted bid-ask spreads are slightly higher than NASDAQ spreads. More notable are dif-
ferences in the price discounts offered by NASDAQ and SEAQ market makers. Though
some research suggests that dealers only offer other dealers discounts from quoted prices,
this is not true on SEAQ. SEAQ market makers grant discounts to medium and large
retail orders more often than they do to each other. The median retail discount increases
uniformly in order size, and applies to many orders larger than the Ca.dbury manda-
tory quote volume. We conclude the Cadbury example by developing a new measure
of transaction costs, what we term the adjusted apparent spread. This measure reveals
how dealers regularly vary spreads and discounts with the characteristics of trades. We
estimate these adjusted apparent spreads using quantile regression techniques. These
regressions flexibly describe the distribution of Cadbury discounts conditional on trade
size and the identities of traders.
Section 3 analyzes 1991 quotation data for 1,887 UK and Irish equities to isolate inter-
and intra-security variations in quoted prices. We find striking variation. Best bid-ask
spreads range from less than one percent of share value to over fifty percent! Much of
this variation is systematic. As on NASDAQ, quoted and best bid-ask spreads decline
as the number of posting market makers increases. It also appears that the greater the
capital risk associated with mandatory quote volumes, the more market makers widen
their spreads. Dealer participation in actively "making the market" also falls as turnover