NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ANTICIPATIONS OF FOREIGN
EXCHANGE VOLATILITY AND
BID-ASK SPREADS
Shang-Jin Wei
Working Paper No. 4737
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 1994
An earlier version of this paper wasissued as an International Finance Discussion Paper.
Number 409, August 1991, by the Federal Reserve Board. I have received very helpful
comments from Stanley Black, Paul Boothe, Hall Edison, Jeffrey Frankel, David Gordon.
Dale Henderson, Takatoshi Ito, Steven Icamin, Maurice Obstfeld, David Parsley, Kenneth
Rogoff, David Romer, Andrew Rose, Richard Stern and seminar participants at the University
of Virginia and the Federal Reserve Board. I alone am responsible for any errors in the
paper. This paper is part of NBER's reseamh program in International Finance and
Macroeconomics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4737
May 1994
ANTICIPATIONS OF FOREIGN
EXCHANGE VOLATILITY AND
BID-ASK SPREADS
ABS1'RACr
exchange rate volatility on bid-ask
Thepaper studies the effect of the market's perceived
from currency options data. An increase in the
spreads. The anticipated volatility is extracted
The direction of the effect is consistent
perceived volatility is found to widen bid-ask spreads.
increase in trading volume
with an option model of the spread, but the magnitude is smaller. An
of spot exchange rates also widens the spread. The omission of the tradingvolume, however,
does not bias the estimate of the effect of the volatility on the spreads. Althoughthe spread-
is close to linear, some foim of
volatility relation implied by the option model of the spread
nonlinearity can still be detected from the data.
Shang-Jin Wei
Kennedy School of Government
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER

1
1. Introduction
Bid-ask spreads and other microstructure of foreign exchange trading are understudied.
Notable exceptions are Glassman (1987), Boothe (1988), Black(1989) and Lyons (1993). Among
those studies on the bid-ask spreads, the a poststandard deviations in foreign exchange rates
are typically used as a measure of exchange risk1. Presumably, when one talksabout the effect
of exchange rate risk on the transaction costs, one is thinking of the effect of the market's
nerception of the risk. Therefore, an important extension to be made is to examine directly the
impact of the market's ex ante perceptions of exchange rate risk on the bid-ask spread.
This paper makes four main contributions. First, we derive a theoretical relationship
between the spread and market's anticipated volatility. The key idea is to express the spread as
a portfolio of options. Copeland and Galai (1983) also relate the spread to options. However,
their model is an equilibrium one, and the spread in their model depends on, among other
things, the percentage of traders who are liquidity traders. In contrast, our model links the
spread with options from a different perspective. Consequently, we are able to derive a spread-
volatility relation without the need to specify an equilibrium model.
Second, we are able to examine the effect of the market's & awe anticipation of
exchange rate volatility on the bid-ask spread, as opposed to the effect of the a post
exchange
rate volatility that has been examined in previous papers. This measure of the market's
anticipated volatility is extracted from observed option data on foreign currencies. The data used
in the paper cover four major exchange rates: the British pound, German mark, Japanese yen
and Swiss Franc, all in units of the U.S. dollars, from February of 1983 to February of 1990.

2
Becausewe have a measure of the market's perceived risk, we can decompose cx post exchange
rate volatility into anticipated and unanticipated components. Then, we can examine whether
the two components have differential effects on the bid-ask spread.
Third, previous studies acknowledge the potentially important impact of trading volume
on bid-ask spreads, but do not examine it directly because of a laàk of data on spot market
trading volume. This paper utilizes actual trading volume of the spot exchange rate for one of
the currencies, and thus is able to assess explicitly the effect of trading volume on the
spread-uncertainty relationship.
Fourth, the relationship between the bid-ask spread and exchange rate volatility could,
in principle, be a non-linear one. Previous studies either have run linear regressions without
justifying the choice of functional form, or have not dealt with possible non-linearities beyond
taking some simple (and arbitrary) transformations of the variables in linear regressions. The
spread-volatility relation in our model appears to be nonlinear in its general form, but the results
of simulations turn out to be very close to linear. This may provide a theoretical justification for
the linear functional specifications. However, nothing guarantees that the empirical relationship
is indeed linear. Therefore, we also apply a nonparamethc method to
study the possible
nonlinearity in the spread-volatility relationship.
The next section provides a simple theoretical model demonstrating that the spread tends
to widen as the market's perceived exchange rate volatilitygoes up. Section 3 describes the data
source and the methods used in extracting the market's anticipated volatility and in computing
the percentage bid-ask spreads. Section 4
reports the empirical findings (linear regressions)
concerning the effect of anticipated volatility on the spreads. The empirical effects of