NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INSIGNIFICANT AND
INCONSEQUENTIAL HYSTERESIS: THE
CASE OF U.S. BILATERAL TRADE
DavidC. Parsley
Shang-Jin Wei
Working Paper No. 4738
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 1994
We would like to thank David Romer for very helpful discussions. We have also itceivéd
useful suggestions from Menzie Chinn, Avinash Dixit, Timothy Lane. Wooheon Rhee, Hans
Stoll, an anonymous referee, and numerous seminar participants. Part of this research was
supported in part by the Dean's fund for Faculty Research of the Owen Graduate School of
Management at Vanderbilt University. This paper is part of NBER's research programs in
International Finance and Macroeconomics and International Trade and Investment Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER Working Paper #4738
May 1994
INSIGNIFICANTAND
INCONSEQUENTIAL HYSTERESIS: THE
CASE OF U.S. BILATERAL TRADE
ABSTRACT
This paper casts doubt on the validity of the hysteresis hypothesis as an explanation of
the persistent U.S. trade deficits in the 1980s. We propose two tests to investigate two different
implications of the hypothesis. The first implication is that cumulative changes in exchange
rates, in addition to current exchange rate levels, are important determinants of trade flows. The
second implication is that foreign exporting firms' perceptions of exchange rate volatility will
affect their decisions to enter or exit the market. We find little support for either aspect of the
hysteresis hypothesis.
David C. Parsley Shang-Jin Wei
Owen School of Management Kennedy School of Goveninznt
Vanderbilt University 79 JFK Street
Nashville. TN 37203 Cambridge. MA 02138
and NBER

I Motivation
The extended dollar appreciation, and subsequent steep depreciation,
during the 1980s has been cited as the proximate cause of sluggish adjustment
of trade volumes and prices. This idea presents a new twist to the
now—traditional view that exchange rate variability is itself caused by
sluggish adjustment of prices. The new view is that the structure of demand
and supply In trade may be characterized by hysteresis (Dixit 89a, 89b;
Krugman and Baldwin 89). Actual empirical examination of this hypothesis is,
however, quite limited.
Hysteresis has been defined as the failure of an effect to be reversed
once the cause of the disturbance is removed (Dixit 89b). In models proposed
by Baldwin and Krugman (89). and developed in Dixit (89a. 89b) the existence
of sunk costs has important implications for equilibrium real exchange rates
and trade flows. In these models, the combination of exchange rate
uncertainty and sunk costs produce hysteresis in trade flows because firms'
entry/exit decisions are tied to some critical levels of the exchange rate.
Without sunk costs revenue fluctuations would be unimportant because firms
would enter in profitable periods and exit in unprofitable periods. In
hysteresis models competitive strength, or the ability to export, becomes
dependent on the past history of the exchange rate. Large exchange rate
swings, then, entail welfare costs, since productive resources within the
society must be reallocated. Given the prevalence of sunk costs, and the
empirical observation that exchange rates are highly variable, we might
suspect hysteresis to be highly applicable to contemporary events.
Behind the facade of novelty, the ultimate implications of hysteresis
are fundamental. In addition to implying that the direction and composition
of real trade flows are somewhat arbitrary, some experts have implicated the

current exchange rate system as a promoter of these path dependencies.
Indeed, Krugman (89) has argued this point to the extent of advocating an
eventual return to a system of fixed exchange rates. The large exchange rate
swings of the 1980s and the persistent trade imbalances do present a prima
fade case for the potential importance of hysteresis. Often, however, more
traditional explanations for these events exist. Given that alternative
explanations frequently entail significantly different policy prescriptions.
a careful empirical evaluation of this phenomenon is warranted.
In this paper we focus on two aspects of the hysteresis hypothesis which
have testable implications. The first is that cwznlative changes in exchange
rates are important determinants of trade flows; i.e., under the hypothesis,
the effect of an exchange rate change on trade flows depends on the past
history of exchange rate changes. This contrasts with the traditional view
that exchange rates matter only in levels. The second implication of
hysteresis derives from an analogy with financial options. In particular,
the hypothesis posits that because of sunk costs and uncertainty, a firm's
perception of the sustainability of the current exchange rate will affect its
decisions to enter or exit the market. Far example, if the firm becomes less
sure of the future course of the exchange rate, the option value of the
'wait—and—see" strategy rises. This implies that as exchange rate volatility
increases, the response of trade flows to exchange rates, will fall. These
features of the hypothesis motivate the econometric tests we employ in this
paper.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II offers
several reasons why the hysteresis hypothesis has not been adequately tested
in existing studies. Section III describes the data we employ. Section IV
develops fully, two testable implications of the hypothesis before presenting
the results of these tests. Section V concludes.
2