NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INFORMATION, TRADING AND
STOCK RE1IJRNS: LESSONS FROM
DUALLY-LISTED SECURITIES
ICC chan
Wai-MingFong
René M. Stulz
Working Paper No. 4743
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 1994
We are grateful to Yakov Amihud for comments, to Tom Georgç for useful discussions, and
to Bong-Chan Kho for research assistance. This paper is part of NBER's research prognm
in Asset Pricing. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4743
May 1994
INFORMATION, TRADING AND
STOCK RETURNS: LESSONS FROM
DUALLY-LISTED SECURiTIES
ABSTRACT
This paper compares the intra-day patterns on the NYSE and AMEX of volatility, trading
also
volume and bid-ask spreads for European dually-listed stocks, Japanese dually-listed stocks
listed in London. and Japanese dually-listed stocks not listed in London with American stocks
for
of comparable avenge wading volume and volatility. It is shown that the inira-day patterns
these stocks axe remarkably similar even though the public information flows differ markedly
have the greatest
across these stocks during the wading day. In the morning. Japanese stocks
These rankings are
volatility and volume, followed by European stocks and American stocks.
reversed in the afternoon. We argue that these patterns are consistent with markets reacting to
and
the overnight accumulation of public infonnation which is greatest for Japanese stock
smallest for American stocks and inconsistent with the view that early morning volatility canbe
attributed to monopolistic specialist behavior.
KC Chan Wai-Ming Fong
Hong Kong University of Science & Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shatin, New Territories
Technology
Clear Water Bay, Kowloon HONG KONG
HONG KONG
René M. Stulz
College of Business
Ohio State University
1775 College Road
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER

1. IntroductIon.
Considerable effort has been devoted recently to teaming about the determinants of stock
return volatility. This research has identified trading noise, public information, private information
and trading mechanisms as potentially important determinants of the volatility of stock returns.
To identify the relative importance of these determinants, contributions to the literature have
focused mostly on experiments that exploit differences in trading mechanisms, in the arrival of
public information, and in whether markets are open. For instance, French and Roll (1966) use
the suspension or trading on some Wednesdays in 1968 to compare non-trading days to trading
days with similar rates of arrival of public information. Barclay, Utzenberger and Warner (1990)
use Saturdays on the Tokyo stock exchange and U.S. returns of Japanese dually-listed stocks
to investigate the impact of trading on volatility when public Information arrival Is reduced. Stolt
and Whaley (1990) make the case that the opening mechanism of the NYSE increases stock
return volatility, whereas Amihud and Mendelson (1991) use the fact that the Tokyo stock
exchange has two trading periods to argue that higher opening volatility is mostly the result of the
incorporation of overnight Information. Foster and George (1992) use trading and non-trading
period returns of dually-listed stocks and control stocks that trade only In the U.S. to argue that
the greater volatility at the open is due to the accumulation of orders at the open. Papers in this
literature focus on trading and nontrading period returns because there are no differences among.
stocks in the arrival of public information during the trading period for the experiments they
conduct.
In this paper, we Investigate the determinants of stock return volatility in a setting where
the rate of arrival of public information differs predictably acmss stocks during the trading day.
We compare the intraday return behavior during the U.S. trading day or European, Japanese, and
I

American stocks listed on the NYSE or the AMEX.' For European stocks, the arrival of public
information drops off at the end of the morning in the U.S. as the European business day comes
to an end. In contrast, for Japanese stocks, the anival of public information is uniformly low during
the U.S. trading day because the business day in Japan does not overlap with the trading day
ii the U.S. Hence, using these three classes of stocks, we compare stocks with very different
patterns of public.inforrnation arrival. Since the rate of public information arrival changes during
the day across our sample, the sample is also well-suited to study the relation between the arrival
of public information, volatility, trading volume, and bid-ask spreads. In particular, the sample is
useful to address the issue of whether the arrival of public information leads to more trading,
either because the arrivals of public and private information are correlated or because, as in the
models of Varian (1989) and Harris and Raviv (1993). investors trade on public information
because it changes their priors differentially.
If public information is an important determinant of volatility, one would expect European
stocks to experience a drop in volatility relative to American stocks when the European business
day ends. We rind that indeed more of the daily volatility of European stocks accrues during the
morning than for American stocks with similar daily volume and volatility, but the difference is not
statistically significant. The rate of accrual of volatility does not significantly differ between
American stocks and European stocks in any of the four 65-minute trading periods from 10:35
to 14:55; further, the cumulative difference in the rate of accrual of volatility between European
stocks and the American matching stocks never exceeds 2% of daily volatility. When we turn to
'In an interesting recent paper, Kleldon and Werner (1993) examine the intraday patterns of
cross-listed U.K stocks from the open in London to their close in the U.S. to understand better
the implications of 24-hour trading of stocks. In their paper, they do not provide the comparisons
across classes of stocks with different arrival rates of public information which are the focus of
this paper. In this paper, we treat European stocks as a group and Japanese stocks as a group.
Consequently, we do not investigate separately London-listed stocks. The results we report for
the European sample are not inconsistent with those of Kleidon and Werner (1993), though.
2