NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RENTAL ADJUSThIENT AND VALUATION
OF REAL ESTATE IN OVERBUILT
MARKETS: FUNDAMENTAL VERSUS
REPORTED OFFICE MARKET VALUES
IN SYDNEY AUSTRALIA
Panic H. Hendershott
Working Paper No. 4775
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1994
I thank BOMA for supplying me with data, Bond University for making facilities available to
me while the first draft of the paper was being written, and Frank Russell Australia for financial
support. The cooperation of the Sydney LW Research and Consultancy Office, which supplied
me with real rental data (including rent concessions) and vacancy rate projections of market
participants, was crucial to the success of this project Individn1c supplying useful input include
Adrian Barrington of BOMAI David Dickinson, N. IL Seek, and 5.0. Slim of the Sydney LW
Research and Con sultancy Office, John Bowers, Ralph Jackson. and David MacKenzie of Frank
Russell, and Bariy Reece of the University of NSW. Earlier versions of this paper were
presented at the University of Connecticut/AREUEA/Fannie Mae 1993 International Real Estate
Conference, Mystic, CF. October 1993 and the first Global Finance Conference in Monterey, CA
April 1994. The empirical estimates differ from the October 1993 draft, based upon a revised
rental adjustment equation. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Public Economics.
of
Any opinions expressed ale those of the author and not those of the National Bureau
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4775
June 1994
RENTAL ADJUSTMENT AND VALUATION
OF REAL ESTATE IN OVERBUILT
MARKETS: FUNDAMENTAL VERSUS
REPORTED OFFICE MARKET VALUES
IN SYDNEY AUSTRALIA
ABSTRACT
Real estate markets are periodically plagued by excess supply, rent concessions and few
arms-length transactions. During such periods, valuation is problematic. The model presented
here requires the forecasts of future vacancy rates, and equilibrium and actual rental rates.
Vacancy rate forecasts of market participants are obtained, the equilibrium rental rate is specified
as the cost of capital, and a rental adjustment equation is estimated in which realeffective
Sydney office market rents are related to gaps between both natural and actual vacancy rates and
equilibriumandactual real effective rental rates.
Value estimates (relative to replacement cost) for 1992, including that for above-market
leases, are computed and the sensitivity to key assumptions is shown. Value/i'eplaccmentcost
calculations are then made for the entire 1985-92 period and contrasted with comparable
estimates implicit in data published by BOMA and LW, two prominent Australian real estate
sources. Lastly, the ratios of real effective rents to equilibrium rents and value to replacement
cost are projected for the 1993-2006 period.
Pauic FL Hendershott
Max M. Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University
1775 College Road
Columbus. 011 43210-1399
and flEER

real estate will be valued at (approximately)
In equilibrium,
replacement cost. When value exceeds replacement cost in a market, new
value.
construction surges, raising vacancies and lowering rents and thus
When replacement cost exceeds value, replacement construction is deferred,
lowering vacancies and raising rents and value. Moreover, expectations of the
construction, vacancy and rent responses imply that existing real estate
values will be only modestly sensitive to changes in required real after—tax
tax
returns caused by real interest rate or changes.' Because hig1er long—
term real interest rates lower real estate values, construction declines and
rental income on existing properties rise. That is, the rental cash flows on
existing real estate are more analogous to those on a sluggishly adjusting
loan than to the fixed coupons on a long—term bond; thus the
adjustable—rate
percentage real estate value decline would be far less than that of a long—
tern
bond.
As a result of the construction response mechanism, deviations of real
estate values greater than five percent from replacement cost would be rare in
relatively stable markets, i.e., those without substantial excess supply or
demand. Unfortunately, stable well—functioning is not the way one would
describe office markets in many part of the western world. In London, Tokyo,
most national capitals of Scandinavia, most state capitals of Australia, and
many large U.S. cities, vacancy rates of 20 to 30 percent have been common,
real effective rents have plunged, and values are almost certainly far below
replacement cost. And in the transforming socialist economies of Central and
Eastern Europe, the profit—motivated construction equilibrating mechanism
described above has not existed for at least a half a century. For the value
Hendershott, Follain and Ling (1987) make this point in their analysis
of the impact of the 1986 tax act on real estate values. Ling (1992) extends
the argument in his analysis of the impact of capital gains tax rate changes.

of any type real estate in any locale there to be near replacement cost would
be pure happenstance.
This paper illustrates a method for valuing real estate in overbuilt (or
underbuilt) markets with office building data from Sydney, Australia. The
method is presented in Section 1, where fundamental value is expressed as
replacement cost less the present value of expected below—equilibrium real
rental income. Underpinnings for the calculation of below—equilibrium real
rents are given in Section II; equilibrium real rents are specified and real
rental adjustment equations are estimated using data from the 1970—92 period.
The percentage change in real effective rents is related to gaps between both
the natural and actual vacancy rates and equilibrium and actual real rental
rates.
Expectations of future equilibrium real rents (including real discount
rates) and vacancy rates thus provide a future rental income stream from which
the present value of expected below—equilibrium rental income, and thus
fundamental value, can be computed.
The value/replacement—cost ratio is calculated for Sydney in Section
III, and its sensitivity to a number of assumptions ts indicated. Most
importantly, the 1992 ratio is not sensitive to real interest rate (and thus
risk premium) assumptions owing to offsetting adjustments in below equilibrium
rents and the discount rate. Also, the value of above—market leases, which
likely existed on Sydney buildings leased up in the early l990s, is computed.
In the absence of price Thubbles," price should equal fundamental value
plus the value of above—market leases.2 In Section IV, estimates of the
2 See Flood and Hodrick (1980), Shleifer and Summers (1990) and Stiglitz
(1990) for useful discussions of the literature on asset market bubbles.
While the construction response will not guarentee the absence of bubbles, it
will clearly limit their duration.
2