NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WAVES OF CREATIVE DESTRUCFION:
CUSTOMER BASES AND THE
DYNAMICS OF INNOVATION
Jeremy C. Stein
Working Paper No. 4782
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge. MA 02138
June 1994
This research is supported by MIT's International Financial Services Research Center and the
National Science Foundation. Thanks to Maureen O'Donnell for help in preparing the
manuscript, and to Owen Lamont for research assistance. I amalso grateful for the comments
and suggestions of Daron Acemoglu. Ricardo Caballero, Ken Froot, Rebecca Henderson, Julio
Roternberg, and Alwyn Young. This paper is part of NEER's research program in Corporate
Finance. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NB ER Working Paper #4782
June 1994
WAVES OF CREATh"E DESTRUCTION:
CUSTOMER BASES AND THE
DYNAMICS OF INNOVATION
ABSTRACT
This paper develops a model of repeated innovation with knowledge spillovers. The
model' s novel feature is that firms compete on two dimensions: 1) product quality or cost, where
one firm's innovation ultimately spills over to other finns; and 2) distribution costs, where there
are no spillovers across firms and where incumbent firms' existing customer bases give them a
competitive advantage over would-be entrants. Customer bases have two important
consequences: 1) they can in some circumstances dramatically reduce the long-nm average level
of innovation; 2) they lead to endogenous bunching, or waves, in innovative activity.
Jeremy C. Stein
E52-448, Sloan School of Management
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02 142-1347
and NBER

1. Introduction
Recent work in the literature on innovation and growthhas emphasized the process that
(1942) labeled "creative destruction. In the models of Aghion and Howitt (1992),
Schumpeter
Grossman and Helpman (l991a, l991b), Segerstrom (1991), Segerstrom, Anant and Dinopoulos
(1990), and Caballero and Jaffee (1993), new, higher-quality products are introduced by new
firms, thereby displacing incumbent firms. The introduction of these new products in turn sets
the stage for yet another round of innovation, entry, and displacement, because of the existence
of knowledge spillovers--once a new product is introduced, future generations of innovators can
learn from it and improve upon it.
The image that comes through in these papers is of a very fluid corporate sector, with
new companies continually pushing aside e,dsting ones. Indeed, this fluidity is seen as an
essential element in the growth process: it is only through the destruction of existing firms'
market shares and profits that new, better products--and the embedded knowledge that
accompanies them--come into being.
Yet casual empiricism suggests that the corporate landscape may be much less fluid than
for
these models envision. Many companies maintain their market shares in given product areas
environment in which
a very long time. Often they manage to do so even as the technological
they operate changes dramatically, and the nature of the products they sell change along with
It.
in a
There are two broad reasons why established firms might be expected to survive
firms may just have a
rapidly changing environment. First, and most simply, established
firms naturally tend to
comparative advantage in innovation. This would imply that established
1

stay "on the cutting edge" of new products andnew technology, since they actually pioneer the
majority of improvements. Ifthis is the case, the survival of such firms would be no surprise—
they survive because they are either the highest quality, or most efficient producers at any point
in time.'
A second possibility is that established firms are nt always on the cutting edge of new
products and technology, but rather, they have a number of QShr competitive weapons at their
disposal that allow them to fend off more innovative newcomers and to thereby forestall the
process of creative destruction. For example, long-established firms are likely to have a base
of loyal customers and well-developed distribution networks that allow them to market their
products more efficiently. Or they may have long-standing relationships with capital suppliers
that allow them to finance their plant and inventories more cheaply. In either case, the net result
is that the established firms may be able to compete successfully against newcomers, even if the
newcomers bring with them substantial technological improvements.
The latter explanation of corporate survival in the face of outside product innovation—
which I will call the "customer base" story--fits well with the literature on competitive strategy
(e.g., Porter, 1980). Work in this area repeatedly emphasizes that innovative, high-quality
'The literaturehas identified a number of factors that may help to foster innovation inside
already-established firms. Gilbert and Newbery (1982) argue that incumbentsarelikely to have
a greater strategic incentive to invest in innovative activity than potential entrants when the
innovations in question are incremental in nature. Moreover, large established firms may have
certain organizational advantages in doing incremental innovation, as stressed by Schumpeter
(1942) -- e.g., preferential access to information or trained scientific personnel. Combining
these strategic and organizational arguments, Henderson (1993) concludes that: "established
firms are likely to dominate incremental innovation, while entrants are likely to dominate radical
innovation" (p. 252). Thus if most innovation proceeds at an incremental pace, one might
expect that established firms would naturally be able to stay on the cutting edge.
2