NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
OVER-THE-COUNTER DERIVATIVES
AND SYSTEMIC RISK TO THE
GLOBAL FINANCIAL SYSTEM
Michael R. Darby
Working Paper No. 4801
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1994
I acknowledge very useful comments from Andreas Grunbichier, Mark Levonian, Francis
Longstaff, Susan M. Phillips, and Lynne 0. Zucker and research assistance from Paul J. Alapat,
Christine Beckman, and Lynda I. Kim. An earlier version of this paper was presented at the
Conference on International Financial Markets in North-East Asia: Assessment and Prospects,
organized by the Seoul National University and Korea Development Institute, Hilton Hotel,
Seoul, Korea, May 26-27, 1994. This paper is part of NBER's research programs in Asset
Pricing and International Finance and Macroeconomics. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4801
July 1994
OVER-THE-COUNTER DERiVATIVES
AND SYSTEMIC RISKTO THE
GLOBALFINANCIAL SYSTEM
ABSTRACF
Over the last decade dealing in derivative financial instruments (basically forwards,
futures, options and combinations of these), particularly in the over-the-counter (OTC derivatives
market has become a central activity for major wholesale banks and financial institutions.
Measured in terms of notional principal amount, OTC derivatives outstanding are near, if not
greater than, US$10 trillion, even after deduction of double-counting for intra-dealer transactions.
Major new regulatory initiatives, including proposed new capital requirements, are under
consideration as a means of reducing systemic risk. This paper examines the concept of systemic
risk-- thatfailureofonefirmwillleadtothefailureofalargenumberofotherflrmsorindeed
the collapse of the international financial system. Alternative proposed definitions are considered
and integrated and the effects of OTC derivatives on these risks discussed. The key conclusion
is that systemic risk has been reduced by the development of the OTC derivatives market due
to shifting economic risks to those better able either to bear the risk or, in many cases, cancel
it against offsetting risks. The implications of the Baste 11 capital proposals for systemic risk are
analyzed and shown to increase this risk due to encouraging transactions which increase portfolio
risks of the dealers and discouraging transactions which decrease their portfolio risk.
Michael R. Darby
Anderson Graduate School of Management
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90024-1481
and NBER

The rapid rise of over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives to a central role in wholesale
banking and finance with notional principal amounts rivaling stock market capitalization
poses central policy issues for banking and financial regulation. In particular, policymakers
are concerned with whether OTC derivatives have increased systemic risk of general failure
of the global financial system. This paper attempts to bridge the gap between the academic
literature and regulatory concerns by defining "systemic risk" rigorously and examining
whether or not such risk has been increased or decreased by the advent of the OTC
derivative market.
Since beginning work on what at the time seemed a somewhat esoteric theme,
derivatives have become as tiniely as each morning's newspapers. This may point out one
of the most salient features of the integrated global financial market --thespeed of change
and evolution. We must always remember that evolution in the financial markets --likein
infectious viruses -- is often responsive to attempted cures. As a result, we are constantly
at risk with regulatory initiatives of engendering new financial products and procedures to
get around the latest rules that may pose more risk to the system than the prior practices
which were the reason for the new regulations.
While new regulations may always engender unintended consequences in the
international financial markets, this is particularly likely when regulations are aimed at
dealing with a loosely defined concept such as systemic risk. If regulators are not sure what
target they are shooting at, it should not be surprising if they hit something else.
In Section I, I first describe swaps and other derivatives, their magnitude and uses
in the global financial market. Next I turn to the concept of systemic risk and the reasons
1

that many officials believe that market forces cannot be relied upon to achieve appropriate
self-regulation in the over-the-counter swaps and derivatives market. Section III contains
an analysis of market arrangements in response to risk elements in the current lightly
regulated regime. Section IV is a review and evaluation of the "Basle II" proposals for
capital requirements on derivatives. Finally, I draw some conclusions on the implications
of these financial instruments for the operation of the global financial niarket.
I. Swaps and Derivatives
Since the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system and the capital controls used to
permit a modicum of monetary policy discretion while maintaining pegged exchange rates,
the financial markets have become increasingly globally integrated.' In part this global
integration is a return to earlier norms, but to a greater extent it reflects the revolution in
commu nication which has occurred contemporaneously.
A parallel development which has perhaps proceeded furthest in the United States
is the securitization of traditional bank liabilities. As banks' traditional intermediary
functions have grown less and less profitable, major financial institutions have increasingly
turned to trading and underwriting activities in order to remain competitive with alternative
uses of their shareholders' capital. Furthermore, governments' efforts to regulate --and
implicitly to tax -- bank assets have played a significant role in banks' increasing
concentration on off-balance-sheetproducts. In addition, needs to strengthen balance sheets
and capital pressures, from both the market and regulators, have been particularly relevant
in the general movement to off-balance-sheet activities and fee-producing initiatives. Over-
2