NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE IMPACT OF MONETARY
POLICY ON BANK BALANCE SHEETS
Anil K. Kashyap
Jeremy C. Stein
Working Paper No. 4821
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge,MA 02138
August 1994
This paperwas prepared forthe Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy1 held in April
of the Federal
1994. The paper could not have been written without the very generous assistance
Brewer, Charles Evans,Kenneth
Reserve Bank ofChicago,particularlyNancy Andrews,Elijah
Kuttner.and Peter Schneider. ".'e also thank Kip King and John
Leusnerfor researchassistance,
for the
and Maureen O'Donnell for help in preparing the manuscript. Finally, we are grateful
Kienow, Allan Meltzer,
comments and suggestions of Marvin Goodfriend, Glenn Hubbard, Peter
National Science
Julio Rotemberg and Mike Woodford. This research was supported by the
M.I.T. This paper
Foundation, and by the International Financial Services Research Center at
Economics. Any
is part of NBER's research programs in Corporate Finance and Monetary
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those ofthe National Bureau of Economic
Research.
sections of text,
1994 by Anil K. Kashyap and Jeremy C. Stein. All rights reserved. Short
provided that full
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
credit, including notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper #4821
August 1994
ThE IMPACT OF MONETARY
POLICY ON BANK BALANCE SHEETS
ABSTRACT
Thispaper uses disaggregated data on bank balance sheets to provide a test of the lending
view of monetary policy transmission. We argue that if the lending view is correct, one should
expect the loan and security portfolios of large and small banks to respond differentially to a
contraction in monetary policy. We first develop this point with a theoretical model; we then
test to see if the model's predictions are borne out in the data.
Anil K. Kashyap Jeremy C. Stein
Graduate School ofBusiness Sloan School of Management
University of Chicago Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Chicago, IL 60637 Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER and NBER

1. Introduction
When the Federal Reserve tightens monetary policy, it exchanges bonds for bank
reserves. A longstanding question is whether this interaction with the banking system has any
effects beyond those on bond-market interest rates. That is, in addition to the textbook "money"
channel, does monetary policy also work in part through a distinct "bank lending" channel?
Over the last few years, there has been a resurgence of interest in this question, and it
has generated a good deal of both new research and controversy. In this paper, we propose to
attack the question from a quite different angle than has other recent work, by examining what
the so-called "lending view" has to say about cross-sectional differences in the way that bank
balance sheets respond to a monetary policy shock. More specifically, we argue that if the
tending view is correct, one should expect the loan and security portfolios of large and small
banks to respond differentially to a contraction in monetary policy. We first develop this point
with a theoretical model; then we then test to see if our predictions are borne out in the data.
By focusing on disaggregated bank data, we can most directly address what skeptics seem
to think is the weakest part of the case for the lending view: the proposition that the Fed can,
simply by changing reserves, affect banks' loan supply schedules. A number of authors have
argued that this proposition is theoretically dubious. For example, Romer and Romer (1990)
emphasize that banks can always, if needed, finance themselves with non-deposit sources of
funds. Thus even if contractionary Fed policy can reduce the deposit financing available to the
banking sector, banks can simply and frictionlessly make up the shortfall by issuing, say, large
denomination CD's, medium-term notes, or some other security. The bottom line, according
to Romer and Romer (1990) and others, is that bank loan supply is effectively completely
1

insulated from Fed policy.
This argumentis just anapplication of Modigliani-Miller logic to the banking firm. In
an M-M world, shocks to the liability side of a bank's balance sheet should not affect its "real
side" behavior, namely its willingness to supply loans for a given interest rate. Therefore, in
order to make a convincing case for a lending channel of monetary policy transmission, one has
to establish that the M-M argument does not apply to banking firms in this context. That is, one
has to show that because of capital market imperfections, shocks to banks' deposit base cannot
be frictionlessly offset with other sources of financing, and therefore translate into "real" effects
on their lending behavior.
We attempt to do so in two basic steps. First, we develop a theoretical model that is
designed to: I) illustrate how the existence of capital market imperfections facing the typical
bankingfirmcan generate a lending channel; 2) highlight the cross-sectional differences between
banks with different degreesof access to non-deposit financing that arise when there are such
capital market imperfections. Perhaps the most important thing to emphasize about this model
of the banking firm is that it is exactly the same sort of model that has been widely applied to
study the implications of capital market imperfections for non-financial companies.
Our second step is to begin to test the cross-sectional implications of this model
empirically. Again, the types of tests that we use are very closely analogous to those used to
study the investment behavior of non-financial firms. Loosely speaking, we test the following
sort of prediction of our model: Fed tightening should have a disproportionately large impact
on the lending behavior of smaller banks, who are more likely to have difficulty substituting into
non-deposit sources of external finance. This directly parallels the empirical strategy in the
2