NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHY IS INFLATION SKEWED?
A DEBT AND VOLATILITY STORY
Joshua Aizenman
Ricardo Hausmann
Working Paper No. 4837
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambiidge, MA 02138
August 1994
Useful comments by Guillermo Calvo, Leonaido Leiderman, Michael Gavin and the seminar
participants at the 1DB are gratefully acknowledged. We also wish to thank Justino De L.a (Yuz
for econometric support. All enors are ours. This paper is part of NBER's research programs
in International Finance and Macroeconomics and International Trade and Invesiment. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the 1DB or the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
1994 by Joshua Aizenman and Ricaido Hausmann. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper #4837
August 1994
WHYIS INFLATION SKEWED?
A DEBT AND VOLATILITY STORY
A B STR ACT
This paper studies the patterns of inflation skewness in 56 countries. Monthly data
suggests that inflation is posicively skewed. We investigate linkages between skewness and non-
linearity, showing that concavity (convexity) will lead to negative (positive) skewness if the
independentvariable is symmetrically distributed. We construct a public finance model for a
developing country that uses inflation tax and external borrowing as the residual means for fiscal
financing. The model predicts a convex dependency of inflation on output. whem inflation
skewness depends positively on inflation volatility, and external debt difficulties magnify the
skewness. We conclude the paper with an assessment of the patterns of inflation between 1979-
1993 for the 56 countries. Overall, the patterns are consistent with the predictions of the model.
Joshua Aizenman Ricardo Hausmann
Department of Economics Inter-American Development Bank
Dartmouth College 1300 New York Avenue, NW
6106 Rockefeller Hall Stop W0304
Hanover, NH 03755 Washington, DC 20577
and NBER

Recent decades have been turbulent for Latin American countries and other
developing countries, a period associated with high and volatile inflation, terms of trade
instability, and external debt problems. A question that deserves further attention is the
impact of the resultant volatility on macroeconomic performance. Recent studies have
shown that macroeconomic volatility impacts negatively on investment and growth.'
The economic explanation for these patterns, however, deserves further investigation.
The purpose of this paper is to focus narrowly on one aspect of volatility -its
impact on patterns of inflation. Figure 1 plots the volatility/skewness patterns of
monthly inflation in a sample of 56countries during the period of 1979-1993. 2 Table I
summarizes the avenge skewness, variance and the mean of inflation rates and inflation
tax rates, demonstrating that inflation is positively skewed. 3, Our paper will trace
possible economic reasons that explain this pattern.
In section 1 we identify the linkage between skewness and non-linearity. We
See Rodrick (1991), Barro (1991), Aizenman and Marion (1993), Flausrnann
(1994), Dornbusch and Edwards (1994) and the references therein.
2 Oursample was restricted by the availability of monthly data. It is composed of
18 OECD countries, and 38 developing countries.
3 Theinflation tax rate is defined by 11(1 +I),where I is the inflation rate. This ratio
measures the implicit tax rate imposed by inflation on money balances, and is bounded
between values close to zero and one. The advantage of focusing on the inflation tax
rate is that it is a stationary variable that has a simple public finance interpretation.
4
Theskewness reported in this study is defined by the third central moment
divided by the cube of the standard deviation. While inflation is positively skewed both
in the OECD countries and the developing countries, skewness is lower for the first
group --theaverage inflation skewness for OECD and developing countries is 0.92 and
1.7, respectively. The avenge inflation tax rate skewness for OECD and developing
countries is .868 and 1.02, respectively.

Figure 1. Skewness and Variance of Inflation
56 CountrIes, February 1979-October 1993
10-
0
C
I.0—
02
2-
-2-
Variance of inflation
Source: International Financial Statistics, IMF.