NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A THEORY OF THE WELFARE STATE
Hans-Werner S inn
Working Paper No. 4856
NATIONALBUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1994
This paper has been prepared for the SJE conference on "The Future of the Welfare State" in
Aarhus, Denmark, September 1994. Ii is part of the CEPR project "Monitoring European
Integration." The author gratefully acknowledges research assistance by Marcel Thum. This
paper is part of NBER's research program in Public Economics. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1994 by Hans-Werner S inn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper #4856
September 1994
A ThEORY OF THE WELFARE STATE
ABSTRACT
The welfare state can be seen as an insurance device that makes lifetime careers safer,
increases risk taking and suffers from moral hazard effects. Adopting this view, the paper studies
the trade-off between average income and inequality, evaluating redistributive equilibria from an
allocative point of view. It identifies the properties of an optimal welfare state and shows that
constant returns to risk taking are likely to imply a redistribution paradox where more
redistribution results in more inequality. In general, optimal taxation will either imply that the
redistribution paradox is present or that the economy operates at a point of its efficiency frontier
where more inequality implies a lower average income.
Hans-Werner Sinn
Department of Economics
University of Munich
Schackstrasse 4
80539 MUnchen
GERMANY
and NBER

I. Redisiribulion and Insurance
While this may be the time to turn the welfare state around, it is also the time to warn against
throwing the baby out with the bathwater. Economists have learned so much about the Laffer
curve, Leviathan, and a myriade of disincentive effects brought about by government
intervention that they have lost sight of the allocative advantages of the welfare state.'
From an allocative point of view, the main advantage of the welfare state is the
insurance or risk reducing function of redistributive taxation. To finance commonly accessible
public goods and public transfers, governments take more taxes from the rich than from the
poor, thus reducing the variance of real lifetime incomes. To the extent that the variance of
lifetime incomes is not predictable when people are born, this activity can be regarded as
welfare increasing insurance. Every insurance contract involves a redistribution of resources
from the lucky to the unlucky, and most redistributive measures of the state can be interpreted
as insurance if the time span between judging and taking these measures is sufficiently long.
Redistributive taxation and insurance are two sides of the same coin.
It is true, in principle, that the insurance function of the government budget could
possibly have been privately provided. However, it is difficult to imagine endowing private
agencies with the extensive monitoring and enforcement rights enjoyed by tax authorities, and
in the absence of such rights, moral hazard and adverse selection problems render a broad
based private solution impossible. Also, of course, if the need for fiscal taxation is taken as
given, then the marginal cost of making the existing tax system redistributive may well be
lower than the cost of introducing additional private insurance. The historical growth of the
welfare state can, in part, be seen as a response to the private insurance system's inability to
offer the cheaper solution.
While the production of safety is an important function of the welfare state, the Domar-
Musgrave effect of increased risk taking may be even more important. Protected by the welfare
state people engage in risky and profitable activities which they otherwise would not have
dared to undertake. Risky occupations might not be chosen without the protection of the
'In fact, none of the favourable allocative effects of the welfare state discussed in this paper have been
mentioned in the illuminating and important book "Turning Sweden Around" by Lindbeck, Molander, Persson
and others (1994). The authors do not even include the redistribution of income in their list of "Basic
responsibilities of the state"; ci. pp.14-16.

2
welfare state, and it would be difficult to find entrepreneurs to supervise risky investment if the
debtor's prison were all the society provided in the case of failure. It is perhaps the most
important function of the social welfare net that it makes people jump over the dangerous
chasms which otherwise would have put a halt to their economic endeavors.
It may, in fact, make them too eager to jump. Protected by the welfare state, people
may neglect to take the necessary care, may take too much risk, and end up in a worse
situation than without such protection. This is the fear that an overwhelming majority of policy
advisors seems to have.
The effect on risk taking has important repercussions for the observable degree of
inequality in the economy, for, if a given set of people will chose more risk ex ante, they will
typically be more unequal ex post. Risk averse societies may exhibit relatively little inequality,
and the more redistribution there is, the larger the pre-tax inequality tolerated may be.
The paper offers a simple model that makes it possible to analyse the interaction
between redistributive taxation, risk taking, and inequality and provides unambiguous welfare
evaluations of the allocations achieved. As suggested by Harsanyi (1953, 1955), Rawls (1971),
and others, the social welfare function for evaluating the income distribution is identical with a
representative individual's utility function for risk evaluations. However, in the model, people
really are behind the veil of ignorance when they make their decisions and evaluate the
resulting income distribution. Their amount of risk taking ex ante determines their degree of
inequality ex post.
The paper's main focus is on the policy trade-off between income equality and per-
capita income. This is not on the trade-off between equity and efficiency, because equity is an
aspect of efficiency. Will redistributive taxation induce too much or too little risk taking? How
does it compare with ideal insurance? Will the pie shrink when it is more evenly distributed?
Will more redistribution result in less inequality? What are the properties of an optimal
redistributive tax system? These are among the questions addressed in this paper.
While little is known about the issue, there are noteworthy exceptions from the general
lack of interest in the insurance function of redistributive taxation. The exceptions include the
literature on risk taking and taxation, jn the context of asset choice, savings or occupational