NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ISSUES CONCERNING NOMINAL
ANCHORS FOR MONETARY POLICY
Robert Flood
Michael Mussa
Working Paper No. 4850
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1994
The authors thank Peter Garber, Dale Henderson, Robert King, Bennett McCaUum, and Steven
Weisbrod for discussions of various aspects of this paper. This paper is part of NBER's research
programs in International Finance and Macroeconomics and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
1994 by Robert Flood and Michael Mussa. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit.
including notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper #4850
September 1994
ISSUES CONCERNING NOMINAL
ANCHORS FOR MONETARY POLICY
ABSTRACF
This paper presents a selective survey of issues relevant to the choice of nominal anchors
for monetary policy. Section I reviews long price-level histories for the United Kingdom and
United States, whichrevealthat the price level behaved very differently following WWII in these
countries than it had done in previous post-war experiences. In particular following WWII the
responsibilities of monetary policy expanded to encompass a business-cycle stabilization role and
the nominal anchor shifted from the fixed anchor or price-level stability to the moving anchor
of inflation-rate stability. The remaining sections of the paper review, in the context of a variety
of models, some of the considerations that are relevant to setting the average inflation rate in
countries without a fixed nominal anchor.
Robert Flood Michael Mussa
Research Department Research Department
International Monetary Fund International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW 700 19th Sweet, NW
Washington. DC 20431 Washington, DC 20431
and NBER p4 NBER

- ii
-
Contents
Summary jjj
I.
Introduction
II. Long Price-Leve1 Histories 3
III. InflAtion, Public Finance and Political Economy 6
lv. Stabilization Policy and inflation 9
1. The case for monetary stabilization of the real
economy 10
2. The importance of expectations 12
3. Policy rules 15
4. Specific policy rules evaluated in multi-country models 16
5. specific monetary policy rules are temporary 19
V. Summary and Conclusions 23
Text Tables
I. Identification of the Regime Minimizing Three Simple
Illustrative Loss Functions 20
Appendix 24
Figures
1. Long Price Level Histories: United Kingdom and United 4a
States
2 Annual Inflation: United Kingdom and United States Ab
3 Inflation and Output Growth Scatterplots: United Kingdom 6a
and United States
4. Inflation v.s, Seignorage/GOP Ba
Appendix Tables
2. Industrial and Other European Countries' Data Used
in Charts 25
Western Hemisphere and Middle East Countries' Data Used
3.
in Charts 26
4. African Countries' Data Used in Charts 27
5. Asian Countries' Data Used in Charts 28
Appendix Figures
5. Long Price Level Histories: France, Italy and Spain 28a
6. Inflation v.s. Seignorage/CDP: 1960-69, 1970-79 28b
References 29

- fli -
Summary
A nominal anchor is a nominal variable that is the target for
monetary policy. In this paper we distinguish three types of such anchors.
First, when monetary policy fixes the currency price of a commodity or a
group of commodities we refer to such an anchor as a fixed nominal anchor,
with the gold standard as a famous example. Second, and more generally,
when monetary policy targets the growth of a nominal magnitude such as the
price level, a monetary aggregate or nominal income for example, building on
an inherited past, we refer to such an anchor as a moving nominal anchor.
The third arrangement, which is not completely distinct from the previous
two, aims at fixing or managing the price of one or more countries'
currencies in terms of another country's currency. Countries entering into
such a system are agreeing to share a more basic nominal anchor such as one
of the countries' inflation target and the nominal systems in those
countries inherit properties of the underlying nominal anchor.
Before WWII and the great depression many countries adhered to a
commodity standard, on and off, with the gold/silver standard the best-known
example. During this period countries following such a standard experienced
long-run price stability; inflations, which accompanied wars, were followed
by equivalently-sized deflations after the wars. In the period following
the great depression and WWII monetary policy was often placed into a more
activist role and was expected to make an effort to help stabilize the real
economy as well as to deliver politically-tolerable inflation performance.
Much attention in recent years has been directed toward: (1) the
appropriate design of monetary policy using theoretical arguments and data-
based simulations; (2) the role of monetary policy rules; and (3) the
ability of the private sector to exploit certain monetary policy rules as
in, for example, a speculative attack on a fixed exchange rate rule. We
review selected aspects of this literature drawing out features that we
think may be robust across industrial countries and possibly important for
their average inflation-rate choice.
Finally, it should be emphasized that in the actual conduct of
monetary policy, governments and central banks do not generally behave in a
manner that can be summarized easily in a mathematical equation. Almost
always, some degree of judgement is exercised by a country's monetary
authority. Nevertheless, the conduct of monetary policy is not random and
undisciplined; it is governed by reasonably well-defined objectives, in the
context of a broad understanding of how monetary policy affects the real
economy, the financial system, and the price level. In the end, it is the
fact that there is something systematic about the conduct of monetary
policy, and about its effects, that allows economic analysis to shed some
light, at least potentially, on the effects of alternative monetary policies
in supplying a nominal anchor for the economic system. The practical
importance and implications of any such analytical exercise, of course, need
to be interpreted with an appropriate degree of caution.