NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MARX-Up PRICrNG IN
MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS
G. William Schwej-t
Working Paper No. 4863
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC
RESEARCH
1050 Massachuse Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1994
The Bradley Policy Research
Center, William E. Simon Graduate
School of Business
Administration, University of Rochester,
provided support for this research. Comments
from
Stephen Kaplan, Lisa Meulbroek Richard
Ruback, and the participants at the 1994 American
Finance Association meetings and
the Harvard Finance and Control
Conference are greatly
appreciated. I have also benefitted from
discussions about this topic with Brad
Fischel, Gregg Jarrell and Mark Wolfson. Cornell, Dan
This paper is part of NBER's research
Asset Pricing. Any opinions program in
expressed are those of the author and not those of
Bureau of Economjc Research. the National
© 1994 by 0. William Schwert.
All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit,
notice, is given to the source. including ©

NBER Working Paper #4863
September 1994
MARX-Up PRICING IN
MERGERS AND ACQUISmONS
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the premiums
paid in successful tender offers and
mergers involving
NYSE and Amex-listed target firms from
1975-91 in relation to pre-announcement stock
price
runups. It has been conventional to measure
corporate control premiums including the price
runups that occur before the initial formal bid. There has been
little evidence on the relation
between the pre-bid runup and the
post-announcement premium (the premium paid to
target
stocltholders measured from the date of the first
bid). Under what circumstances are
runups
associated with larger total premiums? The
evidence in this paper shows that in mostcases, the
pre-bid runup and the post-announcement
premium are uncorrelatetj (i.e. little or no substitution
between the runup and the
post-announcement premium), so therunup is an added cost to the
bidder. This has important implications
for assessing the costs of illegal insider
trading based
on private information about a potential bid.
G. William Schwert
William E. Simon Graduate School
of Business Administration
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER

Sche,r Mark-up Pricing in M&A
1. Introduction
Many studies have documented the large premiums paid by bidder firmsto acquire control
of exchange-listed target fin-us. The size and
variability of these control premiums raise several
interesting questions. For example, it is conventional to include a period of
pre-bid runup in the
targets stock price as part of the control premium paid by winning bidders.
As shown below, the
average runup is about half of the total premium paid in successful takeovers
(the other part of the
premium is the markup over the stock price the day before the first bid is
announced). What causes
pre-bid runups, and how do they affect the total control premium? These
questions provide the focus
for this empirical study of 1,398 successful takeovers
of New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) and
American Stock Exchange (Amex) -listedtarget firms for the 1975-91 period.
The spate of insider trading cases associated with
mergers and acquisitions (M&A) during
the 1980s drew significant attention to the
consequences of such activities. Meulbroek (1992) shows
that daily stock returns are correlated with the
illegal trading activities of insiders for firms where
the Securities and Exchange Commission (S.E.C.)
successfully prosecuted insider trading. She
estimates that almost half of the
runup in the month before initial merger or tender offer
announcement occurs on the days when insiders traded illegally,
although insiders traded on a small
subset of the days in the runup period on
average.
Jarrell and Poulsen (1989) study 172 successful cash tenderoffers in the 198 1-85
period.
They conclude that there are several sources of legitimate information
available to market
participants that allow investors to anticipate takeover
announcements, including announcements
of 1 3D filings when investors acquire more than 5% ofthe target firm's stock. They find weak
evidence that pre-bid runups substitute for post-bid
markups in their sample, so that premiums are

Schi.'ert: MarA-up Pricing in M&A
higher ceferis paribus when runups are
large.
The question of whether illegai insider
trading damages bidders by raising the
price paid to
acquire a target ni-rn has been highly contentious.
There are many lawsuits against
investment banks
and others who might have leaked
private information that led to
illegal insider t.rading. For
example, Anheuser-Busch sued Paul Thayer
and A. G. Edwards because it felt
that leaks of inside
information b' Thayer (a director of
AnheuserBusch) caused it to
pay too much in acquiring
Campbell Taggart in 1982.' Litton sued Lehman
Brothers because insider
trading by Dennis Levine
allegedly caused Litton to pay too much
when it acquired Itek in 1983.2
Maxus sued Kidder
Peabody, Ivan Boesky and Martin
Siegel because the price it paid to
acquire Natoinas in 1983 was
allegedly inflated by Boesky's illegal insider
trading.3 FMC Corporation sued Goldman
Saclis,
Boesky and others because the
price it paid stocitholders in its 1986
recapitaiization plan was
allegedly inflated by the insider
trading activities of Boesky.4
This paper examinesthe
theoretical and empirical relations between
pre-bid runups and post-
bid markups conditional
on various types of information that
were available in the market prior to
merger or tender offer bids from 1975-91. Section
2 reviews the literature on auctions
and develops
the hypotheses to be tested.
Section 3 describes the
sample of mergers and acquisitions thatare used
in the tests. Section 4
analyzes several regression tests that relate
pre-bid runups to post-bid
markups. Section 5 analyzes alternate
specifications for some of the statistical
tests. Section 6
contains bnef concluding remarks.
AeepBuschCs. Paul
elaL. No, CA3-S57R(N. Tex.
for an analysisof this case.
1988). SeeCornellandSi (1992)
LittonIndustries . Lhma, arathers Ku eb
734F. Supp. lOll (S.D.Y. 1990).
Maxus
v. Kidder Peabody, eta!., No. Sl-15583M(298D. Tex. 1987).
FMC
Corporagon . Boesky. eta!. 852 F.2d 981,994(7th Cir. 1988).