NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT CAPITAL
STRUCTURE? SOME EVIDENCE FROM
INTERNATIONAL DATA
Raghuram G. Rajan
Luigi Zingales
Working Paper No. 4875
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1994
Rajan thanks the Center for Research on Securities Prices while Zingales thanks the Graduate
School of Business for funding. This project was also made possible with a grant from the
Center for International Business Research at the University of Chicago. We thank Patricia
O'Brien, Douglas Diamond, Eugene Fama, Steve Kaplan, Anil Kashyap, Merton Miller, James
Seward and Rob Vishny for helpful discussions, and participants in workshops at the University
of Chicago (Finance and Junior Faculty Lunch Group), HEC-University of Montr6al, Indiana
University, University of Maryland, NBER Summer Institute, the Stockholm School of
Economics and the 1994 WFA meetings for comments. We are indebted to Eduardo Gonzales
for excellent research assistance, and Andrew Alford for invaluable help in getting us acquainted
with Global Vantage. This paper incorporates part of a C.R.S.P. working paper entitled "Notes
on International Capital Structure". This paper is part of NBER's research program in Corporate
Finance. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
© 1994 by Raghurarn G. Rajan and Luigi Zingales. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Thirty six years and hundreds of papers aner Modigliani and Miller's seminal work, what do we
really know about corporate capital structure choice? Theory has clearly made some progress on the
subject.We nowunderstand the most important departures from the Modigliani and Miller assumptions
that make capital structurerelevant to a firm's value. However, very little is known about the empirical
relevance of the different theories. Empirical work has unearthed some stylized facts on capital structure
choice, but this evidence is based on tirms in the United States alone, and it is not at all clear how these
facts relate to different theoretical models. Without testing the robustness of these fmdings outside the
environment in which they were uncovered, we cannot determine whether these empirical regularities are
merely spurious correlations, let alone whether they support one theory or another.
l'his paper attempts to start tilling this gap in our knowledge. Our primary objective is to
establish whether the choice of capital structure in other countries is based on factors similar to those
influencing capital structure of U.S. firms. In doing so. we do not restrict ourself to attempting to
reproduce the regularities found in the U.S. in other countries, but we try to go deeper in understanding
the theoretical rationale behind them. The use of international data provides an unique opportunity for
this analysis. To the extent other countries are similar to the U.S.. they provide an independent sample
to test the received wisdom. To the extent they have different institutional structures, they increase our
ability to discriminate among alternative theories.
The cost of using an international sample is that some time has to be spent in analyzing the
differences between the countries, ranging from accounting practices to legal and institutional
environments. Thus, we start by presenting the typical balance sheet in each of the G-7 countries (the US,
Japan, Germany, France. Italy, the U.K., and Canada). This analysis highlights the effects of different
accounting rules, and also points to the corrections that need to be made so that measures of leverage are
comparable across countries. After correcting for differences in reporting and valuation, we find that the
extent to which firms are levered is fairly similar across the G-7 countries, with only the U.K. and
Germany being relatively less levered.
We then continue by analyzing the major institutional differences across countries and their likely
impact on financing decisions. Although the G-7 countries are fairly homogeneous in their level or

economic development (in addition to data availability, this is another good reason to focus on them),
their institutions — as exemplified by the tax and bankruptcy code, by the market for corporate
control, and by the historical role played by banks and securities markets — are fairly different. Apart
from establishing a framework within which to understand between-country differences, the review of
institutions is important because they may affect the within-country cross-sectional correlation between
leverage and factors such as firm profitability and firm size. This discussion can help us better identify
the true economic forces underlying the factors.
The within-country cross-sectional analysis indicates that factors correlated with leverage in the
United States are, in general, correlated in the same way in other countries also. But it is much harder
to link these factors to specific theories of capital structure choice. For example, leverage increases in
size in all countries except Germany. A possible explanation is that larger firms are better diversified,
and have a lower probability of being distressed. Lower expected bankruptcy costs enables them to take
on more leverage. But in Germany, the bankruptcy code ensures that firms entering bankruptcy are
usually liquidated. Since liquidation values are generally lower than going concern values, bankruptcy
is potentially more costly in Germany. So there should be a stronger positive correlation between size
and leverage in Germany. Why then do we observe a significant negative correlation? Thissuggests that
either our understanding of the economic underpinnings of the factors (e.g., size), or our
understanding
of the influence of institutions (e.g.. bankruptcy laws), or both, is flawed. More research isclearly called
for.
We are not the first to examjne capital structure across countries. Much of the
previous literature,
though, focuses on aggregate differences in capital structure. Rutherford (1988) is one of the first to
compare leverage across different countries using O.E.C.D. data, and she points out possible biases in
accounting. Mayer (1990) analyzes financing choices in different countries with flow of funds data. The
majority of these studies conclude that the Anglo-American economies (the U.S., the U.K. and Canada)
are less levered than those of Continental Europe and Japan. A number of authors have explained these
2 We
recognize the enormous differences in accounting and reporting standards across countries. What is
surpnsing is the extent to which countries look similar, after correcting for important differences. This is why we
believe that the aberrations in patterns reflect something real rather than simply differences in accounting.
2

aggregate differences as due tO differences in the extent and nature of financial intermediation (see Borio
(1990)), differences in institutional Structures governing bankruptcy and debt renegotiation (see Frankel
and Montgomery (1991)), and differences in the market for corporate control (see, for example, Bergiof
(1990)). Others, such as Mayer (1990), suggest that certain institutions like the tax code cannot explain
aggregate differences. We argue that while institutional differences may drive whatever aggregate
differences in capital structure that do, indeed, exist, their influence may be more subtle than previously
thought.
Because of the paucity of data, few authors have gone beyond aggregate data. Early attempts to
explore the cross sectional determinants of capital structure in different countries were undertaken by
Remmers, et al. (1974) and Stonehill, et a!. (1975). Both studies analyze a sample of large firms from
four selected industries in five countries (U.S., Japan, France, Norway, and the Netherlands) in the
period 1966-72. They find that industry and firm size are not important determinants of leverage, while
profitability and firm growth generally are.' A more recent study is Kester (1986), who compares
leverage in Japan and the U.S.. He finds that after controlling for a number of determinants, there are
no major differences in the extent to which firms are levered in the two countries. We add to this
literature, not simply by presenting correlations between factors and leverage, but by attempting to
unearth the underlying economic forces.
The rest of the paper procedes as follows. Section I describes the aggregate leverage in each
country after implementing the necessary accounting adjustments. Section II overviews the major
institutional differences across the G-7 countries, in section III, we undertake a comparative study of the
cross-sectional determinants of capital structure choices and attempt to find an explanation for the
observed regulariues. Section IV concludes.
'Toy ci al. (1974) also conduct a survey on the objective of financial executives in different countries. Although
their limited sample prevents from wide generalization, it is interesting to mention some of their findings. In all the
counines managers think about capital structure targets in book value (and not in market value) terms. Furthermore,
their main goal appears to be guaranteeing the financial stability of their company and the availability of funds
needed rather than maximizing shareholders' value.
3