NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITIES,
MANAGERIAL DISCRETION, AND
THE SECURITY ISSUE DECISION
Kooyul Jung
Yong-Cheol Kim
René M. Stulz
WorkingPaper No. 4907
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1994
We are grateful for useful comments to Steve Buser, K.C. Clan, David Denis, Harry DeAngelo.
Thomas George, David Mayers, John Persons, Pairicia Reagan, David Scharfstein. Chester Span,
Robert Vishny, an anonymous referee, and to the participants in the 1993 NBER Summer
thstitute and at finance seminars at the Hong Kong Institute of Science and Technology,
University of British Columbia, the Ohio State University and the University of St. Gallen. This
paper is part of NEER's research program in Corporate Finance. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
1994 by Kooyul Jung. Yong-Cheol Kim, and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs. may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper #4907
October 1994
INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITIES,
MANAGERIAL DISCRETION, AND
ThE SECURITY ISSUE DECISION
ABSTRACT
With agency costs of managerial discretion, equity financing is advantageous for the
shareholders of firms with valuable investment opportunities but not for the shareholders of other
firms. Accordingly, we find that firms with good investment opportunities are more likely to
issue equity than debt, have a smaller abnormal return in absolute value when the issue is
announced, and experience substantial asset growth following the issue. Firms that issue equity
even though they do not have good investment opportunities experience a larger abnormal return
in absolute value when the issue is announced and invest morn after the issue than comparable
firms that issue debt.
Kooyul Jung Yong-Cheol Kim
MJ Neeley School of Business Department of Finance
Texas Christian University Clemson University
Fort Worth, TX 76129 314 Sirriew
Clemson, SC 29634-1301
René M. Stulz
Department of Finance
The Max M. Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University
1775 S. College Road, Room 314
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER

SectIon 1. IntroductIon.
Why is it that some firms issue equity and others debt when they raise new funds? The most
popular story, the pecking-order story, is based on the view that Information asymmetries between
managers and new investors make equity issues more costly than debt Issues and therefore imply a
financing hierarchy.' Investors in low flsk debt are affected only to a small extent If management attempts
to seH them overvalued securities and therefore do not discount the securities sold much to proteci
themselves against this adverse selection risk. In contrast, this flsk is large for investors who buy equity
because the value of equity is much more sensitive to new information about the finn's true value. Firms
therefore prefer issuing debt to issuing equity and firnis that cannot avoid Issuing equity experience a
negative stock-price reaction when they do so. This popular story assumes that management maximizes
the wealth of existing shareholders. It leaves no role for the agency costs of managerial discretion that arise
because managements objectives differ from those of shareholders and (or the agency costs of debt that
result from the divergence between the investment policy that maximizes finn value and the one that
maximizes shareholder wealth br a given level of leverage. In this paper we take agency costs seriously
and provide evidence that the popular story should be amended to take mb account the existence of these
costs.
In much of the recent agency literature, ft is assumed that the agency costs of managerial discretion
arise because management values growth even when growth does not benefit shareholders. Wth this view,
management is reluctant to pay out the firm's cash flow, preferring to use it to finance new projects even
when they have a negative net present value (NPV). Management dislikes debt financing because it
restricts its ability to pursue growth. Ii management issues debt, ft has to pay a coupon regularly, satisfy
covenants, and take the risk of losing control of the corporation if it falls to follow the bond indenture. One
way to state this is that debtholders monitor management.2 In contrast, for some firms, an equity issue can
See Myers (1 914). Information asymmetries between management and outside investors do not
necessarily imply a financing hierarchy. Examples of models which emphasize Inbormational asymmetries
but do not obtain a pecking-order result are Brennan and Kraus (1987) and Noe (1985).
2 See Harris and Raviv (1990), Hart and Moore (1990). Jensen (1986) and Stulz (1990).

be very much like an infusion of free cash flow, i.e., of funds that management can spend without being
monitored. Therefore, if management wants to invest in a project of marginal value and does not have
inside funds available, it is more likely to be able to do so If the firm has low leverage and it will prefer to
finance ft with an equity issue.
Though debt financing restricts managements discretion to pursue growth objectives. ft fails to
discriminate perfectly between management exploiting positive NPV growth opportunities and management
growing firm size at the expense of firm value. This means that debt financing is advantageous for
shareholders when a firm has poor investment opportunities, because it constrains management to pay out
cash flow, but not when a firm has good investment opportunities, because ft may prevent that firm from
fully taking advantage of its opportunities. Since equity increases managerial discretion, management would
rather finance with equity if internal funds are insufficient. However, the value of the firm when management
finances with equity inappropriately is lower and therefore outside investors are more likely to intervene and
remove or restrict management.' The greater threat of outside intervention resulting from equity financing
limits the extent to which management finances projects with equity Issues and explains why management
which issues equity when it does not have good projects conveys bad news to shareholders, since it
effectively says that it is not concerned about intervention from outside investors.
In this paper, we find evidence that firms issuing equity belong to two types based on firm
characteristics that are observable at the time of the issue. There are firms with valuable investment
opportunities that obtain financing through an equity issue because this makes them better able to grow
profitably. There are also equity-issuing firms that have poor investment opportunities and have not
exhausted their debt capacity. Without agency costs of managerial discretion, one would not expect the
latter firms to issue equity. Equity issues by such firms are bad news for shareholders and we show that,
controlling for other firm and Issue characteristics, firrns with poor investment opportunities have a more
negative stock-price reaction to equity issues than firms with better investment opportunities. We provide
Further, as argued in Stulz (1988). equity financing reduces the extent to which management and its
ames control votes within the corporation and hence makes outside intervention easier.
2