NBER WORKING PAPERSERIES
THE EFFECF OF CREDITMARKET
COMPhI IUON ON LENDING
RELATIONSHIPS
MitchellA. Petersen
RaghuramG. Rajan
WorkingPaper No. 4921
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachuseus Avenue
Cambridge. MA 02138
November 1994
Wethank Alan Berger, Judith Chevalier. Constance Dunham, Mark Flanneiy, Michael Gibson.
Anne GrØn, Oliver 1-fart. Steven Kaplan.BobMcDonald, George Pennacehi, Canice Prendergast,
Rafael Repullo, Ivo Welch, Lawrence White, and John Wolken for valuable comments on a
previous
draft We are againgrateful toJohn Wolken for making a special effort to provide us
with some of the data. The editor, Andrei Shleifer, and two anonymous referees made
suggestions that improved the paper significantly. We also thank workshop participants at
Brigham Young University, the University of California at Los Angeles. Carnegie Mellon
University, the Center for Economic Policy Research Conference on Financial Regulation at
Toulouse, theConference onIndustrialOrganization andFinance at San Sebastian. the University
of Chicago, Columbia University, the Federal Reserve Boani, the Federal Reserve Banks of
Atlanta and Minneapolis. Harvard Business School, Indiana University, London School of
Economics,Massachusetts Institute ofTechnology,NorthwesternUniversity, Southern Methodist
University. Stanford University, VirginiaPolytech, University
ofWisconsinandthe UtahWinter
Finance Conference for their insights. This paper is part of NBER's research program in
Corporate Finance. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
1994 by MitchellA.Petersen and Raghuram G. Rajan. All rights reserved. Short sections of
that full
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permissionprovided
credit, including notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper #4921
November 1994
THE EFFECT OF CREDIT MARKET
COMPETITION ON LENDING
RELATIONSHIPS
ABSTRACT
This paper provides a simple model showing that the extent of competition in credit
markets is important in determining the value of lending relationships. Creditors are more likely
to finance credit constrained finns when credit markets are concentrated because it is easier for
these creditors to internalize the benefits of assisting the firms. The model has implications about
the availability and the price of credit as firms age in different markets. The paper offers
evidence for these implications from small business data. It concludes with conjectures on the
costs and benefits of liberalizing financial markets, as well as the timing of such reforms.
Mitchell A. Petersen Raghuram 0. Rajan
Graduate School of Business
Kellogg School
Northwestern University University of Chicago
Leverone Hall 1101 East 58th Street
Evanston, IL 60208 Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER

Is it possible for finns facing competitive credit markets to form strong ties to particular
creditors? Does the benefit to a firm of forming such relationships diminich when credit markets get more
competitive? There is a theoretical reason for believing that credit market competition may be inimical
to the formation of mutually beneficial relationships between firms and specific creditors. When a finn
is young or distressed, the potential for future cashflows from its projects may be high, while the actual
cash it generates is low. When evaluating the credit-worthiness of the firm, a creditor should take into
account the streamof future profits the firm may generate. When the credit market is competitive and
creditors cannot hold equityclaims, thelender cannotexpect to share in the future surplus of the firm.
She is constrained to break even on a period by periodbasis because she would drive away business if
she charged a rate above the competitive one. Since uncertainly about a firm's prospects is high when
the firmis young ordistressed, creditors ina competitivemarket may be forcedto charge a high interest
rate until theuncertainty is resolved. This can be extremely distortionary tothefirm's incentivesand
may, infact, result in the firmnot receiving credit at all. A monopolisticcreditor, on the other hand,
shares inthe future surplusgenerated by the firmthroughthe futurerents she is ableto extract. Shecan
backtoad interest payments over time, subsidizing the firm when young or distressed
andextractingrents
later. Consequently, she may be more willing to offer credit than a similarly placed tender in a
of the
competitive market. In other words, credit market competition imposes constraints on the ability
firm and creditor to intertemporally share surplus. This makes lending relationships less valuable to a firm
because it cannot expect to get, help when most in need.
The argument that relationships and competition are incompatible recurs in other sub-disciplines
in economics.' For instance, labor economists claim that a firm is more reluctant to invest in training
workers in a competitive labor market unless they post a bond, since workers can threaten to quitand
in
demand a competitive salary once they are trained (Becker 19751. While there is anecdotal evidence
the financial press suggesting this kind of phenomenon is a reality, there is little formal supporting
in
evidence in the academic literature. This is partly because periods of increased competition are,
less valuable. It is thus
general, also accompanied by other changes which may make relationships
document that
difficult to disentangle the effects. For example. Hoshi, Kashyap and Scharfstein (1990]

high quality Japanese firms moved away from their banks when the domestic bond markets were
liberalized. This movement may reflect the adverse effects of competition on relationships. Alternatively
this movement may simply reflect a reshuffling of borrowing by firms that previously did not have access
to public markets. The ideal test would examine the effects of competition on relationships in a situation
where firms are not simultaneously faced with a change in the sources of capital available to them.
In this paper, we focus our analysis on small businesses in the United States. Such firms
concentrate their external borrowing from banks [see Petersen and R.ajan 1994] and therefore the
confounding effect of the portfolio choice problem discussed above is minor. In different regions of the
country, the degree of competition between banks varies, partly because of restrictions on bank entry and
branching, partly because there is only so much banking business a local market can support. Thus, we
can isolate the effects of competition on relationships in this sample.
In the next section, we present a simple model which highlights the distinction between
competitive and concentrated credit markets, In section II, we describe the data and the empirical tests.
We find that significantly more young firms obtain external financing in concentrated markets than in
competitive markets. Underlying differences in firm quality across markets do not appear to explain the
differential access to capital. As the theory suggests, creditors smooth interest rates intertemporally in
more concentrated markets, which may explain why they are able to provide more finance. We conclude
in section 111 with policy implications and suggestions for ffiture research.
I. The Model
A. Agents andInvestment Oppanunities
Assume a risk neutral world where there are two types of agents looking for finance; good
entrepreneurs and bad entrepreneurs. At date 0, good entrepreneurs can choose either a safe project or
a risky project. A safe project pays out S at date 1 when amount 1 is invested in it. Furthermore, when
the project concludes the good entrepreneur will be able to invest i in another safe project which returns
2• Alternatively, if the good entrepreneur chooses to gamble at date 0, he can invest in the risky
project. At date 1, the risky project may succeed and pay out withprobability p. orit may fail and
pay 0 with probability (l-p). If it succeeds, he can invest I in a safe project which pays It2 at date 2.
2