NBER Working Paper 5602
June 1996
TRADE CRED~: THEORIES AND
EVIDENCE
ABSTRACT
In addition to borrowing from financial institutions, firms may be financed by their
suppliers. Although there are many theories explaining why non-financial firms lend money,
there are few comprehensive empirical tests of these theories. This paper attempts to fill the gap.
We focus on a sample of small firms whose access to capital markets may be limited. We find
evidence that firms use trade credit relatively more when credit from financial institutions is not
available, Thus while short term trade credit may be routinely used to minimize transactions
costs, medium term borrowing against trade credit is a form of financing of last resort. Suppliers
lend to firms no one else lends to because they may have a comparative advantage in getting
information about buyers cheaply, they have a better ability to liquidate goods, and they have a
greater implicit equity stake in the firm’s long term survival. We find some evidence consistent
with the use of trade credit as a means of price discrimination. Finally, we find that firms with
better access to credit from financial institutions offer more trade credit. This suggests that firms
may intermediate between institutional creditors and other firms who have limited access to
financial institutions.
Mitchell A. Petersen Raghuram G. Rajan
Kellogg Graduate School of Management Graduate School of Business
Northwestern University University of Chicago
Evanston, IL 60208 Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER

Tradecreditisthesinglemostimportantsourceof short term external finance for fums inthe United
States.2Whydoindustrialfirmsextendtrade credit when more specializedfinancial institutions such as banks
could provide finance?There are many theoretical explanations fornade credit: Trade credit may provide
acrosstocapiti forfms thatareunabletoraiseitthroughmore traditional channels. Suppliers may be better
thanspecializedfinancial institutions inevaluatingand controlling the credit risk oftheir buyers. If so, trade
credit may be away for f~ms withbetter accesstocredit markets to intermediate finance to fwmswith less
accesstocreditmarkets.Alternatively,madecredhmayallowsupplierstoprice discriminate using credit when
discriminationdirectlythroughpricesisnotlegallypermissible. Fina!lytrade credit may beuseful inreducing
transactionscostsor inprovidingassurancesaboutthe qualityofthe supplier’sproducts. Unfortunately, there
isverylittle systematic evidence aboutwhy trade credit isextendedor whichf~ms are the largest providers
or users oftrade credit. In thispaper, we shed somelightonthese issues.
The problem in testing theories of trade credit thus far has beenthe paucity ofdata. Databases like
Compustat do not have the detail needed totest thenuances of the various theories that serve to distinguish
them. In this paper, we use a more detailed database compiled by the National Survey of Small Business
Finance (NSSBF). This data setfocuses on small fums, which are more likelyto face constraints on their
ability toraise capital.
Wefmdthatsuppliersappear tohave some advantage infinancing growing firms, especially if their
creditqualityissuspect.Weconjecturethreepotentialreasonsfor this. First, the evidence suggests these fums
maybeasourceoffuturebusiness,andsuppliersaremorewillingtoprovide credit inanticipation of capturing
this business. Second, suppliers may obtain the information they need at low cost from product market
transactions, and perhaps from other suppliers. The information that suppliers use in monitoring and
controllingrepaymentseemstobedifferentfromthatusedbyfinancial institutions, perhaps because the nature
of thecredit isvery different. Thkd, suppliersappear to rely on their abilityto repossess and sellthe goods
againstwhich credit hasbeen granted.
Therestofthepaper isorgtied as follows. In section1,we flesh out theempirical implications of
2Rajan and Zingales (1993)report thataccountspayable amountedto 15% of the assets for a sample of
non-financial U.S. firms on Global Vantagewhile debt incurrent liabilities accounted forjust 7.4%.
1

whatwebelievearethemostimportant theoretical explanationsoftrade credit. In section II, we describe the
data.SectionIIIexaminesthedeterminants of trade credit granted by a firm, while section IV examines who
receives credit. We conclude with adiscussion of theresults and suggestionsfor future research.
I. Trade Credit: Theories,
We startwithabriefdescription of thetheories thathavebeenproposed to explain the existence and
useoftradecredit.Thislistisnotmeanttobecomprehensive.Rather, itreflects what we believe are themore
plausible theories inthe literature andthe onesupon whichour data can shed light,
A. Financing advantage theoriesof tradecredit.
The suppliermayhavean advantageover traditional lenders in investigatingthe credit worthiness of
hisclients,aswell as abetter abilityto monitor andforce repayment ofthe credit. This may give him a cost
advantageoverfinancialinstitutionsinoffering credit to abuyer (seeSchwartz (1974) for an early exposition
of the financing advantagetheory of trade credit). There are at leastthree sources ofcost advantage.
1.Advantage ininformationacquisition.
The suppliermayvisitthebuyer’spremisesmoreoftenthan financial institutions would. The size and
timing of the buyer’s orders also give him an idea of the condition of the buyer’s business. The buyer’s
inability to take advantage of early payment discounts may serve as a tripwire to alert the supplier of a
deteriorationinthebuyer’screditworthiness.3Whilefinancialinstitutionsmay also collect similar information,
the supplier may be able to get it faster and at lower cost because it is obtained in the normal course of
business.
2. Advantage in controllingtheb~er.
Itmaybeinthemture of thegoodsbeing suppliedthat there are feweconomical altermtive sources
other than the supplier. If so, the supplier can threaten to cut off future supplies in the event of borrower
actionsthatreducethechancesofrepayment. This threat may be especiallycredible if thebuyer accounts for
a smallportionofthesupplier’s sales. Bycontrast, afuncial institutionmay have more limited powers; the
threattowithdrawfiture financemayhavelittleimmediateeffect on theborrower’s operations. Furthermore,
3Theories oftrade credit based onthe sellerhaving superior information to financial institutions, or the
sellerusing trade credit terms to sort buyers includeBrennan, Maksirnovicand Zechner (1988),
Smith (1987), Biais, Gollier, andViala (1993).
2

the fimncial institution’s ability towithdraw past fmnce may be constrained by bankruptcy laws,
3. Advantage insalvaging valuefrom existingassets.
Ifthebuyerdefaults, the supplier can seizethegoods thatare supplied. The more durable the goods
supplied, the better collateral theyprovide andthe greater thecredit the supplier canprovide (see Mian and
Smith(1992)). Financial institutionscan alsoreclaim the f~m’s assetstopay off thefirm’s loan. However,
ifthesupplieralreadyhasanetworkforsellingitsgoods,itscostsofrepossessingand resale willbe lower than
that of an institution. The advantage of suppliers over fmncial institutions will vary cross sectionally
de~nding uponthetypeofgoodsthesupplierissellingandhowmuch thecustomer transforms them. The less
the goods are transformed by the buyer the greater the advantage the supplier will have over financial
institutions in finding an alternativebuyer.4
B. Price discrimi~tion through trade credit.
Trade credit may be offered even ifthe supplierdoesnothave a funcing advantage over financial
institutionsbecause credit may be used toprice discriminate.5Sincecredit terms are usually invariant tothe
creditqualityofthebuyer, tradecreditreducestheeffectiveprice to lowqualityborrowers.bIfthis is themost
priceelasticsegmentofthe market, thentrade credit isaneffectivemeans ofprice discrimination. A mtural
reasonwhy this segment’s demand maybe more price elastic isbecause itis typicallycredit rationed. If so,
trade credit both lowers the effectiveprice of thegoodandpermits this segment toexpress itsdemand.
Anotherwayofseeingthisistonotethat fms withahighmargin (between sales andvariable costs)
for their product clearly have a strong incentive to make additional sales, but without cutting the price to
existingcustomers.Sincetheir profit on thenextunit ishigher, theywould be willing to incur apositive cost
tosellanadditionalunit,solongasitdoesnot affecttheir previous sales. Under the assumption that anti-trust
4Of course, ifthere are multiplecreditors includingfinancial institutions, bankruptcy laws may prevent
acreditorfrom seizingparticular goodsunlessthe saleis onconsignment, inwhich case this advantage may
be irrelevant.
5See Meltzer(1960), Schwartz and Whitcomb (1979), Breman, Maksimovic and Zechner (1988), and
Mian and Smith (1992).
bPetersenandRajan(1994)fti thatoncethedecisiontograntcredit has beentaken, the credit terms seem
tofollowindustry practice. They are usually nottailored to theparticular borrower, Also see Smith (1980).
3