NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EVIDENCE ON THE CHARACTERISTICS
OF CROSS SECTIONAL VARIATION
IN STOCK RETURNS
Kent Daniel
Sheridan Titman
Working Paper 5604
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1996
We thank participants of seminars at Dartmouth, Harvard Business School, HKUST, MIT,
Northwestern, UCLA, University of Chicago, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign,
University of Michigan, USC, University of Texas, University of Tokyo, Wharton, and the
February 1995 NBER Behavioral Finance Workshop, the PACAP, APFA and AFA conferences
and Jonathan Berk, Mark Carhart, Randy Cohen, Douglas Diamond, Vijay Fafat, Wayne Ferson,
Kenneth French, Steven Kaplan, Mark Kritzman, Josef Lakonishok, Craig MacKinlay, Alan
Marcus, Chris Polk, Richard Roll, Ren6 Stulz, Robert Vishny and especially Eugene Fama for
helpful discussions, comments and suggestions. Daniel thanks the Center for Research in
Security Prices (CRSP) at the University of Chicago for research support. Titman grateful] y
acknowledges research support from the John L. Collins, S.J. Chair in International Finance. We
are, of course, responsible for any errors. This paper is part of NBER’s research program in
Corporate Finance. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
O 1996 by Kent Daniel and Sheridan Titman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including O notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper 5604
June 1996
EV~ENCE ON THE CHARACTERISTICS
OF CROSS SECTIONAL VARIATION
IN STOCK RETURNS
ABSTRACT
Firm size and book-to-market ratios are both highly correlated with the returns of common
stocks. Fama and French (1993) have argued that the association between these firm
characteristics and their stock returns arises because size and book-to-market ratios are proxies
for non-diversifiable factor risk. In contrast, the evidence in this paper indicates that the return
premia on small capitalization and high book-to-market stocks does not arise because of the co-
movements of these stocks with pervasive factors. It is the firm characteristics and not the
covariance structure of returns that explain the cross-sectional variation in stock returns.
Kent Daniel Sheridan Titman
Graduate School of Business Finance Department
University of Chicago School of Management
1101 East 58th Street Boston College
Chicago, IL 60637 Chestnut Hill, MA 02167
and NBER

1 Introduction
There is now considerable evidence that the cross-sectional pattern of stock returns can be
explained by characteristics such as size, leverage, pmt returns, dividend-yield, earnings-tcprice
ratios and book- t~market ratios.l Fama and French (1992, 1996) examine all of these variables
simultaneously and conclude that, with the exception of the momentum strategy described by
Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), the cross-sectional variation inexpected returns can be explained -
by only two of these characteristics, size and book-tomtiket. Beta, the traditional CAPM
measure of risk, explains almost none of the cross-sectional dispersion in expected returns once
size is taken into account.2
There is considerable disagreement about the reason for the high discount rate assigned
to small and high book-tomarket firms. The traditional explanation for these observations,
exposited by Fama and French (1993, 1996), is that the higher returns are compensation for
higher systematic risk. Fama and French (1993) suggest that book-to-market and sizeareproxies
for distress and that distressed firms may be more sensitive to certain business cycle factors,
like changes in credit conditions, than firms that are financially less vulnerable. In addition,
the duration of high growth firms’ earnings should be’ somewhat longer than the duration of
the earnings of low growth firms, therefore term structure shifts should affect the two groups of
firms differently.
,,
In contrast, Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1994) (LSV) suggest that the high returns
associated with high book-to-market (or value) stocks aregenerated by investors who incorrectly
extrapolate the past earnings growth rates of firms. They suggest that investors are overly
optimistic about firms which have done well in the past and are overly pessimistic about those
which have done poorly. LSV also suggest that low book-to-market (or growth) stocks are more
glamorous than value stocks and may thus attract naive investors who push up prices and lower
the expected returns of these securities.3
1The size anomaly was documented by Banz (1981) and Keim (1983), leverage by Bhandari (1988),
the past returns effect by DeBondt and Thaler (1985) and Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), the earnings-
to-price ratio by Ba.su (1983), the book-to-market effect by Stattman (1980) and Rosenberg, Reid, and
Lanstein (1985).
2See also Jegadeesh (1992),
3There is also a third potential explanation: Kothari, Shanken, and’ Sloan (1995) suggest that selection-
1

Fama and French (1993) provide several tests that suggest that afirm’s book-to-market ratio
and size are in fact proxies for the firm’s loading on priced riskfactors. First, they show that the
prices of high book-t~market and small sizestocks tend to move up and down together in a way
that is suggestive of a common risk factor. Secondly, they find that the loadings on zero cost
factor portfolios formed based on size (a small capitalization portfolio minus large capitalization
portfolio they call SMB) and book-to-market ratios (a high book-to-market portfolio minus alow
book-to-market portfolio they call HML) along with a value-weighted market portfolio (Mkt)
explain the excess returns of a full set of book-to-market and size-sorted portfolios.4
While LSV do not dispute the possibility that there may be priced factors associated with
value (or growth) stocks, they argue that the return premia associated with thesefactor portfolios
are simply too large and their covariances with macro factors arejust too low (and in some cases
negative) to be considered compensation for systematic risks LSV present compelling evidence
to support their claim, however their results are not inconsistent with multi-factor models, such
as Merton (1973) and Ross (1976), which allow for priced”factors that are orthogonal to the
overall market return. An explanation for these return anomalies, based for example on Merton
(1973), would require that we find a priced factor that is orthogonal to the market, yet affects
,, .,.
future investment opportunities.
While we would expect that it would be very difficult to verify that the returns associated
with size and book-to-market portfolios do indeed satisfy the above condition, it is likely to
bias problems in the construction of book-t~market portfolios could be another cause of the premium.
However, recent work by Chan, Jegadeesh, and Lakonishok (1995) shows that the selection biases are
not large. Further, Cohen and Polk (1995a) construct portfolios in a way that completely eliminates
the COMPUSTAT selection bias and find similar evidence. Finally, Davis (1994) forms book-to-market
sorted portfolios free of selection bias in the 1940-1963 period (out-of-sample relative to the Fama and
French 1963-1992 sample period) and finds a book-te-market effect similar in magnitude to that found
by Fama and French (1992).
4As further evidence, Fama and French (1993) show that Mkt, HML and SMB portfolios formed from
one-half of the CRSP sampleof stockscanexplainthereturnsof portfoliosformedwithstocksfromthe
otherhalf. Inaddition,Famaad Rench (1995) show that the same return factors are present in a firm’s
earnings, and Cohen and Polk (1995a) show that portfolios formed b~ed on individual firm’s covariances
with the SMB and HMLfactorexhibitthesamepremiaasdotheoriginalsizeandbook-to-marketsorted
portfolios.
5MacKinlay(1995) makes a similar argument: He calculates the statistical distribution of the ez-ante
Sharpe-ratio of the mean-vaiance efficient portfolio from the returns of the Farna and French (1993)
portfolios, and concludes that the likely value of the the Sharpe-ratio obtainable is “too-high” to be
explained within the context of efficient-market theory.
2