NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT AND
KEIRETSU RETHIN~GU.S. AND
JAPANESE POLICY
David E. Weinstein
Working Paper 5612
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1996
This paper was prepared for the NBER conference on “The Effects of U.S. Protection and
Promotion Policies.” I am grateful to the Ministry of Finance for allowing me to be a visiting
scholar at the Institute for Fiscal and Monetary Studies during the summer of 1995 when this
draft was prepared. While too many people helped me there to thank each of them individually,
I want to especially thank Satoshi Ohuchi for arranging interviews. In addition to the Ministry
of Finance, I would like to thank the Nomura Fund and the Japan Securities Research Promotion
Foundation for financial support. Special thanks also go to Theresa Camey, Dennis Incarnation,
Takuo Imagawa, Robert Lawrence, Ed Lincoln, Mark Mason, Paul Sheard, and Akihisa Tamaki
for greatly improving my understanding of this topic. Jeff Bernstein, Takatoshi Ito, Hugh
Patrick, Mark Ramseyer, and Klaus Wanner made extensive and invaluable comments on an
earlier draft of this paper that were enormously helpful in preparing the final draft. Finally, I
want to thank Robert Feenstra for suggesting I look at the “170”number in the first place. This
paper is part of the NBER’s project on International Capital Flows and NBER’s research program
in International Trade and Investment. I am grateful to The Center for International Political
Economy for the support of this project. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
@ 1996 by David E. Weinstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including O
notice, is given to the source,

NBER Working Paper 5612
June 1996
FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT AND
KEZRETSU: RETHINKING U.S. AND
JAPANESE POLICY
ABSTRACT
This paper focuses on two issues. First, a reexamination of the data on the level of
foreign direct investment (FDI) in Japan suggests that foreign firms sell five to six times more
in Japan than is commonly believed, Previous studies severely underestimated the stock of FDI
in Japan due to poor data. Second, after finding that even after adjusting for various factors the
level of FDI in Japan is still low, the paper explores explanations for this phenomenon. A
second main conclusion is that government tax and financial policy continues to inhibit foreign
takeovers through the promotion of stable shareholding,
David E. Weinstein
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138

For twenty-five years, the US and Japanese governments have seen the rise of corporate
groups in Japan, keiretsu, as due in part to foreign pressure to liberalize the Japanese market. In
fact, virtually all works that discuss barriers in ahistorical context argue that Japanese corporations
acted to insulate themselves from foreign takeovers by privately placing shares with each other.1
The story has proved to be a major boon for the opponents of a neoclassical approach to trade and
investment policy. Proponents of the notion of “Japanese-style Capitalism” in the Japanese
government can argue that they did their part for liberalization and cannot be held responsible for
private sector outcomes. Meanwhile, proponents of results oriented policies (ROPS)can point to
yet another example ofhow the removal of one btier led to the formation of a second barrier.
While agreeing with thebasic conjecture that high levels of corporate ownership may work
to deter takeovers in Japan, the argument presented here suggests that it is not cultural or
institutional factors that produce corporate groups andhigh levels of stable shareholding, but rather
conventional government policy. The focus on “conventional” policies is important. One does not
need to rely on government encouragement and other non-binding mechanisms of Japanese
industrial policy in order to understand the rise of Japanese corporate groups. The incentives to
form these groups can, to a large degree, be traced to tax, regulatory, and other policies that are
conventional in the sense that their impac~ can readily be understood within astandard neoclassical
economic paradigm.
The failure to recognize the role played by conventional policies in the formation of
Japanese corporate groups has lead to tremendous frustration on both sides of US-Japan
negotiations. The US claims that despite Japanese concessions, very little has changed. The
Japanese, for their part, have grown tired of continual US complaints over sector after sector. To
some extent, this is the result of a failure on both sides to face the facts. On the Japanese side, this
lSee for example, Incarnation (1992), p. 76,Mason (1992), and Lawrence (1993).

2
involves recognizing that they have created a financial system through tremendous government
interventions based on dubious economic rationales. But the problem is not only a Japanese one.
As this paper will try to demonstrate, the US position has been influenced by poor data and
insufficient attention to the underlying government incentives to form distinctive Japanese
corporate structures. This has led to a belief that standard principles of economics do not apply in
the case ofJapan and that US policy iscontinually hindered hidden informal regulations.
Considering the willingness of policymakers to believe that trillions of yen worth of
securities changed hands because of government encouragement or a fear ofpotential foreign
takeovers, it is not surprising that many in the US have decided that process oriented policies are
not tenable and have favored results oriented policies (ROPS).Unfortunately for the proponents of
these policies, it is not just academic economists who think that ROPSare bad economics, most
Japanese do too. The current political climate in Japan strongly favers deregulation. The
implementation of ROPS,however, requires greater governmental intervention which is likely to
further entrench bureaucrats and generate future problems. As the most recent automobile parts
negotiations revealed, the unpopularity of ROPS makes them very difficult to implement in
practice.
All of this suggests that we reexamine the evidence in favor of ROPSand the notion that
conventional policies are not important. The remainder of the paper therefore focuses on two
issues. First, a reexamination of the data suggests that levels of FDI into Japan are not nearly m
out of line with international levels as is widely believed. This conclusion is based on the fact that
much of the data underlying the analysis of FDI into Japan is highly problematic. Second, after
finding that even after adjusting for various factors the level of FDI in Japan is still low, the paper
explores government interventions that may continue to inhibit foreign t~eovers through the
promotion of stable shareholding.