NBER WOR~G PAPER SERIES
CONTRACTS AND MONEY
Boyan Jovanovic
Masako Ueda
Working Paper 5637
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1996
Wethank Roland Benabou, La~Christiano, John Coleman, Frank Diebold, Jordi Gali, Mark
Gertler, Jeremy Greenwood, Chris Hanes, Marcos Lisboa, Glenn Rudebusch, and Oved Yosha
for comments, and the National Science Foundation and the C.V. Starr Center for Applied
Economics at New York University for financial assistance. This paper is part of NBER’s
research program in Productivity. Anyopinions expressed are those of theauthors and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
@ 1996 by Boyan Jovanovic and Masako Ueda. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including O notice, is given to the source,

NBER Working Paper 5637
June 1996
CONTRACTS AND MONEY
ABSTRACT
We analyze the contractual relation between workers and their employers when there is
nominal risk. The key feature of the problem is that the consumption deflator is random and
observed sometime after the effort is exerted. The worker’s effort is not observable, and to
induce the agent to work, second-best contracts do not insure the worker fully. They do
eliminate all nominal risk for the parties (by fully indexing the terms of the contracts to the price
level) but they would be re-negotiated. Foreseeing this, the parties to the contract will write one
that is renegotiation-proof. Under such a contract, nominal shocks affect real consumption.
Since the argument should apply in many situations, it will have macroeconomic implications,
one of which is short-run non-neutrality of money. We have found that surprise money is likely
to redistribute consumption and welfare towards workers, and away from shareholders.
Boyan Jovanovic Masako Ueda
Department of Economics The Wharton School
New York University University of Pennsylvania
269 Mercer Street Philadelphia, PA 19104
New York, NY 10003
and NBER

1. Introduction
A contract written in nominal terms exposes the parties to price-level risk. Full
indexation to the price level is a device for eliminating such risk. Our paper shows that when
nominal data are gathered with delay, a fully indexed contract would be renegotiated by the
parties to that contract. That is, fully indexed contracts are not time consistent, not renegotiation
proof. But contracts that specify an uncontingent nominal payment are not renegotiation-proof
either.
When contracts are not fully indexed, monetary policy will affect the real terms of those
contracts, and hence it will affect real variables. In general; three types of explanation have been
proposed for how money affects real variables: “Menu Costs” models assume it is costly to
change prices -- Sheshinski and Weiss (1977), “Surprise Money” models assume money
influences expectations and affects spot market trades which can not be undone after the money
shock is revealed -- Lucas (1972), Azariadis (1978), Eden (1994). “Asymmetric Injections”
models assume that a subset of agents gets monetary injections -- Grossman and Weiss (1983),
Rotemberg (1984), Christian and Eichenbaum (1992).
Because price expectations are built into contracts, ours is a “Surprise Money” paper. It
applies to the markets of the many goods and services that are traded not in impersonal spot
markets but as part of a contractual arrangement. We focus on the contract between the firm and
the worker. No nominal rigidity is imposed on the contract; since effort is unobservable, to
elicit effort the firm does not insure the worker filly. Instead, the contract says the worker
should get more money when his nominal output is high, and when the price level is high, When
nominal output is observed, the worker’s real reward is still uncertain because the price level is
observed with delay. At this point, effort has been sunk, and so the principal may as well fully
insure the agent against price-level risk. So, the principal now guarantees the agent a
consumption whose level depends on the nominal output alone. But the latter reflects the money
supply, and so money has real effects.
Two implications emerge. First, the worker gets more when price surprises are positive,
so that labor’s share is positively related to price surprises, and that the nominal wage varies
more than the real wage [the latter is documented for the U.S., U.K., and Japan in Table 1of
Gordon (1982)]. It also means that the firm’s price markup over cost should be negatively
related to price surprises. Benabou (1992), Blanchard andMuet(1993), and Kaskarelis (1993)
document this. A related implication is that positive money shocks raise the real wage, which is

2
consistent with evidence in Table 5 of Christian andEichenbaum(1992).
The second implication is that surprise money lowers stock-returns. This explains the
finding that unexpected inflation is negatively related with real stock prices -- Fama(1981, p.
545), Chen, Roll, and Ross (1986, tables 2 and 4), Chan, Chen, and Hsieh (1985, table 2), and
Blanchard (1993, table 7). So, money has distributional effects even though we assume money
is distributed in proportion to existing holdings.
Two final points: The model does m explain nominal rigidity; renegotiation-proof
contracts are not fully indexed, but nominal transfers do depend on money shocks. Also, a
random money-supply rule strictly lowers welfare -- a stronger result than in Lucas (1972) who
showed only that predictable money-supply rules lead to a Pareto optimal equilibrium.
Section 2 gives the intuition for our results, while section 3 describes the equilibrium
model. Section 4 presents the main welfare theorem, while section 5 gives the positive
implications, Section 6 discusses the key assumptions, section 7 discusses some issues and
problems, and section 8 concludes the paper.
2. The Intuition
Here are three related principal-agent problems that contain the intuition for our results.
Problem 1 is the standard principal-agent problem. Problems 2 and 3 present the parties with
price-level risk in a partial equilibrium context.
2.A. PROBLEM 1: A risk-neutral principal hires a risk-averse agent. The principal can not
see the agent’s effort, only output, y. The agent’s effort influences y as follows:
F. (y) s Probability {output < y effort = n}
Just two effort-levels, n e {O,1} are possible. The agent’s preferences over consumption c,
and effort n, are
U(c, n) = U(c) - en.