NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
AN ANALYSIS OF DIVISIONAL
INVESTMENT POLICIES
Hyun-Han Shin
Ren6 M. Stulz
Working Paper 5639
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1996
We are grateful to Judy Chevalier, Gene Fama, Steve Kaplan, Owen Lament, Tim Opler, Jay
Ritter, Andrei Shleifer, Ralph Walkling, Jeff Zwiebel, participants at the NBER Corporate
Finance Spring 1996 Group Meeting and at seminars at the Ohio State University, the University
of Chicago, and Stanford University for useful comments. This paper is part of NBER’s research
program in Corporate Finance. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
@ 1996 by Hyun-Han Shin and Ren6 M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including O notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper 5639
June 1996
AN ANALYSIS OF DIVISIONAL
INVESTMENT POLICIES
This paper investigates the divisional investment policies of diversified firms. We find
that investment of the smallest division of diversified firms is significantly related to the cash
flow of the other segments. We then show that the smallest division’s investment is more
sensitive to the cash flow of the other divisions for firms where one expects aggregate investment
to be related to cash flow also, namely low q firms and firms with high leverage. This and other
evidence we provide is consistent with what we call the bureaucratic rigidity hypothesis. This
hypothesis states that relative allocations of investment funds in diversified firms are sticky. We
fail to find support for the view that diversified firms allocate more funds to divisions in
industries with better investment opportunities.
Hyun-Han Shin Ren6 M. Stulz
Department of Finance Department of Finance
Lundquist College of Business Ohio State University
University of Oregon 314 Hagerty
Eugene, OR 97403-1208 1775 College Road
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER

1. Introduction.
Does it matter for a division’s investment policy whether it is pad of a highly
diversified firm, a moderately diversified firm, or is a stand-alone firm? The view that
diversification creates value is often based on the idea that being part of a diversified
firm makes it possible for a division to invest without the impediments from capital
market imperfections. q We call this the efficient internal capital markets hypothesis.
The alternative view that diversified firms invest less efficiently is generally associated
with the proposition that, because of their additional layers of management, they find it
difficult to take advantage of good investment opportunities at the division level and fail
to decrease aggressively investment in divisions that have poor investment
opportunities. We call this hypothesis the bureaucratic rigidity hypothesis. In this paper,
we first show that divisions of diversified firms invest differently than otherwise
comparable stand-alone firms and then explore why this is so.
Even though the various views of diversified firms lead to the conclusion that
investment differs between a division of a diversified firm and an otherwise comparable
stand-alone firm, there is little evidence on how investment policies differ between
diversified firms and specialized firms. Most of the evidence on the investment policies
of diversified firms is indirect and demonstrates that diversified firms are valued less
than comparable portfolios of specialized firms,2 One exception is Lament (1996), who
reports that diversified oil companies reduced investment in non-oil divisions when they
faced decreased oil revenues. Lament’s (1996) evidence shows that division-level
investment of diversified oil companies depends on other variables than the investment
1 See, for instance, Williamson (1975). Stein (1996) provides a model where
diversification increases efficiency of firms that are liquidity-constrained because
management allocates more funds to the more efficient divisions.
2See, for instance, Berger and Ofek (1995), Comment and Jarrell (1995) and Lang and
Stulz (1994).
1

of comparable single-segment firms, but his research is not focused on trying to
understand how investment in diversified firms is different, but rather to provide
evidence on the existence of liquidity constraints.
The literature on investment policy at the firm level has documented a strong
relation between a firm’s investment and its cash flow.3 One explanation for this result
is that external finance is expensive relative to internal finance. This can be because of
information asymmetries and/or because of agency costs. With this explanation, firms
that find it most expensive to access outside funds finance investment mostly through
their cash flow. Diversification breaks the link between a division’s cash flow and its
investment even if the firm finds outside funds expensive. A diversified firm can use the
cash flow from one division to finance investment in another division. We therefore
investigate first whether the link between a division’s cash flow and its investment is
weaker than the link between a firm’s cash flow and its investment and whether there is
a relation between the investment of a division and the cash flow of other divisions.
Finding such a relation would be evidence that the internal capital market plays an
important role in diversified firms.
In our investigation, we consider separately small and large divisions. The
largest division of a firm should have an investment policy fairly similar to the
investment policy of a stand-alone firm since it typically represents a large part of the
diversified firm. In contrast, we would expect the investment of the smallest division to
be less related to its own cash flow than it would be if the division was a stand-alone
firm, We find strong evidence supportive of this view. Investment of the smallest
division does not depend on the smallest division’s cash flow when the firm is highly
3This literature is reviewed in Bernanke, Gertner and Gilchrist (1994) and Hubbard
(1995). Kaplan and Zingales (1995) provide a critical perspective on this literature.
2