NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EFFECTS OF CHILD-BEARING ON
MARRIED WOMEN’S LABOR SUPPLY
AND EARNINGS :USING TWIN BIRTHS
AS A NATURAL EXPERIMENT
Jaisri Gangadharan
Joshua L. Rosenbloom
Working Paper 5647
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1996
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
O 1996 by Jaisri Gangadharan and Joshua L. Rosenbloom. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, maybe quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including @notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper 5647
July 1996
THE EFFECTS OF CHILD-BEARING ON
MARRIED WOMEN’ S LABOR SUPPLY
AND EARNINGS: USING TWIN BIRTHS
AS A NATURAL EXPERIMENT
ABSTRACT
Married women’s decisions about child-bearing and market work areimportantly interrelated.
Although there are many estimates of the effects of fertility on female labor supply few of them have
adequately addressed the problems of simultaneity inherent in these choices. In this paper, we use
exogenous variations in fertility due to twin births to measure the impact of an unanticipated child
on married women’s labor supply and earnings. We find that the short-run effects of an
unanticipated birth on labor supply are appreciable and have increased in magnitude as more mothers
enter the labor market. It also appears that the impact of unanticipated births on earnings and wages
has changed from 1980 to 1990. In 1980 reduced labor supply caused atemporary drop in earnings,
but in 1990 earnings and wages remained depressed well after the labor supply effects of atwin birth
had disappeared.
Jaisri Gangadharan Joshua L. Rosenbloom
Department of Economics Department of Economics
University of Kansas University of Kansas
Summerfield Hall Summerfield Hall
Lawrence, KS 66045-2113 Lawrence, KS 66045-2113
and NBER

The Effects of Child-Bearing on Married Women’s
Labor Supply on Earnings:
Using Twin Births as a Natural Experiment
1. Introduction
Despite the dramatic increase in married women’s labor force participation rates in
recent decades, in most families women continue to be responsible for providing the majority
of childcare and other nonmarket services. 1 Fuchs (1989) has argued that conflicting
demands on women’s time have been an important factor inhibiting the reduction of gender
gaps in earnings and occupations. To meet familial obligations, he argues, many women
drop out of the labor force entirely, while others look for part-time or less demanding types
1 According to Juster and Stafford (1991, p. 474) in 1981 American women spent over
two times as many hours doing housework (30.5) as American men (13.5). For married
women with children under 5 at home, Robinson (1988) reports that hours of housework fell
to 22,5 per week in 1985 from 32 per week in 1965. On the other hand, in 1985 married
men with children under 5 at home averaged just 9 hours of housework, up from 3.9 hours
in 1965. Jacobsen (1994, p. 61) calculates that although the fraction of time spent by both
men and women in child care is relatively small, women spend 4 times as much time
engaged in this activity as men.

2
of work. Increased labor supply drives down wages in female dominated occupations, while
lower levels of investment in human capital formation reduces the future growth of earnings.
Thus, he concludes, it is mainly women’s stronger preference for children (rather than
discrimination) that explains persistent gender inequality.
Unfortunately it is difficult to measure the impact of childbearing on women’s labor
supply behavior and earnings. Many early studies of female labor supply treated fertility and
family structure as exogenous determinants of female labor supply behavior (e.g., Mincer
1962, Cain 1966, Heckman 1974). However, decisions about when and how much to work,
on the one hand, and about the number of children to have and the timing of their births, on
the other, are most plausibly viewed as jointly endogenous consequences of the household’s
utility maximization problem. Consequently the population correlation between fertility and
either labor supply or earnings may be misleading for several reasons. First, to the extent
that fertility is affected by measured exogenous variables--such as a woman’s wage, her
education or her husband’s income--failure to account for the endogeneity of fertility may
bias estimates of the effect of both fertility and these exogenous variables on labor supply
behavior. Second, to the extent that there are left out or unmeasured variables--such as
individual heterogeneity in tastes--that affect both labor supply behavior and fertility
decisions, observed fertility will serve as a proxy for the effects of these variables (Shultz
1978; Rosenzweig and Wolpin 1980; Nakamura and Nakamura 1992). One solution to these
problems is to estimate the determinants of fertility and labor supply within a simultaneous