NBER WOR~G PAPER SERIES
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION, STRATEGIC
COMPETITION, AND RELATIVE
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION: THEORY
AND EVIDENCE
RajeshAggarwal
AndrewA. Samwick
Working Paper5648
NATIONAL BUREAU OFECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050MassachusettsAvenue
Cambridge,MA 02138
Ju]y 1996
We thankSheriAggarwal, Gary Engelhardt,Wayne Gray, Benjamin Hermalin,Dennis Logue,
JonathanSkinner,Matthew Slaughter,Sang-Seung Yi, and seminarparticipantsat Dartmouth
College for theirhelpful comments. We aregratefulto JohnFitzgeraldfor assistancewith the
ExecuComp dataset;AndrewHaitforassistancewiththeCensusof Manufactures,andErvinTufor
researchassistance.All errorsareourown. Anyopinionsexpressedarethoseof theauthorsandnot
thoseof theNationalBureauof Economic Research.
@ 1996by RajeshAggarwalandAndrewA. Samwick. All rightsreserved. Shortsectionsof text,
nottoexceed twoparagraphs,maybe quotedwithoutexplicitpermissionprovided thatfullcredit,
includingO notice, isgiventothesource.

NBER Working Paper5648
July1996
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION, STRATEGIC
COMPETITION, AND RELATIVE
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION: THEORY
AND EVIDENCE
ABSTRACT
We arguethatstrategicinteractionsbetweenfirmsinanoligopoly canexplainthepuzzling
lackof high-poweredincentivesinexecutivecompensationcontractswrittenby shareholderswhose
objective isto maximize thevalueof theirshares. We derivetheoptimalcompensationcontracts
for managersanddemonstratethattheuseof high-poweredincentiveswill be limitedby theneed
tosoftenproductmarketcompetition. Inparticular,whenmanagerscanbe compensatedbased on
theirown andtheirrivals’performance,we showthattherewill be aninverserelationshipbetween
the magnitudeof high-powered incentivesandthedegreeof competition in theindustry. More
competitiveindustriesarecharacterizedbyweakerpay-performanceincentives.Empirically,wefind
strongevidenceof thisinverserelationshipinthecompensationof executives intheUnitedStates.
Oureconometricresultsarenotconsistentwithalternativetheoriesof theeffect of competition on
executive compensation. We conclude thatstrategicconsiderationscanprecludetheuseof high-
powered incentives,incontrastto thepredictionsof thestandardprincipal-agentmodel.
RajeshAggarwal Andrew A. Samwick
Amos Tuck School Departmentof Economics
DartmouthCollege DartmouthCollege
Hanover,NH 03755 Hanover,NH 03755
andNBER

1. Introduction
The separation of ownership and control of large corporations is a central feature of modern
economies. The largely unobserved choice of actions by a firm’s managers can have a major
impact on the wealth of its shareholders. The literature on principal-agent theory suggests
that the primary means for the shareholders to ensure that managers take optimal actions
is to tie managers’ pay to the performance of their firms; that is, to provide high-powered
intentives for managers to maximize the returns to shareholders. However, the empirical
literature has not found evidence of high-powered incentives. Instead, the typical finding is
a low pay-performance sensitivity, which seems to imply that shareholders arenot providing
managers with incentives to maximize the returns to shareholders.
In this paper, we argue that strategic interactions between firms in an oligopoly can ex-
plain the puzzling lack of high-powered incentives in executive compensation contracts writ-
ten by shareholders whose objective is to maximize the value of their shares. We derive the
optimal compensation contracts for managers and demonstrate that the use of high-powered
incentives will be limited by the need to soften product market competition. In particu-
lar, when managers can be compensated based on their own and their rivals’ performance,
we show that there will be an inverse relationship between the magnitude of high-powered
incentives and the degree of competition in the industry. More competitive industries are
characterized by weakerpay-performance incentives. Empirically, we find strong evidence of
this inverserelationship in the compensation of executives in the United States.
We conclude that strategic considerations can preclude the use of high-powered incen-
tives, in contrast to the predictions of the standard principal-agent model. That model
posits an economic trade-off between inducing the correct amount of unobservable effort by
the agent and minimizing the amount of risksheis required to bear. In practice, that model
1

predicts that managerial compensation will be correlated with the total return to sharehold-
ers, typically through ownership of shares of the firm’s stock or grants of options on the
fire’s stock. In a seminal article, Jensen and Murphy (1990) test and reject this theoretical
prediction, finding that the compensation of chief executive officers increased by ody $3.25
per $1,000 increase in shareholder wealth.1 They hypothesize that political forces (e.g.,
societal notions of fairness and equity) work to reduce the pay-performance sensitivity.2
This contrasts with our explanation that the pay-performance sensitivity is low because a
high pay-performance sensitivity would induce overly aggressive behavior in the product
markets.
Another prediction of the principal-agent model of executive compensation is that pay
should be based not only on the returns to the firm’s shareholders but on every variable that
provides unique information about the actual action taken by the manager.3 A prominent
example of such a variable is the profits of other firms in the same product market, leading
to a compensation contract based on the relative performance of the manager compared to
her rivals. The prediction from the relative performance evaluation model is that, other
things equal, an executive will receive lower compensation if executives of rivalfires deliver
higherreturns to their shareholders. In our model, the validity of this prediction depends on
the nature of strategic competition. When the returns to attenuating competition arehigh,
compensation contracts will not exhibit relative performance evaluation. When the returns
to achieving product market leadership arehigh, contracts will haveincentives that resemble
1 Later work by Haubrich (1994) has demonstrated that some parameterizations of the principal-agent model
do allow for pay-performance sensitivities as low as the 0.003 found by Jensen and Murphy.
2 Finkelstein and Hambrick (1996) discuss the political forces that shape executive compensation in great
detail.
q This is the sticient statistic restit from Holmstrom’s (1979) work on moral hazard.
2