NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FEDERAL RESERVE PRIVATE
INFORMATION AND THE BEHAVIOR
OF ~TEREST RATES
Christina D. Romer
David H, Romer
NBER Working Paper 5692
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1996
We thank Norman Bernard, Dean Croushore, Carol Low, Stephen McNees, and Randell Moore for
providing date, Jeffrey Fuhrer, Owen Lament, Gregory Mankiw, and Glenn Rudebusch for helpfil
comments, Matthew Jones and Clara Wang for research assistance, and the National Science
Foundation for financial support. This paper is part of NBER’s research programs in Economic
Fluctuations and Growth, and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
O 1996 by Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including 0 notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper 5692
July 1996
FEDERAL RESERVE PRIVATE
INFORMATION AND THE BEHAVIOR
OF ~TEREST RATES
ABSTMCT
Many authors argue that asymmetric information between the Federal Reserve and the public
is important to the conduct and the effects of monetary policy. This paper tests for the existence of
such asymmetric information by examining Federal Reserve and commercial inflation forecasts. We
demonstrate that the Federal Reserve has considerable information about inflation beyond what is
known to commercial forecasters. We also provide evidence that monetary policy actions provide
signals of the Federal Reserve’s private information and that commercial forecasters modifi their
forecasts in response to those signals. These findings may explain why long-term interest rates
typically rise in response to shifts to tighter monetary policy.
Christina D. Romer David H. Romer
Department of Economics Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall 549 Evans Hall
University of California, Berkeley University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720 Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER and NBER

FEDERAL RESERVE PWATE INFORMATION AND
THE BEHAVIOR OF INTEREST RATES
I. INTRODUCTION
Asymmetric information between the Federal Reserve and thepublic
isaphenomenon that isoften posited, but rarely tested. Numerous models of
central bank behavior, for example, show that the existence of asymmetric
information has important implications for the effectiveness of policy and the
consequences of dynamic inconsistency (see, for example, Sargent and
Wallace, 1975; Barre, 1976; Barro and Gordon, 1983; Canzoneri, 1985; and
Cukierman andMeltzer, 1986). Yetthere are fewstudies that testwhether the
Federal Reserve does indeed possess information about the state of the
economy that is not available to the public.
Asymmetric information between the Federal Reserve and the public
is also often mentioned as a possible explanation for a puzzling empirical
phenomenon: the response of long-tern interest rates to monetary policy
actions. Standard theories of the effects of monetary policy imply that ashift
to tighter policy raises short-term interest rates temporally by raising real
rates, but lowers them in the long run by reducing inflation. When these
theones are coupled with the expectations thary of the term structure, they
predict that a shift to tighter policy lowers interest rates on bonds of
sufficiently long maturities. In fact, however, when the Federal Reserve
undertakes contractionary open-market operations, interest rates for securities
of all maturities typically rise (Cook and Hahn, 1989a). A common
explanation of this behavior isthat when the Federal Reserve tightens, market
participants infer that it has unfavorable private information about the likely
behavior of inflation, and they therefore revise their expectations of inflation
upward. It is this upward revision in inflation expectations caused by the
revelation ofFederal Reserveprivate information thatcauseslong-tern interest

2
rates to rise.
Inthis paper weuse Federal Reserve andcommercial forecasts to test
whether the central bank actually does possess private information about the
current and future state of the economy. The key idea is that information the
Federal Reserve has about the economy that is not known to market
participants islikely tobe reflected inthe Federal Reserve’s internal forecmts.
Because the Federal Reserve m&es its forecwts public ordy after five years,
the forecasts can contain information that isnot known contemporaneously to
market participants. In this analysis of private information we look primarily
at the Federal Reserve’s knowledge about inflation, because we then use the
results to test the asymmetric information explanation of the response of
interest rates to monetary actions. However, to check the robustness of our
resdts, we also look for private information about the path of real GDP.
This analysis of asymmetric information and its implications for the
behavior of interest rates proceeds in several steps. Section 11describes the
forecastdatathat we use, S&tion 111then investigates whether the Federal
Reservehasprivate information about inflation. Specifically, weaskwhether,
given commercial forecasts of inflation, the Federal Reserve forecasts are
useti in predicting inflation. To do this, we regress commercial forecasters’
expost foraast errors on thedifference between the Federal Reserve forecasts
and the commercial forecasts.
We find that the difference between the two inflation forecasts is an
overwhelmingly significant predictor of tbe commercial forecast errors. The
t-statistic on the difference between the Federal Reserve and commercial
forecwts is insistently over two, and in many specifications it is over four.
In addition, in most specifications the estimated coefficient on the difference
between the two forecasts is approximately equal to one, implying that the
optimal forecasting strategy of someone with access to both forwasts would
be toput essentially noweight onthe commercial forecaat. These findings are