NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RISK-SHIFI’ING BY FEDERALLY
INSURED COMMERCIAL BANKS
Armen Hovakimian
Edward J. Kane
Working Paper 5711
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1996
We thank Alan Marcus and James T. Moser for helpful comments on earlier drafts of the paper.
This paper is part of NBERs research program in Corporate Finance. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
O 1996 by Arrnen Hovakimian and Edward J. Kane. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including O notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper5711
August 1996
RISK-SH~~G BY FEDERALLY
INSURED COMMERCIAL BANKS
ABSTRA CT
Mispriced and misadministered deposit insurance imparts risk-shifting incentives to U.S.
banks. Regulators are expected to monitor and discipline increases in bank risk exposure that would
transfer wealth from the FDIC to bank stockholders. This paper assesses the success regulators had
in controlling risk-shifting by U.S. banks during 1985-1994. In contrast to single-equation estimates
developed from the option model by others, our simultaneous-equation evidence indicates that
regulators failed to prevent large U.S, banks from shifting risk to the FDIC. Moreover, at the
margin, banks that are undercapitalized shifted risk more effectively than other sample banks.
Armen Hovakimian Edward J. Kane
Finance Department Finance Department
Boston College Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02167 Chestnut Hill, MA 02167
and NBER
howes/mf @hermes.bc.edu

Risk-Shifting by Federally Insured Commercial Banks
Armen Hovakimian, The Wallace E. Carroll School of Management, Boston College
and
Edward J. Kane, The Wallace E. Carroll School of Management, Boston College*
July 1996
Until a risk-related premium structure was introduced in the 1990s, the flat explicit
deposit insurance premium paid by U.S. banks created an incentive for insured banks to
increase their risk exposurel. Viewing the bank’s deposit guarantee as a put option written
by the FDIC, Merton (1977) shows that the value of this option to the bank would
increase with asset risk and leverage risk. Higher risk increases the value of the FDIC’s
insurance services. If the incremental cost a bank pays for these services does not rise to
absorb this value, increasing risk exposure extracts an incremental deposit insurance
subsidy. Such subsidies may benefit bank stockholders via higher stock price artd/or they
may be “shifted”, in whole or large part, to bank customers,
Four forces act to restrain excessive risk taking by the banks. Benston, Eisenbeis,
Horvitz, Kane, and Kaufman (1986) argue that market discipline from uninsured
debtholders and other stakeholders limit risk-taking excesses. They also mention a
second limiting factor: managerial risk-aversion. To avoid the negative effect that
leading a bank to failure may have on their reputational human capital, managers may
limit risk-taking to reduce probability of distress. Saunders et al. (1990) develop
evidence that supports this hypothesis. Third, though cushioned by deposit insurance,
distress costs help to restrain risk-taking. Substantial charter value may be lost in the
We thank Alan Marcus and James T. Moser for helpful comments on earlier drafts of the paper.
l
1See, for example, Buser et al. (1981), Goodman and Santomero (1986), and Kane (1986, 1987).
1

event of liquidation. The last but not least important restraining factor is government
regulation.
Buser et al. (1981) model the price of federal deposit insurance as a sum of two
components: an explicit insurance premium and an implicit cost associated with
regulatory pressure for safe and sound operation, The implicit premium is conceived to
be risk-sensitive so as to stop excessive risk-taking by the banks. In a bilaterally market-
driven equilibrium, the marginal benefits from deposit insurance would be exactly offset
by its marginal costs (explicit and implicit). However, deposit insurance is a trilateral
contract. Agency problems in government decision-making process raise the possibility
of an equilibrium in which an uncompensated risk exposure is shifted to taxpayers.
Gorton and Rosen (1995) opine that, despite general agreement among researchers on
bank incentives, “empirical research has not reached a consensus on whether deposit
insurance is underpriced.” Marcus and Shaked (1984) adapt a one-year put option
model to estimate the risk-adjusted deposit insurance premiums. Their results suggest
that the FDIC insurance is generally overpriced, although the distribution of “fair”
premiums is highly skewed. Ronn and Verma (1986) refine the Marcus-Shaked model
and incorporate market perceptions of FDIC forbearance policies. Duan, Moreau, and
Sealey (1992) use the methods of Ronn and Verma (1986) to estimate fair FDIC
premiums. Linking changes in these premiums to the changes in banks’ risk exposure,
they estimate that successful risk-shifting is a relatively isolated phenomenon.
These studies presume a one-year option settlement framework, which understates the
value of deposit insurance. Pennacchi (1987) clarifies that an implicit and counterfactual
2See Buser et al. (1981) and Marcus (1984).
3See, for example, Buser et al (1981), Flannery (1982), and Pyle (1984, 1986).
2