NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HONG KONG’S CURRENCY BOARD
AND CHANGING MONETARY REGIMES
Yum K. Kwan
Francis T. Lui
Working Paper 5723
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1996
This paper was presented at NBER’s East Asian Seminar on Economics, and the NBER conference
“Universities Research Conference on the Determination of Exchange Rates.” This work is part of
NBER’s project on International Capital Flows which receives support from the Center for
International Political Economy. We are grateful to the Center for International Political Economy
for the support of this project and to Barry Eichengreen and Zhaoyong Zhang for helpful and
constructive comments. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
O 1996 by Yum K. Kwan and Francis T. Lui. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including @notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper 5723
August 1996
HONG KONG’S CURRENCY BOARD
AND CHANGING MONETARY REGIMES
ABSTRACT
The paper discusses the historical background and institutional details of Hong Kong’s
currency board. We argue that its experience provides agood opportunity to test the macroeconomic
implications of the currency board regime. Using the method of Blanchard and Quah (1989), we
show that the parameters of the structural equations and the characteristics of supply and demand
shocks have significantly changed since adopting the regime. Variance decomposition and impulse
response analyses indicate Hong Kong’s currency board is less susceptible to supply shocks, but
demand shocks can cause greater short-term volatility under the system. The decent performance
of Hong Kong’s currency board is due mainly to the stable fiscal policy of its government. Counter-
factual exercises also show that three-fourths of the reduction in observed output volatility and two-
thirds of that in observed inflation volatility are explained by the adoption of the currency board,
while the remainder is explained by changes in the external environment, The improvement in
stability does not rule out the possibility of monetaty collapse, however.
Yum K. Kwan Francis T. Lui
Centre for Economic Development Centre for Economic Development
Hong Kong University of Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology Science and Technology
Clearwater Bay, Kowloon Clearwater Bay, Kowloon
HONG KONG HONG KONG

1. Introduction
Currency board, first introduced in the British colony of Mauritius in 1849, is a
rule-based monetq institution that is rather different from a central bank. Although
there are variations, a typical currency board has two essential characteristics. First,
the board has the obligation to exchange on demand local currency for some major
international currency, which is often called the reserve currency, and vice versa, at a
fixed exchange rate stipulated in the legislation. Second, local currency is issued based
on at least 100 percent reserve of securities denominated mainly in the reserve
currency.
Since the nineteenth century, dozens of currency boards had been established in
British colonies and other places, often in response to monetary or exchange rate
disturbances.’ However, when these colonies became independent nations after World
War II, most of them decided to replace the currency board with a central bank. Only
very few currency boards still survive today. Some people may be inclined to believe
that this form of monetary institution has already lost its practical importance. This
judgment is premature. Recently, Argentina and Estonia have enacted laws to establish
currency boards, which have also been recommended for Russia, Bulgaria and some
other nations in Eastern Europe (see Hanke, Jonung, and Schuler (1993)). The
currency crisis of Mexico in 1995 has further stimulated people to consider the system
seriously. If this renewed interest could be sustained and these countries were to adopt
currency boards eventually, then as Schwartz (1993) had commented, “a watershed
would have been reached in the annals of political economy.”
1
Formoredetailed discussion of the history of currency boards, see Schwartz (1993) and Hanke
and Schuler (1994). See also Walters andHanke (1992).
1

Do the potential benefits of currency boards outweigh their costs in these
countries? Some of the theoretical advantages and disadvantages of currency boards
are well known.2 For example, convertibility of currency is guaranteed and there is
little or no uncertainty about the exchange rate. On the other hand, in times of
domestic liquidity crisis, a currency board arrangement cannot act as a lender of last
resort. In theory, its reserve currency can only be used to buy local currency or foreign
securities. It would be a violation of its basic principle if the reserve were to be used
to purchase the assets of a domestic bank suffering from a run.3 Moreover, since
currency board is a rule-based arrangement, active discretionary monetary policies are
precluded. Whether this macroeconomic self-discipline is regarded as an advantage,
however, is more controversial.
To assess the viability of adopting currency boards as the monetary institution, we
should not satisfy ourselves with theoretical discussions alone. Since they have been in
existence for almost one and a half centuries, a more fruitful appro,ach is to analyze
rigorously the empirical data generated from actual experience. This literature is
generally lacking. In this paper, we shall analyze the macroeconomic implications of a
currency board regime using Hong Kong data and methods developed by Blanchard
2
Williamson (1995) provides a useful summary of the advantages and disadvantages of currency
boards.
3
The currency board of Hong Kong is an exception to this rule. There is no formal legislation
prohibiting the board from using its foreign exchange to purchase domestic assets, although the
board has sofar refrained from doing soin asignificant way.See the balance sheet inTable 7. One
interpretation is that the legislature provides an “escape clause” with which the board can act as a
lender of last resort during financial crises. As long as the escape clause is only invoked in truly
exceptional andjustifiable situations, it willnotjeopardize thecredibility of the currency board, See
Persson and Tabellini (1991) for an illustration and discussion of escape clause models. See also
footnote 14.
2