NBER WO~G PAPER SERIES
A MODEL OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE
RATE ~DETERM~ATION
Charles Engel
Working Paper 5766
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1996
I appreciate helpfal comments from anumber of colleagues in the field. Some of the work on this
paper was completed while Iwasavisiting scholaratthe Federal Reserve Bank ofKansas City. The
views expressed in this paper are my own and are not necessarily shared by the Federal Reserve
Bank ofKansas City ortheNational Bureau ofEconomic Research. Iacknowledge assistance from
the National Science Foundation, NSF grant#SBR-932078. Thispaper ispart ofNBER’s research
program inInternational Finance andMacroeconomics, andNBER’s project onInternational Capital
Flows. We are gratefil to the Center for International Political Economy for the support of this
project. hy opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
01996 by Charles Engel. All rights reserved. Short sections oftext, notto exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that fall credit, including O notice, is given to
the source,

NBER Working Paper 5766
September 1996
A MODEL OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE
RATE ~DETERMINATION
ABSTRACT
Economic agents undertake actions to protect themselves from the short-run impact of
foreign exchange rate fluctuations: Nominal goodsprices aresetinconsumers’ currencies, and firms
hedge foreign exchange risk. A model is presented here which shows that these features of the
economy can lead to indeterminacy in the nominal exchange rate in the short run. There can be
noise in the exchange rate, unrelated to any fundamentals, essentially because the short-run
fluctuations do not influence any rational agent’s behavior. Empirical implications of this sort of
noise are explored.
Charles Engel
Department of Economics
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
andNBER
CMENGEL@U.WASH~ GTON.EDU

Since the collapse of the Bretton Woods system in the early 1970s, nominal exchange
rates among industrialized countries have been extremely volatile. The short-run
movements in exchange rates have b=n much more extreme than early proponents of floating
rams (such as Friedman (1953) and Johnson (1972)) envisaged.
Two notable puzzles that arise in relation to this volatility are:
(1) What accounts for the volatility? Some of the tharetical models of the 1970s were
specifically designed to explain how the nominal exchange rate could be much more
volatile than the underlying economic fundamentals (notably Dombusch (1976)). But these
models have fared very badly empirically. Meese and Rogoff (1983a, 1983b), and
subsequently many others, have documented the failure of these models in explaining
short-run movements of exchange rates. While the models are more successful at longer
horizons (Mark (1995), Chinn and Meese (1995)), the movement of exchange rates at short
horizons seems independent of the movement in what are hypothesized to be the underlying
economic fundamentals (Flood and Rose (1995)).
(2) Despite the huge variability in nominal exchange rates, international trade does not
appear to have b=n greatly adversely affwted (see, for example, Kroner and Lastrapes
(1993)), On the contrary, there has been a steady opening of markets and expansion in
the volume of trade.
The story of this paper is simple: In the short run, nominal exchange rate changes
have essentially no rd effwts. But, since a change in the exchange rate does not
affect any agent’s behavior, the level of the exchange rate is indeterminate. Purely
extrinsic noise causes the exchange rate to fluctuate around the equilibrium value
determined by the fundamentals.
There are two essential elements to the model presented here. First, recent work
has noted that nominal exchange rate fluctuations have little effect on the prices
1

consumers pay (Knetter (1989, 1993), Engel (1993), Engel and Rogers (1996)). There
appears to be forces of both pricing to market and nominal price stickiness at work in
international markets. Producers charge different prices for similar goods in different
markets. A German producer might charge one price for its product at home, and another
prim for sale in the U.S. The reasons for this type of price discrimination have b~n
explored extensively in r=nt literature (see, for example, Krugman (1987), Dombusch
(1987), Marston (1990)). Prices may not respond to exchange rate changes either for
reasons explored in the “pass-through” literature, or because there are menu-costs to
changing prices (such as in Mankiw (1985)).
While nominal price stickiness has bwn a feature of a long line of models of
exchange rates, generally the price stickiness in these models is of a different sort
than has ban observed in the data. Dombusch (1976), for example, assumes that
exporters set prices in their own currencies. If the dollar depreciates relative to the
mark, imports from Germany become more expensive for Americans in the Dombusch
formulation. But, the evidence suggests that, because firms price to market, they set
the price in the currency of the country that buys the good. German firms set the price
of their exports to the U.S. in dollar terms. A change in the exchange rate has no
effect on that price in the short run.1
There is an effmt on the profits of a German firm, however, if the dollar
deprmiates and the German firm’s export price is fixed in dollars. The revenue per item
sold will decline in mark terms. The German firm’s profits are adversely tifected. But,
that leads to the second essential element of the model in this paper. Firms can hedge
against exchange rate fluctuations. A sufficiently insured firm can fully hedge against
losses from exchange rate fluctuations that are purely noise.
1 Some of the evidence in the pricing-to-market literature suggests that U.S firms
are different than other firms in their pricing behavior. But, Rangan and Lawrence
(1993) argue that this is an incorrect inference based on faulty data.
2