NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HIGH WATER MARKS
William N. Goetzmann
Jonathan Ingersoll, Jr.
Stephen A. Ross
Working Paper 6413
http://www.nber.org/papers/w6413
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 1998
We thank Stephen Brown, Judy Chevalier, Bruce Lehmann, N. Prabhala and two anonymous referees
for helpful comments and discussion. We also thank participants in the 1998 NBER Asset Pricing
Workshop and the 1998 WFA meetings. Please direct correspondence to: William N. Goetzmann,
Yale School of Management, Box 208200, New Haven, CT 06520-8200 (william.goetzmann@yale.edu).
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 1998 by William N. Goetzmann, Jonathan Ingersoll, Jr., and Stephen A. Ross. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

High Water Marks
William N. Goetzmann, Jonathan Ingersoll, Jr., and Stephen A. Ross
NBER Working Paper No. 6413
February 1998, Revison posted January 2012
ABSTRACT
Incentive fees for money managers are frequently accompanied by high-water mark provisions that
condition the payment of the performance fee upon exceeding the previously achieved maximum share
value. In this paper, we show that hedge fund performance fees are valuable to money managers, and
conversely, represent a claim on a significant proportion of investor wealth. The high-water mark provisions
in these contracts limit the value of the performance fees. We provide a closed-form solution to the
cost of the high-water mark contract under certain conditions. Our results provide a framework for
valuation of a hedge fund management company.
William N. Goetzmann Stephen A. Ross
School of Management MIT Sloan School of Management
Yale University 100 Main Street, E62-616
Box 208200 Cambridge, MA 02142
New Haven, CT 06520-8200 and NBER
and NBER sross@mit.edu
william.goetzmann@yale.edu
Jonathan Ingersoll, Jr.
PO Box 208200, New Haven, CT, 06520-8200
jonathan.ingersoll@yale.edu

High-Water Marks and
Hedge Fund Management Contracts
The growth of the hedge fund industry over the past decade has brought an unusual form of
performance contract to the attention of the investment community.1 Hedge fund managers typically receive
a fraction of the fund’s return each year in excess of the high-water mark. The high-water mark for each
investor is the maximum share value since his or her investment in the fund.2 These performance fees
generally range from 15 percent to 25 percent of the new profits earned each year. In addition, managers also
charge a regular annual fee of one percent to two percent of portfolio assets. For example, George Soros’
Quantum Fund charges investors an annual fee of one percent of net asset value with a high-water mark
based performance fee of 20 percent of net new profits earned annually. As a result, the Quantum Fund
returned 49 percent (pre-fee) in 1995 on net assets of $3.7 billion resulting in an estimated total
compensation of $393 million for that year, most of which was due to the incentive terms.3 Of course, when
the high-water mark is not reached, manager returns are substantially reduced. In 1996, the Quantum fund
lost 1.5 percent, and thus, earned only their regular annual fee $54 million (1 percent of the $5.4 billion of
assets).
While the Quantum Fund stands out as an unusually good performer over the past decade, its
compensation terms are typical of the hedge fund industry. High-water mark contracts have the appealing
feature of paying the manager a bonus only when the investors make a profit, and in addition, requiring that
the manager make up any earlier losses before becoming eligible for the bonus payment. On the other hand,
their option-like (non-linear) characteristics clearly could induce the manager to alter his investment strategy,
and the large bonus of 20 percent above the benchmark clearly reduces long-term asset growth.
In this paper, we examine the costs and benefits of high-water mark compensation to investors. To
do so, we develop a valuation equation that allows us to estimate the division of wealth that the investor
implicitly makes with the portfolio manager upon entering into such a contract. We find for reasonable
1 The term hedge fund is used to characterize a broad class of skill-based asset management firms that, for a variety of
reasons, do not qualify as mutual funds or money managers regulated by the Investment Company Act of 1940. For
recent academic research on the hedge fund industry, performance incentives and performance, see Fung and Hsieh
(1997, 1999, 2000), Brown, Goetzmann and Ibbotson (1999), Brown, Goetzmann, and Park (1997) and Ackerman,
MacEnally, and Ravenscraft (1999).
2 The various partners’ funds are all pooled so they earn the same rate of return, but different partners may have a
different high-water mark depending on the maximum share value reached since their investment in the fund.
3 Figures are from the U.S. Offshore Funds Directory, 1995 and 1996 editions for the Quantum Fund N.V. Returns
assume re-investment of income. Manager fees are calculated from reported changes in net asset value.
1

parameters of the valuation equation that the present value of fees and other costs could be as high as 33
percent of the amount invested. A more representative number, though, is probably 10 percent to 20 percent.
A significant proportion of this compensation is due to the incentive feature of the contract; however, the
tradeoff between regular fees and high-water mark fees depends upon the volatility of the portfolio and the
investor’s withdrawal policy. We find that this proportion is high when money is “hot,” i.e., when the
probability of investors leaving the fund is high, and when the volatility of the assets is high. In contrast,
when investors are likely to remain for the long term, and when volatility is low, the regular-fee portion of
the contract provides the greatest value to the manager.
This apparently significant transfer of wealth to the manager may, however, be economically
justified. We show that excess performance as small as an alpha of three percent could compensate the
investors for such charges.
We also consider why high-water mark contracts exist, and in particular, why they are used by hedge
funds as opposed to mutual funds. While their prevalence in the hedge fund industry might be an accident of
history, the high-water mark compensation contract may have features particularly suited to the types of
investment strategies employed by hedge funds. The role of volatility and investor withdrawal, for example,
may account for why we find high-water mark incentives used in asset classes such as hedge funds,
commodity funds, and venture capital funds. In these asset classes, investor payoff is presumably based more
upon expectations of superior manager skill and less upon the expected returns to an undifferentiated or
passively managed portfolio of assets. Given that hedge fund investment is, in a sense, a pure bet on manager
skill, our analysis provides a framework for considering how much skill a hedge fund manager must have to
justify earning such high fees.
In addition to the valuation of the high-water mark contract, we explore the question of whether the
high-water mark compensation is due to the fact that hedge fund technology may have diminishing returns to
scale. Most hedge fund managers are engaged in some form of “arbitrage in expectations,” in the domestic
and global debt, equity, currency, and commodities markets. By their very nature, scaling these arbitrage
returns may not be possible as investors purchase more fund shares. Most mutual funds can compensate their
managers for past performance with a fixed percentage fee on assets, since good performance will attract
new money. Hedge funds, however, may not be able to take or even want new funds.
To test whether the high-water mark contract may be a substitute for increasing compensation
through fund growth, we examine the empirical relationship between hedge fund investor cash-flows and
performance. In contrast to similar studies in the mutual fund industry, we find that neither large funds nor
funds with superior performance sell new shares — indeed we find evidence that they experience net share
repurchases. This is consistent with the hypothesis that the hedge fund industry itself has important limits to
2