A CONTRACTING-THEORY
INTERPRETATION OF THE ORIGINS
OF FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE
Edward J. Kane
Berry K. Wilson
Working Paper 6451

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A CONTRACTING-THEORY
INTERPRETATION OF THE ORIGINS
OF FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE
Edward J. Kane
Berry K. Wilson
Working Paper 6451
http://www.nber.org/papers/w6451
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1998
Valuable comments on an earlier draft were provided by Charles Calomiris, James Thomson, and an
anonymous referee. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1998 by Edward J. Kane and Berry K. Wilson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

A Contracting-Theory Interpretation
of the Origins of Federal Deposit Insurance
Edward J. Kane and Berry K. Wilson
NBER Working Paper No. 6451
March 1998
JEL Nos. G2, N2, K2
ABSTRACT
Conventional wisdom holds that the enactment of federal deposit insurance helped small rural
banks at the expense of large urban institutions. This paper uses asymmetric information, agency-cost
paradigms from corporate finance theory and data on bank stock prices to show how deposit
insurance could and did help stockholders of large banks. The broadening stockholder distribution
of large banks during the stock market bubble of the late 1920s undermined the efficiency of double
liability provisions in controlling incentive conflict among large bank stakeholders. Federal deposit
insurance restored depositor confidence by asking government officials to take over and bond the task
of monitoring managerial performance and solvency at U.S. banks.
Edward J. Kane Berry K. Wilson
Finance Department Federal Communications Commission
Fulton Hall 330A 2000 M Street, NW
Boston College Washington, DC 20554
Chestnut Hill, MA 02167
and NBER
sandra.howe.2@bc.edu

A CONTRACTING-THEORY INTERPRETATION OF THE ORIGINS OF
FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE
When Congress enacted federal deposit insurance in 1933, scholars understood it
to be a tool for helping small banks and for restoring the liquidity of bank deposits. Still,
Calomiris and White (1994, p. 164) note that by late 1931, representatives of urban
constituencies in “eastern states that had not supported deposit insurance for decades
introduced federal deposit insurance bills.” These authors argue that the severity of losses
experienced in the early 1930s caused this switch, energizing small depositors into a
political force strong enough to overcome unvarying large-bank opposition to deposit
insurance. In their view, “small, rural banks and lower-income individuals (with small
deposit accounts) were clear winners, while large, big-city banks, wealthy depositors and
depositors in failed banks were losers.”
It was of course recognized at the outset that deposit insurance could also have
incentive effects. In particular, Emerson (1934) explained that deposit insurance would
intensify risk-taking incentives at banks unless it was properly priced and principles of
sound banking were consistently enforced. In the late 1960s, scholars began to argue that
deposit insurance was mispriced (Scott and Mayer, 1971) and had in fact fueled a massive
reduction in stockholder-contributed bank capital (Pelzman, 1970). But it was not until
the onset of the 1989 FSLIC debacle that the profession came to appreciate the many and
perverse ways that this substitution of subsidized government guarantees for stockholder-
contributed capital at insured institutions shifted risks from owners to taxpayers.
This paper shows that the rebalancing of Congressional support in the 1930s may
have been assisted by changes in the funding-cost benefits that deposit insurance could
offer stockholders in a substantial number of large urban banks. The analysis uses theories
of regulatory competition and financial contracting under information asymmetry to