



I. Introduction
Providing incentives to managers of publicly owned companies is the classic example of
the principal-agent problem (Berle and Means (1932)). Managers or executives take unobserved
actions that affect the returns of shareholders. The literature on principal-agent theory suggests
that the primary means for the shareholders to ensure that managers take optimal actions is to tie
managers' pay to the performance of their firms; that is, to provide high-powered incentives for
managers to maximize the returns to shareholders.1 Managerial compensation will be correlated
with the total return to shareholders, typically through ownership of the firm's stock or options
on the firm's stock.
Despite the compelling logic of the principal-agent framework, there is little existing
empirical support for the model when applied to executive compensation. In their recent survey
of corporate governance, Shleifer and Vishny (1997, p. 774) ask, “Given the large impact of
executives’ actions on values of firms, why aren’t very high powered incentive contracts used
more often in the United States and elsewhere in the world? Is their use limited by optimal
design of incentives, by fear of self-dealing, or by distributive politics?”
The evidence that managers are not given high-powered incentives is provided by the
seminal article of Jensen and Murphy (1990a). They find that the compensation of chief
executive officers increases by only $3.25 per $1,000 increase in shareholder wealth, which they
interpret as being too small to provide significant incentives. They hypothesize that political
forces work to reduce the pay-performance sensitivity from what would be consistent with the
principal-agent model. Hall and Liebman (1997) estimate larger pay-performance sensitivities
and document that the pay-performance sensitivity has grown since 1980 due to increasing
ownership of stock and stock options. However, they do not conclude based on their findings
that compensation contracts are efficient and, therefore, draw no inferences about the validity of
the principal-agent model.
These studies are unable to support the principal-agent model because the average level
of the pay-performance sensitivity cannot be used to judge the validity of the principal-agent
model. Haubrich (1994) shows through numerical simulations that some parameterizations of
the principal-agent model allow for pay-performance sensitivities as low as the 0.003 found by
1 There are other mechanisms that may induce managers to act in the best interests of the shareholders, such as
reputational concerns, competitive labor markets, and the threat of takeover, dismissal, or bankruptcy.

Jensen and Murphy (1990a). A more direct test of the model focuses on its comparative static
predictions.2 The standard principal-agent model posits an economic tradeoff between inducing
the correct amount of unobservable effort by the agent and minimizing the amount of risk she is
required to bear. In most principal-agent models, the pay-performance sensitivity will be
decreasing in the riskiness or variance of the firm's performance. Executives in firms with more
volatile stock prices will have less performance-based compensation.
We use the variation in stock return volatility across firms to test whether executives at
riskier firms have lower pay-performance sensitivities. We find that the pay-performance
sensitivity of a manager's compensation is decreasing in the variance of her firm's returns. In
general, the pay-performance sensitivity for executives at firms with the least volatile stock
prices is an order of magnitude greater than the pay-performance sensitivity for executives at
firms with the most volatile stock prices. These findings strongly support the principal-agent
model.
We also find that estimates of the pay-performance sensitivity that do not explicitly
account for the variance of firm performance are biased toward zero. The variance of firm
performance is an extremely important determinant of compensation, as implied by the principal-
agent model. Consider two firms, one with a high variance of returns and the other with a low
variance of returns. Suppose that the CEOs of both firms receive the same compensation
because the high variance firm had good performance and the low variance firm had poor
performance. Running a regression of pay on performance, or simulating pay-performance
sensitivities, without controlling for the variance of firm performance will incorrectly find no
pay-performance sensitivity, since the CEO with better performance does not receive higher
compensation. We find that omitting the variance of firm performance dramatically understates
the average pay-performance sensitivity.
Another prediction of the principal-agent model is that executive compensation should be
based not only on the returns to the firm's shareholders but on every variable that provides
unique information about the action taken by the manager.3 A prominent example of such a
variable is the returns of other firms in the same industry, leading to a compensation contract
based on the relative performance of the manager compared to her industry rivals. The prediction
2 This point has previously been made by Garen (1994). We discuss his empirical findings below.
3 This is the sufficient statistic result from Holmström's (1979, 1982) work on moral hazard.
2