



I. Introduction
Declining industries, worker layoffs, and factory closings are unavoidable consequences of
a continuously evolving market economy. How efficiently does the market reallocate factors of
production to productive uses in other sectors? Much is known about the outcomes for labor.
Studies, such as those by Topel (1990), Ruhm (1991), Jacobson, LaLonde and Sullivan (1993),
and Schoeni et al (1996), estimate the effects of reallocation on individual workers. They find
that displaced workers often experience prolonged periods of unemployment, as well as
significant losses in permanent income even after they become re-employed. These results
suggest that labor market frictions, such as inefficient separations, search costs or industry-
specific human capital, may be impediments to the efficient reallocation of labor.
Relatively little is known, however, about the post-displacement outcomes for the other
major factor of production - physical capital. Much capital is highly specialized, both in its
embodied technology and factor substitution possibilities and in the types of products it can
produce. While a substantial amount of theoretical and empirical work on investment behavior
has analyzed the effects of costly reversibility on the decision to invest, little direct evidence has
been offered on the efficiency with which capital is reallocated across firms and sectors.
We seek to fill this gap in the literature by providing a theory and estimates of the costs of
reallocation of capital across firms and sectors. Our theory of used capital sales features
specificity of capital and thinness of resale markets. We show how variations in specificity and
costs of search affect the reallocation of capital.
1

Quantifying the costs of capital mobility is more difficult because of data availability.
While several data sets, such as the Panel Study of Income Dynamics and the Displaced Workers
Survey, allow one to track workers over time as they move between industries, we know of no
data set that tracks physical capital as it moves between industries. Studies of depreciation, such
as those by Hulten and Wykoff (1981) and Hulten, Robertson and Wykoff (1989), use transaction
prices from used assets to determine rates of economic depreciation. These data, however, do not
contain information on the original purchase price, nor do they link the buyers and sellers of the
assets. Bresnahan and Ramey (1993) study capital utilization and reallocation of capital across
size classes in the automobile industry during the 1970s and 1980s. Much of that reallocation,
though, was within firms.
Thus, to answer these questions it was necessary to construct a new data set. We
collected confidential information from auctions of equipment from three large Southern
California aerospace plants that discontinued operations. We then used information on sales
prices and the characteristics of buyers to determine the extent of capital mobility for this
particular industry. We will argue below that the aerospace industry is particularly interesting
because it has undergone significant downsizing.
Our findings suggest that capital is very specialized by sector and that reallocating capital
across sectors entails real costs. For example, we find that capital crossing industries sold for a
greater discount than capital that remained in the aerospace industry. Furthermore, the process of
winding down operations before selling the capital resulted in significant periods of under-
utilization before the capital was finally sold. Thus, there also appears to be a time cost to
restructuring. On the other hand, the assumption of zero fungibility of capital is also far from
2