





-2-
protection. Taussig (1915, p. 151) himself suggested that “the same sort of growth [in iron and
steel] would doubtless have taken place eventually, tariff or no tariff; but not so soon or on so
great a scale.”2
Such assertions require substantiation, and if true the question then becomes one of
whether it proved worthwhile to impose protective tariffs in order to establish domestic
production of a product in advance of when it otherwise would have arisen. This paper
investigates such issues by focusing on a segment of the iron and steel industry that has been
heralded as possibly the best example of infant industry protection. The experience of the tinplate
industry, which produces thin sheets of iron or steel that have been coated with tin, is unique on
several dimensions:
! Unlike most manufacturing industries, tinplates did not receive significant tariff
protection after the Civil War, apparently due to a mistaken interpretation of the tariff code. Left
without adequate protection, there was virtually no domestic production prior to 1890.
! The McKinley tariff of 1890 substantially raised the duty on imported tinplate to
encourage the entry and growth of domestic producers. The act also contained an unusual
provision in which the tariff would be completely eliminated in six years if, by that time, domestic
production did not amount to at least one-third of imports.
! The tariff succeeded in promoting domestic production and output rapidly expanded,
2 Others have endorsed Taussig’s judgment. Berglund and Wright (1929, p. 134)
maintain that “whatever had been our policy with respect to the tariff, the United States would
have developed a great iron and steel industry.” Hogan (1971, p. 357) argues that “it seems
inevitable that with our resources of ore and coal that the United States would naturally have been
an iron and steel producer,” although “it also seems probable that British competition might have
hindered the proper growth of the industry in the early years.” Wright (1990) discusses the
importance of raw materials abundance for U.S. manufacturing during this period.