



I. Introduction
The costs and benefits of universal banking have been debated for over seventy years. The
desirability of altering the Glass-Steagall Act—the landmark 1933 law which, among other things,
restricted underwriting by commercial banks—has attracted increasing attention. The recent wave of
mergers in the financial sector has intensified the scrutiny of these issues.
In this paper, we examine the impact of potential conflicts of interest in a modern setting
analogous to universal banks. This approach represents a distinct contribution to the recent research
by financial economists on this question. Earlier work has focused on banks during the pre-Glass-
Steagall era. Kroszner and Rajan1 and Puri2 find that securities underwritten by affiliates of commercial
banks did not perform worse than similar offerings underwritten by investment houses and may have
actually outperformed the investment bank offerings. Kroszner and Rajan find that universal banks of
the 1920s may have chosen to address potential conflicts of interests by underwriting less information-
sensitive issues.3 Puri examines similar data and argues that the public was actually willing to pay a
premium for issues underwritten by universal banks, suggesting that the banks—with their greater
access to information—were able to more effectively certify the quality of the new issues.4 Finally,
Kroszner and Rajan find that the organizational structure of the underwriting activity at a bank affected
1 Randall S. Kroszner & Raghuram G. Rajan, Is the Glass-Steagall Act Justified? A Study of the U.S.
Experience with Universal Banking before 1933, 84 Am. Econ. Rev. 810 (1994).
2 Manju Puri, The Long-Term Default Performance of Bank Underwritten Security Issues, 18 J. of
Banking & Fin. 397 (1994).
3 Kroszner & Rajan, supra note 1.
4 Manju Puri, Commercial Banks in Investment Banking: Conflict of Interest or Certification Role? 40
J. Fin. Econ. 373 (1996).

the market’s perception of the offering.5
We offer an alternative test, which partially addresses the hurdles that studies of pre-Glass-
Steagall banks face. We use venture capital-backed initial public offerings (IPOs) to investigate the
importance of conflicts of interest in the issuance of public securities. Investment banks often have
venture capital subsidiaries that invest in private firms. If the investment banker underwrites an offering
for a firm in which it is already a venture investor, potential conflicts of interest may result. These
conflicts are analogous to the conflicts of interest that might affect a bank that underwrites the security
of a firm in which it holds a debt obligation.
Our paper augments the earlier research by examining potential conflicts of interest in a modern
setting. The availability of stock price information allows us to calculate actual returns for the issuing
firms. Similarly, the detailed financial disclosure available for our sample allows us to determine the
precise financial relationship between the underwriter and the issuer. This allows us to more directly
examine the consequences of potential conflicts than historical studies.
We seek to determine (i) whether underwriters that hold an equity stake in issuing firms are
able to take advantage of unsuspecting buyers (which Kroszner and Rajan call the “naïve investor”
5 Randall S. Kroszner & Raghuram G. Rajan, Organization Structure and Credibility: Evidence from
Commercial Bank Securities Activities before the Glass-Steagall Act, 39 J. Monetary Econ. 475
(1997).
2