



I. Introduction
Discrimination occurs whenever the terms of a transaction are affected by personal
characteristics of the participants that are not relevant to the transaction. By far, the most
commonly considered characteristics are those of race and gender. In labor markets this might
translate into equally productive workers in similar jobs being paid different salaries based on their
race or gender. In credit markets – the subject of study in this paper -- it might translate into loan
approvals differing across racial groups with otherwise similar financial backgrounds.
In this paper we use data from the Federal Reserve Board and the U.S. Small Business
Administration to examine the existence or otherwise of discrimination in the small business credit
market. Discrimination in the credit market against minority-owned small businesses can have an
important effect on the likelihood that that business will succeed. Moreover, discrimination in the
credit market might even prevent the business from opening in the first place. We provide
qualitative and quantitative evidence supporting the view that blacks are discriminated against in
this market. For example, we find that black-owned firms are much more likely to report being
seriously concerned with credit market problems and report being less likely to apply for credit
because they fear the loan would be denied. Moreover, we find, after controlling for a large
number of characteristics of the firms, that black-owned firms are substantially more likely to be
denied credit than other groups. We find little or no evidence that women are discriminated
against in this market.
The structure of the paper is as follows. We begin by briefly reviewing the theory of
economic discrimination and provide some background to our analyses by reviewing prior
research relevant to discrimination in credit markets. We then discuss the empirical framework
employed in our analyses and describe the data used in the remainder of the paper. We then

analyze the qualitative data available to us regarding the beliefs reported by small business
owners. The following sections present econometric evidence of loan denial differences by race
along with an analysis of possible sample selection biases. We then provide a series of caveats to
these analyses. Finally, we present our conclusions.
II. Theoretical Framework and Review of the Literature
Most recent economic studies of discrimination draw on the analyses contained in Gary
Becker's The Economics of Discrimination (1957). Becker’s main contribution was to translate
the notion of discrimination into financial terms. Discrimination, in this view, results from the
desire of owners, workers, or customers to avoid contact with certain groups. This being the
case, transactions with the undesired groups would require more favorable terms than those that
occur with a desired group. Assume that the primary objective of a financial institution is to
maximize their expected profits. The expected return on a loan will depend on the interest rate
charged and the likelihood that a borrower defaults. The financial institution would approve any
loan for which the expected return on the loan exceeded the cost of the funds to the institution.
Discrimination would then result either in a) higher interest rates being charged to undesired
groups having otherwise similar characteristics to the desired group, or b) requiring better
characteristics (i.e. a lower expected default rate) for the undesired group at any given interest
rate. In other words, the disadvantaged group might either be appraised more rigorously or, they
would be given less favorable terms on the loan.
A similar connection between the likelihood of loan approval and the race of the applicant
might also be found if firms employ statistical discrimination. In this case, firms use personal
characteristics - such as race or gender - to infer the likelihood of default on the loan. If
2