





investment differs; some studies use flows of investment, others use stocks, and still others use
production, sales, capital expenditures, exports, or employment. A third reason for
incomparability is that some studies examine mainly time series variation while others focus on
cross- country variation at a given time.
Measures of Affiliate Location
There is no definitive measure of the size of affiliate operations. The stock of investment
in a host country, the most frequently used measure because of its almost universal availability,
is a financial concept, calculated for balance-of-payments purposes and matching balance-of-
payments definitions. It does not necessarily match the location of production, employment, or
other indicators of real activity because a host country may be used as a conduit for financing
production that takes place elsewhere. For example, in the 1980s, the United States held stocks
of direct investment in the Netherlands Antilles that reached a value of negative $25 billion.
There was no corresponding production there; the negative investment was the result of a tax on
foreign borrowing that could be avoided by having the affiliates in the Netherlands Antilles
borrow abroad and relend the proceeds to their parents in the United States, turning a portfolio
capital flow into a direct investment flow that was not subject to the tax. Another example of a
mismatch between investment stock and production is that, in 1997, the United States held an
investment stock of $33 billion in Bermuda, almost as large as that in Brazil and much larger
than that in Mexico, two of the major destinations for U.S. outward FDI and locations for
overseas production by U.S. multinationals. The investment in Bermuda, as well as in several
other locations, such as the Bahamas, Panama, the Netherlands Antilles, and U.K. Islands in the
Caribbean, is almost entirely in the Finance sector, and it is doubtful whether there is any real
activity in those countries, other than incorporation, represented by these large investment
stocks. The host countries’ national income and product calculations treat these operations as
outside the national economies.
2