



Capitalization of Capital Gains Taxes:
Evidence from Stock Price Reactions to the 1997 Rate Reduction
1. Introduction
This paper examines whether stock prices are discounted for potential capital gains taxes.
The extent to which shareholder taxes affect stock prices is central to firm valuation and tax
policy and has long intrigued scholars in economics, finance, and accounting. To date, the
controversy has largely centered on whether dividend taxes are capitalized in equity values. This
paper extends the discussion to consider whether capital gains taxes are capitalized. The equity
capitalization of capital gains taxes is assessed by evaluating stock price reactions around a likely
change in expected capital gains tax rates, namely the May 1997 budget accord that led to a
reduction in the long-term capital gains tax rate from 28 percent to 20 percent.1
Shareholders can pay capital gains taxes on trades in the secondary market, share
repurchases, and liquidating distributions. Because dividends reduce current stock prices and
future liquidation values, reductions in the expected capital gains tax rate should be particularly
value-enhancing to firms that do not pay dividends or pay low dividends, ceteris paribus. If
investors expect cross-sectional differences in the proportion of earnings ultimately to receive
capital gains treatment (e.g., because of dividend policy variation), company valuation should
vary cross-sectionally, based on differences between ordinary income and capital gains rates.
The purpose of this study is to determine whether such cross-sectional valuation differences can
be detected when expected capital gains tax rates change.
1 Realizations from capital transactions are subject to differing tax treatments depending on whether they are gains
or losses and how long the investor has owned the property. Throughout the paper, references to the current capital
gains tax rate mean the most favorable long-term capital gains tax rate applied to net long-term capital gains.

To date, few studies have investigated the effect of capital gains taxes on stock prices and
their findings have been inconclusive. Inconsistent with capital gains tax capitalization,
Amoako-Adu, Rashid and Stebbins (1992) report stock prices reactions did not vary across
dividend yields when the Canadian government introduced a $500,000 lifetime capital gains
exemption in 1985. Conversely, consistent with capital gains tax capitalization, they report that
high-dividend yield firms experienced a significantly smaller price decrease than low dividend
yield firms when the exemption was reduced to $100,000 in 1987. They do not reconcile the
conflicting findings. One possible explanation is that the second test is more powerful because
the second exemption amount is more binding for the marginal investor than the first.
Two concurrent papers examine capital gains tax capitalization using a residual-income
valuation model (Ohlson (1995)). Harris and Kemsley (1999) infer that equity is discounted for
dividend taxes because the coefficient on retained earnings (their proxy for future dividends) in
their valuation model is less than the coefficient on other book value. If capital gains taxes also
are capitalized, they reason that the coefficient on retained earnings should vary with the firm’s
dividend yield and should vary depending on whether the firm repurchases its shares. No clear
patterns of variation emerge.
Collins and Kemsley (1998) extend the Harris-Kemsley model to incorporate the capital
gains taxes arising from secondary trading. Examining 46,584 observations from 1975-1994,
they regress stock prices on book value, earnings, dividends, and the interactions of the
maximum statutory capital gains tax rate with earnings and dividends. Consistent with their
predictions, they report that the coefficient on the earnings (dividend) interaction is negative
(positive). They interpret the coefficients on the interaction terms as evidence that capital gains
2