



1. Introduction
When corporate insiders trade their company’s stock, how much do they profit? What
kinds of stocks offer the greatest profits? Are high-volume trades more profitable than low-
volume trades? What is the expected cost to “outsiders” due to possible transactions with
insiders?
In this paper, we answer these questions using a comprehensive sample of reported
insider transactions from 1975 to 1996. The principal innovation in our approach is the
construction of value-weighted portfolios comprised of all insider trades. This portfolio-based
approach applies performance-evaluation methods to analyze the returns of insiders’ trades from
the day they are executed. These methods provide answers to new questions and offers fresh
insights into old ones.
By law, corporate insiders must file monthly SEC reports about their trades in their
company’s stock, and these reports are quickly made public.1 This data on insider trading has
inspired a large academic literature that studies the cross-sectional variation of stock returns as a
function of insider-trading activity. Representative articles include Lorie and Niederhoffer
(1968), Jaffe (1974), Seyhun (1986) and (1998), Rozeff and Zaman (1988), Lin and Howe
(1990), and Lakonishok and Lee (1998).2 This literature focuses on the abnormal returns to
firms depending on the “intensity” of insiders’ purchases and sales over well-defined periods.
For example, a stock may be labeled an “insider buy” for a month if at least three insiders bought
the stock and no insiders sold it. Alternatively, the definition may rely on the net number of
shares purchased and sold by insiders during the month. We refer to such rules as “intensive-
1
Section 2 discusses the definition of a corporate insider, and the regulation and reporting requirements of their
trades.
2
A closely related literature that studies insiders’ ability to forecast the time-series of aggregate stock returns, a
topic we do not discuss in this paper. See Seyhun (1988), (1992), and (1998), and Lakonishok and Lee (1998).
3

trading” criteria. These studies use a variety of intensive-trading criteria for many different
samples, and are nearly unanimous in the conclusion that stocks that are intensely bought tend to
outperform relevant benchmarks over a subsequent period, and that those that are intensely sold
tend to underperform. They provide mixed evidence on whether other investors can profit, after
transactions costs, by using the public information contained in the insider trading reports.
Seyhun (1998) summarizes this evidence and concludes that several different trading rules lead
to profits.
The research cited above can be interpreted as tests of both the “strong” and “semi-
strong” versions of the efficient-markets hypothesis. If, for example, intensively purchased
stocks earn abnormal returns, then this would be evidence against the strong form. If outsiders
can use the public filings of insiders to construct successful trading strategies, then this would be
evidence against the semi-strong form (Fama, 1971). While intensive-trading criteria illuminate
the efficient-markets hypothesis, the approach encounters two challenges. First, the requirement
that intensity be defined over some interval means that stocks are only classified after these
intervals end. Therefore, the returns on the days immediately following most trades are not
included in the analysis. Second, the use of individual stocks as the main unit of analysis makes
it impossible to determine a value-weighted return to all trades; the stocks with intensive buying
or selling activity may comprise a small or a large part of overall trading. Attempts to overcome
these challenges by using event-study methods on daily returns for all trades (Pascutti, 1996)
encounter statistical difficulties due to both cross-sectional correlation and biases in computing
long-run abnormal returns.3
3 See Barber and Lyon (1997), Barber, Lyon, and Tsai (1998), and Kothari and Warner (1997).
4