



1. Introduction
What are the defining characteristics of a bank? The standard answer is that commercial banks
are institutions that simultaneously engage in two distinct types of activities, one on each side of the
balance sheet: deposit-taking and lending. More precisely, deposit-taking involves issuing claims that are
riskless and demandable, that is, claims that can be redeemed for a known value at any time. Lending
involves acquiring costly information about opaque borrowers, and offering credit based on this
information.
A great deal of theoretical and empirical analysis has been devoted to understanding the
circumstances under which each of these two activities might require the services of an intermediary, as
opposed to being implemented in arm's-length securities markets. While much has been learned from this
work, with relatively few exceptions it has not addressed a fundamental question: why is it important that
one institution carry out both functions under the same roof?1 For example, Diamond (1984) provides a
convincing argument that some types of loans will have to be made by intermediaries, but it is hard to see
in his model why the intermediary cannot be a non-bank finance company that is funded with short term
debt, rather than a commercial bank that is funded with demand deposits. Similarly, Gorton and Pennacchi
(1990) show that intermediation can be valuable in creating adverse-selection-free demand deposits, but it
is again not obvious why this service cannot be provided by mutual funds that invest only in liquid
securities (e.g., high-grade commercial paper and T-bills) and do not make any loans that involve
monitoring.
The question of whether or not there is a real economic synergy between deposit-taking and lending
has far-reaching implications. On the one hand, if one takes the view that there is no underlying synergy,
the fact that commercial banks engage in both activities might be interpreted as resulting from either past or
1 These exceptions include Calomiris and Kahn (1991), Diamond and Rajan (1998), Flannery (1994), and Qi
(1998). We discuss some of these papers in more detail below.
1

current distortions in the regulatory environment. For example, it might be argued that deposit insurance
has encouraged an artificial gluing together of the two activities, as banks attempt to maximize the value of
the insurance put option by engaging in risky lending. Under this view, one would naturally tend to be
sympathetic to "narrow banking" proposals, which effectively call for the breaking up of banks into
separate lending and deposit-taking operations that would resemble finance companies and mutual funds
respectively.2 On the other hand, if there is a real synergy, a forced switch to narrow banking could lead to
large inefficiencies.
In a similar vein, many theories of the monetary transmission mechanism–particularly those that
stress the so-called "bank lending channel"–hinge crucially on the assumption that banks engage in both
deposit-taking and lending.3 To the extent that these theories are true, if the issuing of reservable demand
deposits were to be decoupled from the function of extending monitored credit to individuals and
businesses, the conduct of monetary policy could be noticeably altered.
In this paper, we argue that there may be significant economic synergies between deposit-taking
and lending. We begin by focusing on a product that, in our view, is important in distinguishing banks
from other lenders such as insurance companies and finance companies: loan commitments, or credit lines
(we use the two terms loosely and interchangeably in what follows). We take the central feature of a
commitment to be that a borrower has the option to take the loan down on demand over some specified
period of time.4 Simply put, once the decision to extend a commitment has been made, it behaves just like a
2For narrow banking arguments along these lines, see Simons (1948), Bryan (1988), Litan (1988) and Gorton
and Pennacchi (1992).
3See e.g.: Bernanke and Blinder (1988) and Stein (1998) for the theory behind the lending channel; Bernanke
and Blinder (1992), Kashyap, Stein and Wilcox (1993), Ludvigson (1998), Kishan and Opiela (1998), Kashyap
and Stein (1998) and Morgan (1998) for supporting evidence; and Kashyap and Stein (1994) for a survey.
4Holmstrom and Tirole (1998) also stress that a key function of an intermediary is to provide liquidity in the
form of loan commitments. However, they do not link the loan commitment function to the structure of the
intermediary's liabilities.
2