



"Accordingly, it might be useful to consider ways in which some added discipline could
be imposed on the interbank market. Such discipline, in principle, could be imposed on
either debtor or creditor banks. ... Alternatively, the issue of moral hazard in interbank
markets could be addressed by charging banks for the existence of the sovereign
guarantee, particularly in more vulnerable countries where that guarantee is more likely
to be called upon and whose cost might deter some aberrant borrowing. For example,
sovereigns could charge an explicit premium, or could impose reserve requirements,
earning low or even zero interest rates, on interbank liabilities. Increasing the capital
charge on lending banks, instead of on borrowing banks, might also be effective."
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan, May 7, 1998.1
1. Introduction
The global financial market has been shaken throughout the nineties by a series of major
financial crises. In retrospect, the Mexican crisis of 1994-95 was a mild tequila overhang in comparison
to the major Asian flu of the late nineties. Attempts to stabilize the global system have led to massive
bailouts, the sizes of which seem to increase exponentially.2 This experience suggests that the present
system cannot survive indefinitely, as the willingness of tax payers in the OECD countries to engage in
continuing bailouts is approaching its limits. Growing recognition of this has resulted in a spirited
debate among economists, and soul searching among policy makers.
At one end of the spectrum of views, we find believers in the inherent efficiency of private
financial intermediation, arguing that the crises are due to global moral hazard generated by quasi public
financial institutions and government interventions. The provision of implicit (or explicit) insurance has
subsidized private lending at the expense of the tax payers. According to this view, preventing these
crises requires alleviating the global moral hazard problem. To accomplish this task may necessitate a
scaling down of the role of the IMF and that of other quasi public institutions in orchestrating bailouts.
1Before the 34th Annual Conference on Bank Structure and Competition of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago.
2The Mexican bailout required about $ 40 billion. The recent crises in the Far East have triggered
commitments of the IMF and the OECD countries to South Korea, Indonesia and Thailand of about $
115 billion.
2

At the other end of the spectrum are economists who argue for stringent capital controls, needed
in order to cut international lending to emerging markets. According to this view, large capital flows are
destabilizing, and are frequently welfare reducing for both the emerging markets and the OECD
countries, potentially benefiting only the speculators.
In between these extremes exists a large array of views. Most share the presumption that we deal
with a second-best situation, in which there is no quick fix but welfare can be enhanced by the proper
regulatory changes. While prudent borrowing of emerging market economics is beneficial, excessive
borrowing may be disadvantageous due to existing distortions. In such an environment, one should
either reduce the existing distortions, or induce borrowers and lenders to internalize them. An example
of these views is provided by Chairman Alan Greenspan, in his remarks cited above, in which he
proposes the imposition of reserve requirements on foreign bank loans as a possible means of imposing
discipline on the market.
To put this issue in the broader context, we observe that most mainstream economists agree that
approaching free trade in goods and services is beneficial. But such a consensus is lacking when we
deal with financial integration. Indeed there is a spirited debate concerning the wisdom of unrestricted
capital mobility between the OECD and emerging markets, and various previous studies have identified
circumstances in which unlimited capital mobility may be sub-optimal.3
The notion of introducing reserve requirements as a means of stabilizing capital flows between
advanced and emerging markets is an innovative idea, one that merits serious analysis. The novel aspect
of this paper is in applying a public finance framework to evaluate the general macroeconomic impact of
reserve requirements in a second-best world, where in the absence of credible pre-commitments, we
observe moral hazard on the lender's side, and sovereign risk on the borrower's side. We are particularly
concerned with determining how the effects of bailouts interact with the reserve requirements and how
the optimal design of reserve requirements is impacted.
3See, for example, McKinnon (1982), Diaz-Alejandro (1984), Kletzer (1984), Aizenman (1989). For
recent contributors, see McKinnon and Pill (1996), Krugman (1988), Rodrik (1998), Agénor and
Aizenman (1998), and Caballero and Krishnamurthy (1998).
3