NBER WORKING PAPER SERJES
VALUING THE RELOAD FEATURES
OF EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS
Steven Huddart
Ravi Jagannathan
Jane Saly
Working Paper 7020
http://www.nber.org/paperslw7020
NATIONALBUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1999
An earlier version of this paper, by Jagannathan and Saly, was titled "Ignoring reload features can
substantially understate the value of executive stock option." Huddart extended the analysis to consider
cases of multiple and unrestricted downloads. Jagannathan and Saly thank Bob McDonald for helpful
discussions. Huddart particularly thanks Bob Whaley for helpful insights and encouragement. The views
expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not reflect those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 1999 by Steven Huddart, Ravi Jagannathan, and Jane Saly. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including ©notice, is given to the source.

Valuing the Reload Features of Executive Stock Options
Steven Huddart, Ravi Jagannathan, and Jane Saly
NBER Working Paper No. 7020
March 1999
JEL No. C80, D84, J33, M12, M41
ABSTRACT
of
Under Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 123, the grant date value
executive stock options excludes the value of any reload feature because, at the timeof writing the
feasible to value a
standard in 1995, the Financial Accounting Standards Board believed it was not
be used to
reload feature at the grant date. We show how the Binomial Option Pricing Model can
determine the grant date value of such options. Ignoring the reload feature can substantially
understate the value of the option: the reload feature increases the value of anotherwise similar
of the reload
option by 24 percent in the example we consider. In view of the potential significance
Standards
feature and the versatility of the Binomial Option Pricing Model, the Financial Accounting
Board may wish to reconsider the accounting for options with a reload feature.
Steven Huddart Ravi Jagannathan
J.L. Kellogg Graduate School of Mgmt.
Fuqua School of Business
2001 Sheridan Rd.
Duke University
Leverone / Anderson Complex
Box 90120
Evanston, IL 60208-200 1
Durham, NC 27708-0 120
and NBER
huddart@mail.duke.edU
rj agannanwu.edu
Jane Saly
3-122 Carison School of Management
University of Minnesota
321 l9thAveS
Minneappolis, MN 55455
jsalycsom.umn.edu

INTRODUCTION
Some executive stock options have features that conventional exchange-traded
and over-the-counter options do not. These features may alter significantly the value
of executive stock option grants compared to conventional options. Yet, for the reload
feature, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) in 1995 recommended
delaying estimation of the feature's value:'
The Board continues to believe that, ideally, the value of an option
with a reload feature should be estimated at the grant date, taking
into account all of its features. However, at this time, it is not feasi-
ble to do so. Accordingly, the Board concluded that the best way to
account for an option with a reload feature is to treat both the initial
grant and each subsequent grant of a reload option separately. (State-
ment of Financial Accounting Standards No. 123, ¶186, p. 61)
However, as Arnason and Jagannathan (1994) show, executive stock options and the
reload feature can be valued using the Binomial Option Pricing method.
The Binomial Option Pricing Model (Cox et al., 1979) is sufficiently versatile to
value executive stock options with a reload feature at the time of the initial grant. We
present a method to value, at grant date, options that may be reloaded a fixed number
Other terms for reload options include restoration options, replacement options,
continuation options, replenishment options, and accelerated ownership options.
1

of times. We demonstrate the method using a Norwest Corporation option grant with
a single reload. In this example, the value of the option with the reload feature is 24%
more than the value of the same option without the reload feature. We further explain
how our method generalizes to handle additional features of reload options including
options for which the number of reloads is unrestricted. Accordingly, the full value of
an option with a reload feature can be valued at the grant date.
A reload feature is a provision that stipulates new optious are granted to an exec-
utive at the time the executive exercises the original options. The reload options typ-
ically have an exercise price equal to the then-current market price and expire at the
same time as the original options. The number of reload options granted per option ex-
ercised varies by firm. Commonly, a reload option is granted for each share tendered by
the executive in payment of the exercise price on the original options.2 Sometimes the
new options themselves may be reloaded. Hence, a comprehensive valuation procedure
requires that both the number of reloads allowed and the number of options granted per
existing option exercised be taken into account. The procedure must also anticipate that
a reload feature affects the timing of exercise of the initial option. The Black--Scholes
fornmula cannot provide an accurate measure of the value of a reload feature since it nei-
ther anticipates optimal early exercise nor assigns value to the reloaded options.
2 Under some plans, the stock used to pay thc exercise price must have been held b
the employee for a minimum specified tirrie. Firms may use tins feature to induce executives to hold some
of their wealth in stock iii periods before the executive exercises Ins options. Some reload plans also require
executives to hold shares acquired on exercise for some time after exercise. See Hemmer et al. (1996).
2