



I. Introduction
Wall Street has long been interested in quantitative methods of speculation. One popular
short-term speculation strategy is known as "pairs trading." The strategy has at least a fifteen year
history on Wall Street and is among the proprietary "statistical arbitrage" tools currently used by
hedge funds as well as investment banks. The concept of pairs trading is disarmingly simple. Find
two stocks whose prices have moved together historically. When the spread between them widens,
short the winner and buy the loser. If history repeats itself, prices will converge and the arbitrageur
will profit. It is hard to believe that such a simple strategy, based solely on past price dynamics and
simple contrarian principles, could possibly make money. If the U.S. equity market were efficient,
risk-adjusted returns from pairs trading should not be positive.
In this paper, we examine the risk and return characteristics of pairs trading with daily data
over the period 1962 through 1997. Using a simple algorithm for choosing pairs, we test the
profitability of several straightforward, self-financing trading rules. We find average annualized
excess return of about 12 percent for top-pairs portfolios. We show that part of this may be due to
institutional factors. In particular, Jegadeesh and Titman (1995) find evidence that a significant
proportion of profits from short-term contrarian strategies may be due to asynchronous trading and
the bid-ask bounce. After the bid-ask bounce and transaction costs are taken into account, pairs
trading yields reduced -- but still positive and significant -- returns.
Regardless of the magnitude of the profits from pairs trading, our results reveal something
about the mechanism and performance of actual relative-price arbitrage activities. This is useful,
because, despite considerable theory about market efficiency, economists have little empirical
information about how such efficiency is maintained. Event studies show us that new information
1

is rapidly impounded into stock prices, presumably through speculative activity, however by their
very nature event studies are conditional upon significant news releases that focus attention upon the
securities. Studies about active speculators and institutional investors are tantalizing -- they suggest
some degree of herding behavior that may be motivated by opportunity for speculative gains,
however we do not yet really understand why certain stocks attract institutional attention. In this
paper, we investigate the mechanisms and profits of relative pricing in a setting in which speculators
are trading in securities that are close economic substitutes for each other. While pairs trading may
be only one of a number of "convergence" strategies employed by arbitrageurs, it has the attraction
of corresponding quite nicely to a model-free, but highly intuitive "Law of One Price," in a way
that will be made clear below.
Our results fall in a gray area of profitability -- attractive enough to sustain low cost market
participants whose presence maintains relative efficiency, but not attractive enough to support large
amounts of investor capital. Our study explores the statistical characteristics of pairs trader portfolio
returns, and thus helps understand one interesting mechanism of market efficiency -- relative pricing
of close substitutes.
II. Background
II.1 History
In the mid-1980’s, the Wall Street quant Nunzio Tartaglia assembled a team of physicists,
mathematicians and computer scientists to uncover arbitrage opportunities in the equities markets.
Tartaglia’s group of former academics used sophisticated statistical methods to develop high-tech
trading programs, executable through automated trading systems, that took the intuition and trader’s
"skill" out of arbitrage and replaced it with disciplined, consistent filter rules. Among other things,
2