



1
I. Introduction
Partnerships often begin in a state of uncertainty, where there is some doubt about the
prospect of success. In such an environment, the partners may "start small" by first attempting
small-scale projects and then, if they are successful, graduating to larger ones. In this way, the
parties structure their relationship in order to learn about one another before committing a great
deal of resources to the enterprise. When deciding how to interact, partners also consider the
chance that they will eventually terminate their relationship. The value of termination depends on
how easily other matches can be made and on the information available about prospective new
partners.
We design a simple model to explore the interaction between how ongoing relationships
are structured and the process by which they are formed. The basic, decision-theoretic analysis
combines the problem of investment under uncertainty with the problem of optimal search. An
extension of the model incorporates the strategic issue of contract enforcement. We study the
relationship between parameters of the matching environment (such as the cost of search) and the
extent to which partners start small. We also examine complementarities between various
endogenous features of partnerships, including the extent of starting small, longevity of
partnerships, and methods of contract enforcement. The main goal of our theoretical exercise is
to capture, with the simplest possible model, a variety of realistic features of the formation and
structure of long-term relationships. We hope this will encourage empirical research on the
dynamic structure of partnerships.
Development of our model was motivated by our desire to understand a characteristic way

2
in which developed country (DC) firms make their decisions regarding cooperation with a
potential less developed country (LDC) partner. Egan and Mody (1992) surveyed United States
buyers operating in LDCs, including “manufacturers, retailers, importers, buyers’ agents, and joint
venture partners” (p. 322), and found that “buyers often begin with small orders, perhaps for a
simple product, and let the relationship [with the LDC firm] build gradually” (p. 330). The
purpose of the small order is to learn about the capabilities of the LDC firm’s manager and
workers to meet the DC firm’s requirements for price, quality, and delivery. Egan and Mody
state (p. 326):
Buyers looking for either new sources of supply or joint venture
partners search for suppliers who manage their factories efficiently,
often regardless of the level of technology those factories currently
employ; interviewees commonly felt that new machines could easily
be installed so long as workers already had the ability to use them
efficiently and absorb training readily. For many buyers,
management was the most important factor in defining an ideal
supplier....As one buyer phrased it, “I do not invest in plant X but in
Mr. Y. It all depends on the people.”
We model the DC firm’s search for an LDC partner/supplier and the subsequent relationship
between the two parties. Matched firms can “start small” in our model.
Clearly one is more likely to learn Mr. Y’s true type, as it were, the more the initial order
resembles the product(s) that the DC firm ultimately wants to buy in large quantity. Hence the
DC firm learns more, the more assistance it provides such as visits to the supplier’s plant by
engineers or other technical staff. In our analysis we therefore not only allow the DC firm to
choose whether or not to start small but also to choose the intensity with which it starts small.
If the small order is filled to the DC firm’s satisfaction, it moves on to a large project in
partnership with the LDC firm. In practice this ranges anywhere from a large order and finance