



1. Introduction
Since Nordhaus’ early contribution (Nordhaus, 1969, 1972), economic theorists have undertaken
extensive analysis of the problem of optimal patent design. Theorists have long recognized the tradeoffs
inherent in the patent system – a system which creates static losses (by conferring upon innovators
temporary monopoly power) in order to realize dynamic social gains by inducing greater innovative effort.
Within policy circles, the debate surrounding intellectual property rights design and enforcement
has also increasingly come to the forefront. As has been widely noted, legal and procedural reforms in the
U.S. in the early 1980s provided stronger protection to holders of existing patents, reflecting a shift in the
U.S. policy consensus in favor of stronger intellectual property rights protection. This policy shift then
took on an international dimension as several consecutive U.S. administrations placed intellectual property
rights at the center of the U.S. agenda in bilateral and multilateral trade negotiations.1 Since the early
1980s, the U.S. has repeatedly sought to cajole or coerce its trading partners into significantly
strengthening their own intellectual property rights regimes, bringing them more in line with the new U.S.
model.
However, neither the expanding theoretical literature on patent design nor the international policy
debate has been sufficiently guided by empirical work.2 Much recent theoretical work explicitly assumes
that R&D performing firms are quite responsive to subtle changes in patent design. The U.S. position in
the international fight over intellectual property rights is based on the proposition that the additional
innovation induced by stronger patent systems is so substantial that the net social impact of a strengthening
of intellectual property rights abroad will be positive. These propositions are empirically testable, yet the
empirical evidence underlining these propositions ranges from sketchy to nonexistent.
Does an expansion of the scope of patent rights really induce more innovative effort? Our paper
provides badly needed empirical evidence on this question by analyzing the response of Japanese firms to
the Japanese patent reforms of 1987, enacted in January 1988 (hereafter the 1988 reforms or “patent
reform”). For reasons which we document in the paper, this Japanese reform provides an unusually clean
1

“natural experiment.”3 Furthermore, this policy reform was undertaken in a country with a large number of
R&D-intensive firms that had reached the global “technology frontier” by the time the reforms were
enacted.4 Thus, we have micro-level data on the R&D investment and patenting of a large number of firms
both prior to and after the enactment of reforms. Finally, Japanese firms are not only aggressive about
seeking patent protection at home, but they are also aggressive in patenting in the U.S., receiving
approximately 25% of all patents granted by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (U.S. PTO). There
was no similar change in U.S. patent law at the time of the 1988 reforms. Because we possess two parallel
patent series for our sample firms, we may be able to identify more precisely just what the impact of the
patent reforms was on innovative output.
We show that the 1988 patent reforms in Japan expanded the scope of patent protection, as defined
by the theoretical literature on patent design, based on interviews with practitioners. Interview results also
suggest that organizational setting has an effect on firms’ response to changes in patent systems.
Empirically analyzing data on 307 Japanese firms during the period 1980 to 1994, we find little evidence
that this expansion of patent scope induced additional R&D effort by Japanese firms. We also examine
whether or not the Japanese patent reform resulted in additional innovative output by examining firm
patenting in the U.S. and Japan. We find some evidence consistent with the hypothesis that innovative
output increased. However, only a portion of this increase can be reasonably attributed to the effects of
patent reform. Taken together, the empirical evidence suggests that firm responsiveness to even significant
changes in patent design is limited. This has important implications for both the current policy debate and
the theoretical literature, which we discuss in our conclusion.
This article is organized as follows. Section 2 explains the pre-reform Japanese patent system.
Section 3 describes the 1988 Japanese patent system reforms. This section also explains why these reforms
can be considered an “exogenous” policy change. Section 4 discusses the perceptions of the effects of the
reforms by practitioners and demonstrates that patent reform effectively expanded the scope of patent
protection. Section 5 establishes the linkage between the 1988 reforms and theoretical literature, and
2