



In general equilibrium models in which prices are perfectly flexible and output fluctuations
occur solely because of supply shocks, the source of a foreign exchange risk premium is the
correlation between supply shocks to output and shocks to the money supply (see Stulz (1984) and
Engel (1992).) Monetary volatility or exchange rate volatility per se will not necessarily result in a
risk premium. Monetary shocks that have no impact on consumption will not increase the riskiness
of holding domestic or foreign nominal assets.
When nominal prices are sticky, however, monetary shocks will cause changes in output and
consumption. While in sticky-price models the risk premium still arises from the covariance of
exchange rates with consumption, it is inevitable that such a correlation will exist. A positive
domestic monetary shock generally leads to a depreciation of the domestic currency and an increase
in home consumption.
The first section of this paper briefly reviews the concept of the foreign exchange risk
premium. There is a tradition in the literature of defining the risk premium as deviations from
uncovered interest parity. Empirically, that is a useful approximation for a measure of the risk
premium, but it can lead one astray in theoretical analyses of the determinants of the risk premium.
Some of my previous papers (Engel (1984, 1992, 1996)) have discussed this issue extensively., so
the discussion in section 1 will be short. Still, it is helpful to review this distinction because
Obstfeld and Rogoff’s (1998) analysis of the foreign exchange risk premium in their sticky-price
general equilibrium model relies on the traditional (but somewhat misleading) definition of the risk
premium.
Section 2 presents the sticky-price general equilibrium models. Again, this presentation is
very abbreviated. That is because the models are drawn directly from Obstfeld and Rogoff (1998)
and Devereux and Engel (1998). The distinction between these two models is that in the Obstfeld-
Rogoff model, producers set prices in their own currency. The price paid by foreigners for home
goods (and the price paid by domestic residents for foreign goods) varies instantaneously when the
exchange rate changes. The law of one price holds. In the Devereux-Engel model, producers set a
price in the home currency for domestic residents and in the foreign currency for foreign residents.
When the exchange rate fluctuates, the law of one price does not hold. The type of price-setting
behavior of producers matters for the size of the risk premium.
Another thing that matters for the size of the risk premium is the money demand function.
For both models of price setting, the nature of the risk premium depends on whether money demand
is derived from a real-balances-in-the-utility-function framework or a cash-in-advance framework.
Section 3 derives expressions for the foreign exchange risk premium in this matrix of
models: prices set in producers’ currencies versus consumers’ currencies; and money demand
derived from cash in advance versus real balances in the utility function.
Section 4 analyzes the findings. There are four main points:
1) While the existence of a risk premium in the flexible-price general equilibrium models depends
on the correlation of exogenous monetary shocks and aggregate supply shocks, the risk
premium arises endogenously in sticky-price models. Monetary variability induces correlation
1

between consumption and exchange rates. This result is appealing in that the foreign exchange
risk premium is directly related to the volatility of exchange rates, which is consistent with the
finding of Flood and Rose (1996)
2) The distribution of aggregate supply shocks has no bearing on the foreign exchange risk
premium in the sticky-price models we analyze.
3) Engel (1984, 1992, 1996) shows the risk premium depends on the prices faced by consumers.
When the law of one price does not hold, as in the model in which producers set prices in
consumers’ currencies, there is no unique foreign exchange risk premium. The risk premium
for home investors is different from the risk premium for foreign investors.
4) Standard general equilibrium models are incapable of producing risk premiums that are very
large. One sticky-price model we examine (prices set in consumers’ currencies with a cash-in-
advance constraint) can generate much larger risk premiums.
1. The Foreign Exchange Rate Risk Premium
A useful way analyze the risk premium implicit in the forward exchange rate (defined here
as the home currency cost of buying a unit of foreign exchange one period forward) is to compare
the forward rate to what it would be if investors were risk neutral. Let F be the forward rate and
t
FRN the risk-neutral forward rate.
t
If there were only a single consumption good, risk-neutrality implies that utility is linear in
consumption. Engel (1984) argues that the risk-neutral investor would arbitrage the market until the
condition:
æ FRN - S ö
E ç ç t t+1 ÷ ÷=0 (1)
t
è P ø
t+1
holds, where E refers to expectations conditional on time t information; S is the spot exchange rate
t t
(domestic price of foreign currency); and P is the nominal domestic-currency price of the
t
consumption good. In words, expression (1) means that under risk neutrality there are no expected
real profits from forward market speculation.
Engel (1992) demonstrates that when utility is time separable, and felicity (period by period
utility) is a function of more than one good, equation (1) still defines the risk-neutral forward rate.
It is possible to write an expression such as (1) when felicity is homothetic. In this case, P is the
t
exact price index associated with the felicity function. Risk-neutrality means that felicity is linear
in the consumption index, where the consumption index is defined as total nominal consumption
expenditure in the period divided by the price index.
Equation (1) gives an expression for the risk-neutral forward rate:
2