



Hostile Takeovers?
1. Introduction
The perception of hostility in American takeovers has had important connotations in both
the popular and the academic literature. Unwelcome bidders are often perceived to threaten at
least some of the stakeholders in target corporations, which leads to extensive defensive
reactions by the management of the target firm. In contrast, friendly takeovers are often seen to
create synergies that make both the bidder and the target firm better off [see, for example,
Mørck, Shleifer, and Vishny (1988, 1989)].
The distinction between hostile and friendly takeovers is also important if the gains from
hostile takeovers are created by removing an inefficient target management team. Manne (1965)
referred to this as part of the market for corporate control. Several papers have shown that
management turnover increases following hostile takeovers, including Shivdasani (1993). While
these theoretical polar cases seem intuitive, in practice most transactions contain elements of
both friendly and hostile deals. That is, some stakeholders are likely to be disadvantaged by the
transaction and there are likely to be some economic gains from combining the operations of the
bidder and target.
Some laws and contracts depend on the distinction between hostile and friendly takeover
attempts. For example, the Wall Street Journal (May 16, 1996) reports that Aon Corp. began
selling “Hostile Takeover Defense Insurance,” designed to reimburse companies for the costs
associated with warding off a hostile takeover bid or a proxy fight with dissident shareholders.
Likewise, Mitchell and Netter (1989) argue that a proposed tax bill that would have discouraged
hostile takeovers contributed to the 1987 stock market crash.
Hostility is usually perceived when an offer is made public that is aggressively rejected
by the target firm. Consequently, perceptions of hostility are closely linked with takeover
1

Hostile Takeovers?
negotiations that are far from completion. Often firms engage in confidential negotiations before
there is a public announcement of a bid or an intention to bid. In some cases, the first public
announcement is of a successfully completed negotiation, which would be perceived to be
friendly, even if the early stage private negotiations would have seemed hostile if they had been
revealed to the public. In other cases, private negotiations break down and one of the parties
decides that public information about the potential bid would enhance its bargaining position.
For example, bidders might choose to reveal their intentions to put stockholder pressure on target
managers. Likewise, targets might reveal a takeover attempt to attract alternative bidders.
Because public announcements of takeover attempts are part of negotiating strategies, the
problem of distinguishing between hostile and friendly transactions is complex. Moreover, as
with any negotiation, the mood of the process can change over time as circumstances change.
Many transactions that seem hostile initially result in friendly negotiated settlements.
This paper studies 2,346 offers for exchange-listed target firms from 1975-96 to see
whether there are identifiable differences between offers that are characterized as hostile and
those that are not. Hostility is measured as four different dichotomies based on (1) the way
takeovers are characterized by the Wall Street Journal (WSJ) or Dow Jones News Retrieval
(DJNR), (2) the way takeovers are characterized by Securities Data Corporation (SDC), (3) the
use of unnegotiated tender offers, and (4) pre-bid takeover speculation. To determine whether
there is economic substance to perceptions of hostility, I examine pre- and post-bid stock price
and accounting performance of the target and bidder firms. I also consider the type of offer that
is made, the mode of payment offered to target stockholders, and whether the bidding firm is also
publicly traded. The differences seen in the data are consistent with the view that the distinction
between hostile and friendly offers is largely a reflection of negotiation strategy.
2