



It is well known that free entry into markets with decreasing average costs can
result in an inefficient number of firms.1 The possibility of inefficient entry into radio
broadcasting has been discussed for decades (see Steiner, 1952).2 Markets for
differentiated products are prone to fail to deliver optimal product variety as well.3
Ownership concentration has the potential to affect both of these problems. Because new
firms and products draw their customers in part from existing products, concentration can
affect incentives to enter as well as how to position products. As a result, while mergers
that increase concentration generally raise prices, they may also mitigate (or worsen) other
distortions associated with the number of products and the extent of variety.
In this paper we consider how product variety in the radio industry is affected by
changes in ownership structure. Because market structure is the endogenous outcome of
a competitive process, it is in general difficult to measure the effect of concentration on
other factors such as the number of products and the extent of product variety.4
However, recent changes in radio station ownership rules have given rise to large
exogenous increases in concentration. The Telecommunications Act of 1996 substantially
relaxed local radio ownership restrictions, prompting a major wave of consolidation in the
industry. Between 1993 and 1997 the average Herfindahl index across 243 major media
markets increased from 1272 to 2096, or by almost 65 percent. This substantial - and
1 See Mankiw and Whinston (1984).
2 Recent empirical evidence (Berry and Waldfogel, 1996) shows that free entry produces far more firms
than would optimally produce advertising (i.e. ignoring benefits to listeners).
3 See Spence (1976), Dixit and Stiglitz (1977), Lancaster (1979).
4 One study attempting to do so is Alexander (1997), who documents the relationship between a measure
of product variety and ownership concentration in the music recording industry.
1

exogenous - growth in ownership concentration makes it possible to measure the effect of
ownership concentration on entry and product variety.5
This paper proceeds in 5 sections. Section 1 outlines the possible theoretical
relationship between ownership and product variety and then presents background
information on ownership rules in radio broadcasting. Section 2 describes our data.
Section 3 presents our empirical strategy. Section 4 contains estimation results. Using a
panel data set on 243 U.S. radio broadcast markets in 1993 and 1997, we find that
concentration reduces entry and increases product variety. Section 5 considers possible
explanations for the results. We find evidence consistent with spatial preemption. Jointly
owned stations broadcasting from the same market are more likely than unrelated stations
(and more likely than jointly owned statations in different markets) to broadcast in similar
formats. A brief conclusion follows.
I. Background
1. Concentration and the Incentives to Operate and Position Stations
Concentration can affect the incentives of owners to operate stations, as well as
their incentives about where to locate new stations in product space (i.e. which formats a
multi-station firm will jointly operate). Here we briefly outline some incentives facing
radio station owners.
The possible effects of mergers on incentives to operate stations and offer variety
are suggested by a comparison of new entrant and incumbent incentives. When a firm
opens a new station, it draws listeners from both "business stealing" (diverting listeners
5 Also worthy of study is the effect of increased concentration on advertising prices. For lack of data we
2