



The financial crisis which began in July 1997 in the East Asian countries, Thailand, Indonesia,
Malaysia and Korea, has had devastating effects on their economies. Growth rates in these countries
which were in excess of five percent before 1997, turned sharply negative in 1998 and, at the time
of this writing it is not yet clear when these economies will turn the corner and resume positive rates
of growth. This paper examines why these countries, which were part of what has been termed
"the Asian miracle" and were able to eradicate so much poverty, are now undergoing severe
economic contractions, with such harmful effects on their populations. A breakdown of information
in financial markets is the key factor that has driven this crisis. After laying out an asymmetric
information view of the Asian financial crisis, this paper goes on to use this framework to explore
lessons from this crisis.
1.
An Asymmetric Information View
of the Asian Crisis
The financial system plays a critical role in the economy because, when it operates properly,
it channels funds from those who have saved surplus funds to those who need these funds to engage
in productive investment opportunities. The major barrier to the financial system performing this job
properly is asymmetric information, the fact that one party to a financial contract does not have the
same information as the other party, which results in moral hazard and adverse selection problems.
An asymmetric information view of financial crises, which I have described in more detail elsewhere
in Mishkin (1996a, 1997), defines a financial crisis to be a nonlinear disruption to financial markets
1

in which the asymmetric information problems of adverse selection and moral hazard become much
worse, so that financial markets are no longer able to efficiently channel funds to those who have the
most productive investment opportunities.
Here asymmetric information analysis is used to explain the East Asian financial crisis. This
analysis emphasizes that the crisis was caused by fundamentals, particularly problems in the financial
sector, and is thus consistent with recent work by Corsetti, Pesenti and Roubini (1998), Goldstein
(1998) and Krugman (1998). However, it does not rule out that illiquidity and multiple equilibria
stories of the type outlined by Radelet and Sachs (1998) played some role as well. The analysis here,
however, goes beyond these other papers by focusing on the mechanisms through which the financial
crisis in East Asia caused sharp contractions in economic activity.
In most financial crises, and particularly in the East Asian crises, the key factor that causes
asymmetric information problems to worsen and launch a financial crisis is a deterioration in balance
sheets, particularly those in the financial sector. As in earlier financial crises, such as in Chile in 1982
or Mexico in 1994-95 where a similar analysis applies,1 the story starts with financial liberalization
that resulted in the lending boom which was fed by capital inflows. Once restrictions were lifted on
both interest-rate ceilings and the type of lending allowed, lending increased dramatically. As
documented in Corsetti, Pesenti and Roubini (1998), Goldstein (1998), World Bank (1998) and
Kamin (1999), credit extensions in the Asian crisis countries grew at far higher rates than GDP. The
problem with the resulting lending boom was not that lending expanded, but that it expanded so
rapidly that excessive risk-taking was the result, with large losses on loans in the future.
There are two reasons why excessive risk-taking occurred after the financial liberalization in
East Asia. The first is that managers of banking institutions often lacked the expertise to manage risk
1Indeed, the analysis here explains why as pointed out in Kamin (1999), the crises in Chile in 1982, Mexico
in 1994-95 and East Asia in 1997-98 bear so much similarity to each other, in contrast to the debt crisis in
Mexico and other Latin American countries in the 1980s. For a discussion of the Chilean crisis, see Diaz-
Alejandro (1985) and for the Mexican crisis, see Mishkin (1996).
2