



I. Introduction
Syndicated bank lending is the Chevy Cavalier of international financial markets.
For the same reasons that Motor Trend devotes little space to basic transportation,
academics pay little attention to international bank lending, preferring to concentrate on
rapidly growing market segments like the sport-utility vehicle and the international bond
market, or exotic products like high-performance sports cars and derivative credit
instruments. What is relevant to the vast majority of consumers thus receives relatively
little attention.
In this paper we argue that more attention to international bank lending is
warranted for three reasons. First, the syndicated bank loan remains one of the
workhorses of international capital markets. As Table 1 shows, loan commitments have
been every bit as important as bonds in the first half of the 1990s. While new bond issues
rose from negligible levels at the beginning of the 1990s to more than $100 billion in
calendar year 1996 and $128 billion in 1997 before falling back in the wake of the Asian
crisis, loan commitments have also trended steadily upward, actually exceeding bond
issues in every year through 1995 but one (1993) and nipping at the heels of new bond
issues in both 1996 and 1997.
Second, international bank lending is particularly important for the private-sector
borrowers whose participation is the distinctive feature of international capital markets in
the 1990s and who are likely to dominate the market to an even greater extent in the
future as the privatization of state enterprise and the liberalization of capital markets
proceed. Already one of the striking contrasts between bond and bank lending is the
extent to which sovereigns and other governmental borrowers continue to rely on the
bond market, while private borrowers are disproportionately important to the market in
international bank loans. This is what we should expect, of course, to the extent that

2
private-sector borrowers about whom information is least complete establish long-term
relationships with banks as a way of resolving information problems. But it means that
the emerging-market bond spreads on which most recent analysis focuses are likely to
provide little, and for that matter potentially misleading, information about what is going
on in this market segment (as Figure 1 suggests).1
A third reason for focussing on loans is the controversy that has swirled around
the behavior of international bank lending in the wake of the Asian crisis. Spreads on
syndicated bank loans show relatively little variation compared to spreads on
international bonds, raising questions about whether bank lenders are properly pricing
country and credit risk. Low interest rates in Tokyo are said to have encouraged Japanese
banks to develop an excessive appetite for emerging-market debt. Growing competition
in Europe as a result of the Single Market is said to have eroded domestic margins and to
have encouraged second-tier European banks to scramble into Asian markets in search of
yield.2 Moreover, with banks enjoying deposit insurance, lender-of-last-resort services,
and in some cases implicit and explicit guarantees—along with the expectation that they
will be able to withdraw their funds on demand insofar as the IMF injects offsetting
resources in response to a crisis—it has been suggested that spread compression on
1 Figure 1 plots average spreads on all new loan commitments and new bond issues in the 1990s. In only
half the quarters do average spreads on loans and bonds move in the same direction. Note that average
loan spreads are much smaller than those for bonds and move in a smaller band. A clue to the reason lies
in the contrasting reactions to the Mexican and Asian crisis. Following the devaluation of the Mexican
peso in December 1994, bond and bank loan spreads in the primary market diverge. The decline in bond
market spreads reflects a sharp change in the composition of the pool of borrowers: only the best quality
issuers were able to tap the bond markets, leaving high-risk borrowers, from Latin America in particular,
effectively rationed out of the market. In comparison, the commercial loan market, dominated by Asian
borrowers, was less affected. By contrast, following the onset of the Asian crisis in the last quarter of
1997, new bank loan commitments fell sharply and spreads increased (to their highest quarterly level
since the start of the time period under consideration). The response of primary bond market spreads was
muted by comparison.
2 Indeed, one of the striking features of bank lending to emerging markets, as we shall see, is the extent to
which it is dominated by Asian borrowers.