



1
I. Introduction
In this paper we address several important issues in corporate governance. What is
the difference between the corporate governance roles of institutional investors and rich
individuals? Why are takeovers such an important part of the monitoring regime in some
capitalist economies (in particular, the U.S. and U.K.) even though they are associated
with well-known inefficiencies (such as the free-rider problem)? Does institutional
monitoring make the takeover market superfluous? Or is the takeover mechanism superior
to permanent institutional blockholding? How can these two principal monitoring
mechanisms coexist in some countries, such as the U.S. and U.K.? If blockholders are so
important for monitoring, why do many firms have no large blockholder? Why do firms
with concentrated and dispersed ownership coexist? And what is the role of the market in
blocks of shares? We address these questions by investigating the implications of the
agency problem at the root of corporate governance.
In governing corporations some investors have sufficiently large blocks of stock
that agency problems associated with dispersed ownership of the corporation are
alleviated. But blockholders themselves may face agency problems. For example,
institutional investors are run by professional managers who may not make value-
maximizing decisions. A rich investor, however, has enough capital to take a controlling
position without facing an agency problem himself in controlling the corporation. If these
rich investors do not have enough such “agency cost-free” capital to control all
corporations, then agency cost-free capital is a scarce resource. In this paper, we ask how
scarce agency cost-free capital is allocated. Answering this question explains how the
ownership structure of corporate assets is determined and provides a theory of hostile
takeovers. A hostile takeover is the consequence of a state-contingent allocation of agency
cost-free capital, as distinct from a buy-and-hold allocation. The analysis distinguishes the
different roles of rich investors and institutional investors, shows that concentrated
ownership and dispersed ownership can coexist (with identical firms), emphasizes the
importance of block trades, and explains how different capitalist economies can have
different equity ownership structures and different types of corporate control markets.
The notion of scarce “agency cost-free” capital which we pursue in this paper is
implicit in Berle and Means (1932) who provide the central paradigm of corporate finance.

2
They observe that the scale of modern technology makes corporations so large that they
cannot all be owned, and hence controlled, by single families or rich individuals.1
Consequently, they argue, because the wealth of rich individuals or wealthy families is
scarce, the ownership of corporate assets is dispersed and this empowers managers to act
in their own interests rather than in the interests of shareholders. A difficulty with this
argument is that the ownership structure of firms is endogenous (see Demsetz (1983)).2
Large block shareholders may alleviate some of the problems caused by the separation of
ownership and control.3 Even without a large shareholder present, managers may be
disciplined by the threat of disciplinary takeovers (see Jensen and Ruback (1983)).
These observations do not provide a coherent explanation for the ownership
structures of public corporations. If blockholders can overcome the problem of the
separation of ownership and control, then blockholders should always be present. This is
possible if small investors can band together to form “institutional investors” or “financial
intermediaries.” Indeed, some have argued that institutional investors should play this role
(e.g., Black (1992a,b), Coffee (1991), and Black and Coffee (1994)). But, their
effectiveness is often questioned. Hostile takeovers might be effective in the absence of
pervasive permanent blockholders. But, hostile takeovers are also puzzling. First, they
only seem to occur in some capitalist economies. Second, hostile takeovers are inefficient
due to the free-rider problem. Firms that rely on the takeover market for monitoring are
restructured only when the benefits of restructuring are large enough to compensate the
raider for sharing the surplus generated by his monitoring activity with the remaining,
passive, investors. Hence, it seems that relying on permanent institutional blockholders is
more efficient.
Our analysis proceeds by returning to the central assumption of the Berle and
Means hypothesis, that the wealth of rich individuals is scarce. We focus on the identity of
blockholders, arguing that institutions are different from rich investors with agency cost-
1 La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (1999) have recently questioned this paradigm, pointing out that
in many countries the state and large families own many large firms.
2 Indeed, Demsetz and Lehn (1985) find some evidence that block shareholders are more prevalent in firms
where there is reason to believe that agency problems are more pronounced.
3 See Berle and Means (1932), Demsetz and Lehn (1985), Shleifer and Vishny (1986), Kahn and Winton
(1996) and Maug (1996), among others.