



Introduction to Executive Compensation
The big news this year isn’t in the big numbers—it’s in the fine print. Buried in
the latest pay contracts chief executives are signing and the lists of stock-options
they’re salting away in the wall safe are the auguries and portents of things to
come. (Business Week, April 24, 1995, pp. 88.)
As the quotation above suggests, there is a growing realization by the popular business
press that a proper analysis of stock and option holdings is crucial to understanding US executive
compensation practices. The academic economics literature has also come to this conclusion,
although only very recently. Despite being in its infancy, the economics literature on the effects
of stock and options holdings has already yielded large dividends, and has the potential for much
more.
In this article, we focus on how this recent advance can be used to address the following
six questions:
1. How much does executive compensation cost the firm?
2. How much is executive compensation worth to the recipient?
3. How well does executive compensation work?
4. What are the effects of executive compensation?
5. How much executive compensation is enough?
6. Could executive compensation be improved?
Murphy (1999) reviews the extensive research on executive compensation. In this article,
we consider, instead, some of the implications of that research and some important directions for
future research. We begin by noting how US CEO compensation policies compare with other
OECD countries. Figure 1 shows an international comparison of the importance of some of the
major components of CEO compensation from 1984-1996, based on data from 12 OECD
countries. Figure 2 shows the analogous comparison for human resource directors. The
components are salary, annual bonus, benefits (including pension), and long-term compensation.
The methodology used to construct the chart is the same as Abowd and Bognanno (1995), and
relies on publicly available data from various governmental statistical agencies, Towers Perrin, a
compensation consulting firm, and other private companies. The estimates shown are for the
domestic national CEO of a company incorporated in the indicated country with $200-500
million in annual sales (1990 dollars).1 Salary is defined as cash compensation that is determined
1 Our comparative data come from a variety of sources, which target different size companies in the
individual countries. To make the sources comparable, Abowd and Bognanno regression adjusted the compensation
data so that the size of the reference company was 200-500 million 1990 dollars. We note that it is difficult to get
1

at the beginning of an annual pay cycle. Annual bonus is defined as cash compensation that is
determined at the end of an annual pay cycle and is based on only one-year’s worth of
performance information. Benefits are the company’s cost to provide retirement income, health
care, and other services, evaluated on an annualized basis. Long-term compensation is the
annualized present value of any cash, or cash-equivalent compensation that is based on outcomes
measured over periods longer than one year.2 The data in this, and subsequent figures, have been
updated for this paper and are available from the authors on request or from the web site
mentioned in the acknowledgements.
Not surprisingly, figure 1 shows that US CEOs receive compensation levels that appear
out of line with the other OECD countries, although figure 2 shows that this is not the case for
human resource directors.3 We will see, however, that the high compensation received by US
CEOs is composed of several complex instruments that require a more detailed analysis in order
to understand US compensation systems.
Although figure 1 shows that US CEOs receive higher levels of pay than those in other
OECD countries, comparisons along other dimensions are also useful. Kaplan (1994) compares
Japanese management practices to those in the US. He finds that the sensitivities of cash
compensation and probability of turnover to market returns are not statistically different across
the two countries. One difference is that financial institutions take a more active role in corporate
governance in Japan, particularly following negative earnings. This may explain why turnover
and compensation are more responsive to negative earnings in Japan. Rather than relying on
monitoring from the board of directors, the interests of US CEOs and shareholders are aligned
through higher stock ownership. Overall, however, Kaplan’s conclusion is that the US and
Japanese systems are quite similar.
The Basic Structure of Contingent Executive Compensation
The system has doled out rich rewards—but it can and does impose hefty
penalties on those who don’t perform. More than ever, the boss is likely to lose
his job and his perks when he doesn’t deliver the profits shareholders expect.
(Business Week, April 22, 1996, pp. 102.)
comparative data for native executives (not foreign nationals) when one looks at very large companies because there
are relatively few of them in most OECD countries.
2 Long-term compensation includes stock options (the right to purchase company stock at a given price),
restricted stock (stock that cannot be sold for some specified period of time), performance share plans (formula-
based stock compensation), and cash equivalents of all of the above.
3 A figure showing that US manufacturing operatives receive compensation levels similar to those in other
OECD countries is included in this working paper and on the web site mentioned in the acknowledgements. Figures
that use real exchange rates rather than purchasing power parity rates are also included in this working paper. Real
exchange rates are useful to compare differences in employer costs across countries. See the supplementary figures
in the Data Appendix to this working paper.
2