NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EVALUATING THE EFFECT OF AN
ANTIDISCRIMINATION LAW USING
A REGRESSION-DISCONTINUITY DESIGN
Jinyong Hahn
Petra Todd
Wilbert Van der Klaauw
Working Paper 7131
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7 131
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 1999
A previous version of this paper has been circulated under the title "Estimation of Treatment Effects with
a Quasi-Experimental Regression-Discontinuity Design: with Application to Evaluating the Effect of
Federal Antidiscrimination Laws on Minority Employment in Small U.S. Firms." We thank Joshua Angrist,
James Heckman, Guido Imbens, Alan Kruegger, Tony Lancaster, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Ken Wolpin
for helpful comments. The paper has also benefited from comments received at the 1997 Midwestern
Econometrics Group conference, the 1997 AEA meetings, the 1998 Econometric Society Summer Meetings
in Montreal, the University of Michigan, the University of Rochester, the University of Wisconsin, the joint
Harvard/MIT econometrics conference, and the joint Brown-Yale-NYU-Penn-JHU labor conference. Van
der Klaauw thanks the C.V. Starr Center of Applied Economics at NYU for research support. Petra Todd's
participation was supported by NSF grant #SBR-9730688. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999by Jinyong Hahn, Petra Todd, and Wilbert Van der Klaauw. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including ©notice, is given to the source.

Evaluating the Effect of an Antidiscrimination
Law using a Regression-Discontinuity Design
Jinyong Hahn, Petra Todd, and Wilbert Van der Klaauw
NBER Working Paper No. 7131
May 1999
JELNo. C14, C51
ABSTRACT
The regression discontinuity (RD) data design is a quasi-experimental design with the
defining characteristic that the probability of receiving treatment changes discontinuously as a
function of one or more individual characteristics. This data design occasionally arises in economic
and other applications but is only infrequently exploited in evaluating the effects of a treatment. We
consider the problem of identification and estimation of treatment effects under a RD data design.
We offer an interpretation of the IV or so-called Wald estimator as a regression discontinuity
estimator. We propose nonparametric estimators of treatment effects and present their asymptotic
distribution theory. Then we apply the estimation method to evaluate the effect of EEOC-coverage
on minority employment in small U.S. firms.
Jinyong Hahn Petra Todd
Department of Economics Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk 3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104 Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
hahn@econ.sas.upenn.edu
petraathena.sas.upenn.edu
Wilbert van der Klaauw
Department of Economics
University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill, NC 27599

1 Introduction
Quasi-experimental methods, like the regression-discontinuity method, are only infrequently consid-
ered in the evaluation literature as a separate method of evaluation. The focus is usually either on
purely experimental or purely observational methods. Data generated by a regression-discontinuity
design shares features with both experimental and observational data. In an experiment, treat-
ment is assigned by a randomization device, which guarantees that persons in the treated group
and in the control group are comparable. A regression-discontinuity (RD) design is similar to an
experiment in that there is also a known rule that influences how persons are assigned to treat-
ment. However, assignment to treatment is not random and persons who receive treatment may
differ systematically from those who do not. In this sense, data from a RD design are similar to
observational data.
In one of the first applications of the RD method and the first paper to introduce the design,
Thistlethwaite and Campbell (1960) estimate the effect that receipt of a National Merit Award has
on students' success in obtaining additional college scholarships and on their career aspirations.
They observe that the awards are given on the basis of whether a test score exceeds a threshold, so
one can take advantage of knowing the cut-off point to learn about treatment effects for persons near
the cut-off. Berk and Rauma (1983) take a similar approach in analyzing the effect of extending
unemployment benefits to released prisoners on recidivism rates, where benefits are given only to
prisoners who worked a minimum number of hours while in prison. Van der Klaauw (1996) examines
the effect that college scholarships awarded at the time of admission have on students' decisions
to attend a particular college. He uses the fact that the value of an index based on a combination
of the student's grade-point average and SAT score partly determines in a discontinuous manner
whether a fellowship is awarded as well as the amount of fellowship. In another recent application,
Angrist and Lavy (1996) estimate the effect of classroom size on student test scores. One of the
factors determining class size in their data is a rule stipulating that another classroom be added
whenever the average classroom size crosses a threshold level. Finally, Black (1996) uses an RD
approach to estimate parents' willingness to pay for higher quality schools by comparing housing
prices near geographic school attendance boundaries. In all these examples, the treatment variable
changes discontinuously as a function of one or more underlying variables, which is the defining
characteristic of regression discontinuity data designs.
Although there have already been many applications of RD methods, important questions still
remain concerning sources of identification and ways of estimating treatment effects under minimal
parametric restrictions. Trochim (1984) discusses alternative parametric and semiparametric RD
estimators that have been proposed in the statistics literature.' Van der Klaauw (1996) considers
'Trochim (1984) also discusses several applications of these methods in educational research.
1

identification and estimation in a semiparametric model under a constant treatment effect
assump-
tion. In this paper, we consider the more general case which allows for variable treatment effects.
We demonstrate that treatment effects are typically nonparametrically unidentified in regression
discontinuity models but that a weak form of identification can be achieved through a functional
form restriction. The restriction is unusual in that it requires imposing continuity assumptions in
order to take advantage of the known discontinuity in the treatment assignment mechanism.2 We
propose two estimators and apply these to evaluate the effect of an antidiscrimination law.
The paper develops as follows. Section 2 discusses the model, the parameters of interest, and
different types of RD designs. Sections 3 considers alternative sources of identifying information.
Section 4 proposes consistent estimators and provides the distribution theory. This section also
draws a comparison between IV estimators and RD estimators by observing that under certain
conditions a kernel-based RD estimator is numerically equivalent to a standard IV estimator. Sec-
tion 5 applies the methods to study the relationship between firm size and minority employment
patterns using data from the NLSY (National Longitudinal Survey of Youth). In the U.S., only
firms with 15 or more employees are subject to federal antidiscrimination laws.3 We can therefore
exploit the discontinuity of this rule to analyze whether smaller firms that are not subject to these
regulations tend to hire smaller proportions of minority workers. Section 6 summarizes our main
findings.
2 The Regression-Discontinuity Design
The goal of an evaluation is to determine the effect that some binary treatment variable x has
on an outcome y1. The evaluation problem arises because persons either receive or do not receive
treatment and no individual is observed in both states at the same time. Let Yli denote the outcome
with treatment and YOi that in the absence of treatment, and let x = if treatment is received and
1
=
0 otherwise. The model for the observed outcome can be written as
(1)
where a1 yçjj, Yiz — YOi. The entire distribution of treatment impacts may be of interest
in an evaluation, but because a2 is not observed for any x2 =
1 person it may only be possible
to reliably estimate limited aspects of the impact distribution. Two parameters of interest that
receive much attention in the evaluation literature are the mean effect of treatment on the treated
E [31 x = and the mean effect of treatment on randomly assigned individual =
1]
2Whileour approach is unusual in its reliance on a continuity assumption for identification, the type of assumption
we make is commonly invoked under other estimation approaches.
3Specifically, to Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1965 and to a 1972 Amendment to the Act.
2