



1. Introduction
It was just a few years ago that capital flows to Asian emerging markets
were praised as a model for the rest of the world. A majority of capital flows to Asia
took the form of foreign direct investment, as opposed to portfolio investment.
Although portfolio investment is quick to come and quick to go, it is less likely,
many believe, for foreign direct investment to reverse the direction. Capital flows
to Asia increased investment, and increased investment contributed to achieving
higher growth. Then high growth performances attracted further capital inflows. A
virtuous cycle of capital flows and economic growth was indeed an important part
of the Asian miracle. However, in the wake of Asian crisis, all the praises were all
but disappeared. Even Asia could not withstand the shocks of volatile capital
outflows caused by a sudden change in investors’ expectations.
When the baht was floated on July 2, 1997, it was hardly a surprise for
many foreign exchange dealers, Treasury officials and central bankers of G7, and
academic economists. However, few predicted that the exchange rates would
depreciate as much as it actually did, and the crisis would spread to other countries
in the region, especially to Korea, in the following several months. The Asian
currency crises of 1997 have been a surprise in its depth and contagion. Indonesia
had been praised by the World Bank until just before the Thailand devaluation.
There was little sign of trouble in Korea, until three months after the baht
devaluation. There was no warning of contagion in the International Capital
Markets report of 1997 (published in September 1997). The IMF financial support
package was negotiated and accepted by the Thai authorities in August, followed
by Indonesia in November and Korea in December. After six months, there is no
clear assessment whether the contagion has stopped. It turned out that the Asian
currency crisis of 1997 is broader and deeper than the Mexican peso crisis of 1994-
95.
From the end of June to the end of December, 1997, the Indonesian rupiah
depreciated more than 140 percent, while the Korean won and the Thai baht
depreciated more than 80 percent, via-a-vis the U.S. dollar. Malaysian ringgit and
Philippine peso depreciated about 50 percent. Even Singaporean dollar and
Taiwanese dollar depreciated close to 20 percent. The least affected was the Hong
Kong dollar and Chinese renminbi, both of which kept the nominal exchange rate
2

to the U.S. dollar.
Stock prices in these countries have also plummeted. In the ASEAN-4
(Thailand, Malaysia, Philippines, and Indonesia) and Korea, stock prices became
less than half from January to December of 1997. Withdrawal of funds from the
stock market by foreign investors at least partly explains a simultaneous collapse
of stock and currency markets.
These exchange rate and stock price movements reflect the strong outflow
of capital from these Asian countries. Even relatively large foreign reserves, in
terms of import months, were not enough in Thailand and Korea. In the case of
Thailand, speculations in the forward market exhausted foreign reserves (in terms
of spot-forward net positions) and in the case of Korea, refusal of rollovers to
Korean commercial banks by foreign banks exhausted the “usable” Korean foreign
reserves.
The Asian cases of 1997 also suggest a strong contagion. Countries in the
region are most strongly affected by a currency crisis of a country. Although there
are similarities among countries in crisis, differences are also pronounced.
Common features include external shocks, the yen/dollar exchange rate movement
and internal factors like weak banking system and large short-term borrowings.
One cannot deny the possibility that a crisis in one country suddenly changes
investors’ mind about the prospects of other countries.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section describes
how capital went into Asian from 1991 to 1996. Section 3 summarizes the crisis of
1997. Similarities and differences between Mexico and Asian countries, and also
those among Asian countries will be shown. Lastly, lessons from this episode of the
currency crises will be drawn in Section 4, and Section 5 concludes.
2. Capital Flows to Asia
2.1 Overview
Capital flows to Asia have been a focus of the intensive studies in the last
several years, especially after the currency crisis of the 1997. Figure 1 shows the
total gross capital inflows—direct investment, portfolio investment, and other
capital flows (78bed, 78bgd, 78bid lines of International Financial Statistics,
IMF)—to the ASEAN-4 (Thailand, Indonesia, Philippines, and Malaysia) and
3