



1 Introduction
1.1 Technology, wage inequality and the demand for skilled labor
Over the past two decades, wage inequality has grown significantly in the United
States. The total effect has been large, as the gap between wages at the 75th percentile of
the distribution and the 25th has increased by nearly 50 percentage points.1 The total
effect has also been widespread, shifting relative wages in the top, middle, and bottom of
the income distribution. The main cause of the growth in inequality appears to be a shift
in the demand for workers of different kinds. Demand is growing for workers with
exceptional talent, training, autonomy, and management ability much faster than for
workers in low and middle-wage occupations.
Parts of this shift in labor demand are explained by such broader economic
patterns as globalization, sectoral shifts in employment and changes in labor market
institutions. Yet these forces appear too small to explain the breadth and depth of the
shift, leaving a large residual shift (Krugman and Lawrence, 1993). Economists have
concluded that this residual must reflect a "skill-biased technical change" in the way
goods and services are produced in the economy (Griliches, 1969; Berndt, Morrison and
Rosenblum, 1992; Berman, Bound and Griliches, 1994). The nature of this technical
change are still not well-understood, but its size, breadth, and timing have led many
observers to link it to the largest and most widespread technical change of the current era,
information technology (see, e.g., Autor, Katz, and Krueger, 1997 and references
therein).
In this paper, we examine the firm-level evidence for a specific theory of how
information technology (IT) could cause skill-biased technical change. In particular, we
argue that the effects of IT on labor demand involve far more than simple automation and
substitution. Instead, we highlight the central role of IT-enabled organizational change in
1 Murphy and Welch (1993) show percentiles of the wage distribution of prime-age males: the
interquartile range has increased from about 1.75 to 1 to about 2.25 to 1. More extreme percentiles have
moved even farther from the median, so that the entire distribution of wages is widening over time.

IT, Organization and Labor Demand Page 2
a cluster of complementary and mutually reinforcing innovations that X change work
fundamentally.
Employers adopt IT-based production processes to improve service quality or
increase efficiencies and thereby increase profits. In either case, effective use of IT
involves changes to organization. Examination of the form of the organizational changes
suggests a theory of why IT-based technical change is skill-biased (Bresnahan (1997)).
First in service-producing sectors like finance, then in the service parts of goods-
producing industries, firms have found ways to take advantage of new production
processes that use IT intensively (Barras (1990)). They have found it very difficult to
profit by just replacing other factors with computers and telecommunications gear while
making the same products. Often, the benefit of the new production process is new
services or improved service quality. Further, the new production process involves
global changes to the organization.2 These often involve replacing low-skill human
workers (automation), while passing on to humans an increased variety of tasks related to
the higher level of service. A similar pattern holds for attempts to achieve IT-based
efficiencies in production. Only with organizational change, typically of a kind that
involves complementarity with high skill as well as substitutability for low skill human
work, do employers get the benefit they seek from IT.
These observations lead us to an analysis based on a cluster of complementarities
that we see as at the heart of recent changes in labor demand. Intensive use of IT, higher
service levels for customers, and organizational change all go together, and together call
for higher-skilled labor. These form a mutually reinforcing cluster of inventions for
employers. Critically, the organizational changes associated with IT-based service
improvements are skill-using. The key skill-biased technical change of the present can
thus be seen to consist not only of IT, but of the complete cluster of associated
complements. The "technical" side of this cluster is the large, ongoing declines in IT
prices and large, ongoing improvements in IT performance. It is tightly linked to labor
2 Among the first to predict this effect were Leavitt, and Whisler (1958). There are by now many
papers which illustrate the role of IT-enabled organizational change at varying levels of detail, notably
Attewell and Rule (1984), Crowston and Malone (1988), Malone, Yates and Benjamin (1987), Milgrom
and Roberts (1990), Brynjolfsson, Renshaw and van Alstyne (1997), Bresnahan and Greenstein (1997), and