NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HEDGING AND FINANCIAL
FRAGILITY IN FIXED
EXCHANGE RATE REGIMES
Craig Burnside
Martin Eichenbaum
Sergio Rebelo
Working Paper 7143
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7 143
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 1999
We are grateful to Kellogg's Banking Research Center for financial support. This draft was completed while
Burnside was a National Fellow at the Hoover Institution which he thanks for its support. We thank Marco
Bassetto, Ariel Burstein, Larry Jones, Deborah Lucas, and David Marshall and seminar participants at
Georgetown, Harvard, Hoover, and Northwestern for useful comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research
or the World Bank.
© 1999 by Craig Burnside, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Hedging and Financial Fragility in
Fixed Exchange Rate Regimes
Craig Burnside, Martin Eichenbaum,
and Sergio Rebelo
NBER Working Paper No. 7143
May 1999
JELNo. F31,F41,G15,G21
ABSTRACT
Currency crises that coincide with banking crises tend to share four elements. First,
governments provide guarantees to domestic and foreign bank creditors. Second, banks do not
hedge their exchange rate risk. Third, there is a lending boom before the crises. Finally, when the
currency/banking collapse occurs, interest rates rise and there is a persistent decline in output. This
paper proposes an explanation for these regularities. We show that government guarantees lower
interest rates and generate an economic boom. They also lead to a more fragile banking system;
banks choose not to hedge exchange rate risk. When the fixed exchange rate is abandoned in favor
of a crawling peg, banks go bankrupt, the domestic interest rate rises, real wages fall, and output
declines.
Craig Burnside Martin Eichenbaum
The World Bank Department of Economics
1818 H Street, NW Northwestern University
Washington, DC 20433 2003 Sheridan Rd.
aburnsidewor1dbank.org Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
eich@nwu.edu
Sergio Rebelo
J.L. Kellogg Graduate School of Management
Northwestern University
Leverone Hall
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
s-rebelo@nwu.edu

1. Introduction
In the post Bretton Woods era currency crises have often coincided with banking
crises. Prominent examples include Southeast Asia in 1997, Chile in 1982, Mexico
in 1994, and Sweden and Finland in 1992.1 There are four common elements in
such dual' crises. First, there are implicit government guarantees to domestic and
foreign bank creditors. Second, banks do not generally hedge exchange rate risk
and many go bankrupt following a currency devaluation. Third, there is a lending
boom before the crisis. Finally, currency collapses that coincide with banking
crises are typically associated with a rise in interest rates on domestic loans and
a persistent declille in output. This paper attempts to provide an interpretation
of why dual crises share these common elements.
To this end, we study the connection between government guarantees to foreign
lenders, banks' hedging strategies and the aggregate level of economic activity.
We consider two types of risk associated with exchange rate devaluations. The
first type arises when banks borrow foreign currency, say dollars, and make loans
denominated in units of the local currency. A second type arises when devaluations
are associated with higher default rates on bank loans. This risk can exist even
when banks make loans denominated in dollars. This is because these loans are
often used to fund concerns that produce nontraded goods whose relative prices
decline after a currency devaluation.2
In our model, absent government guarantees, it is optimal for banks to fully
'Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999) study empirically the link between banking and currency
crises. See Diaz.-Alejandro (1985) and Nyberg and Vihriälä (1993) for analyses of the 1982
Chilean and 1992 Finnish crises, respectively. Garber and Lall (1998) and Krueger and Tornell
(1999) discuss the 1994 Mexican crisis.
2For example Gavin and Hausmann (1996) write that "... duringthe years leading up to the
Chilean banking crisis (1982), banks were permitted to borrow in foreign currency but prohibited
from taking the exchange risk, so that lending funded by international borrowing was required
to be denominated in foreign currency. This was supposed to transfer the currency risk from
banks to the nonfinancial firms to which banks made loans, but after the unexpected devaluation
many firms found themselves unable to repay their loans in full or on time. Thus, the exchange
rate risk that faced nonfinancial firms was to an extent borne by the banking systems in the
form of credit risk."
2

hedge exchange rate risk in forward markets. This is true regardless of which type
of exchange rate risk banks face. However, the presence of government guarantees
completely eliminates banks' incentives to hedge the risk of a devaluation. Indeed,
it is optimal for banks to magnify their exchange rate exposure by selling dollars
forward, so that they lose money when there is a devalilation. To the extent that
banks are prevented from doing this, say by government regulation, our results
provide a theory for why forward markets would not exist: in fixed exchange
rate economies with government guarantees banks have no desire to buy dollars
forward.
To study the macroeconomic effects of government guarantees we embed our
model of banking into a general equilibrium environment which has two key fea-
tures. First, firms in the output sector must borrow working capital from banks to
pay labor. So from firms' perspective, the marginal cost of an extra unit of labor
is the gross interest rate on bank loans times the real wage.3 Other things equal
this means that a lower gross interest rate on domestic loans raises the demand
for labor. Second, there is a fixed exogenous probability that the economy will
permanently shift from a fixed exchange rate regime to one in which the exchange
rate depreciates at a constant rate.
Prior to a devaluation, government guarantees to bank creditors lower the
domestic interest rate and raise aggregate output, employment, real wages, the
number of banks and the number of firms in the output sector. Thus the guar-
antees generate what appears to be a boom. But they also lead to a more fragile
banking system. Banks do not hedge exchange rate risk. When a devaluation
occurs, they renege on foreign debt and go bankrupt. At the same time, the
devaluation leads to a permanent rise in the domestic interest rate and a perma-
nent fall in aggregate output, employment, real wages, the number of banks, and
the number of goods producing firms. Economies with and without government
guarantees respond in the same way to a devaluation. But since an economy with
31n this respect our setup is similar to Christiano and Eichenbaum (1992) who emphasize
the importance of the working capital channel in the monetary transmission mechanism.
3