



1 Introduction
Central banks have a reputation for secrecy. Policy boards of central banks generally deliberate
in secret, like judicial panels. In sharp contrast with judicial bodies in most major democracies,
however, central bank policy is often implemented without any detailed justi…cation and often
with no announcement at all. The norm of secrecy has recently been rejected, most notably in
in‡ation-targetingcountriessuchasNewZealand,theU.K.,andSweden. Inonewayoranother,
these countries have made an explicit commitment to stable low in‡ation as their primary goal
of monetary policy, and the central banks issue transparent in‡ation reports laying out in‡ation
forecasts, explaining how policy will respond to various contingencies, and accounting for past
errors.
Rationalizing transparency and openness is easy. Goodfriend [13] strongly criticized the
FederalReserve’sargumentsforsecrecyinafamouscourtcase,andBlinder[4]recentlyprovided
a strong case for openness and accountability, arguing that this makes independent central
banking more consistent with democracy and improves the stabilization properties of monetary
policy.1 In the literature on in‡ation targeting, transparency has been motivated as a way
of improving the incentives for central banks to pursue their announced goals, in addition to
facilitating the implementationof monetary policyby increasing itspredictability bythe private
sector (see, for instance, Svensson [24] and [25]).
Rationalizing the secrecy norm is not so easy. Milton Friedman commented that “From
revealed preference, I suspect that by far and away the two most important variables in their
[Federal Reserve policymakers’] loss function are avoiding accountability on the one hand and
achievingpublicprestigeontheother”(quotedinFischer[10],footnote52). Whilesecrecycould
stem from central bankers’ desires to protect their egos, it seems unlikely that central bankers
are more a¤ected by such motives than judges or heads of government agencies. If Friedman’s
argumentiscorrect,onemightwonderwhysocietysetsupstructuresindulgingthesecrecyfetish
of central bankers but generally not indulging such urges elsewhere.
The seminal work by Cukierman and Meltzer [8] (CM) provides a di¤erent explanation of
central bank secrecy. CM build on the Kydland and Prescott [15] and Barro and Gordon [2]
(KPBG) models of optimizing policy by adding a time-varying source of in‡ation bias and
1 Both quote Karl Brunner for support: “Central banking [has been] traditionally surrounded by a peculiar
and protective political mystique...The mystique thrives on a pervasive impression that Central Banking is an
esoteric art. Access to this art and its proper execution is con…ned to the initiated elite. The esoteric nature of
theartismoreoverrevealedbyaninherentimpossibilitytoarticulateitsinsightsinexplicitandintelligiblewords
and sentences” (as quoted in Goodfriend [13]).
1

making this bias private information of the central bank. At certain times, the bank values
employment particularly highly and would like to use in‡ation surprises to attain that goal.
While the bank cannot, on average, surprise the public, CM shows that if control errors mask
the true intention of the bank, the bank can use in‡ation surprises to raise output during the
periods when it is most valuable. In this framework, improving the public’s inference—either
through improved central-bank control of the target variable or through less secrecy regarding
intentions—raises the reputation cost to the bank of manipulating in‡ation surprises. Thus,
increased transparency and control can each help sustain commitment to a low in‡ation goal.
The most notable result in CM is that central banks might well choose deliberately imperfect
control in order to mask their intentions.2
A paper by Faust and Svensson [9] (FS) has recently extended CM in two ways, by clearly
distinguishing the roles of transparency on the one hand and the degree of control on the other
(transparency and control are in indistinguishable in CM) and by allowing a more realistic and
standard quadratic loss function for the central bank (the loss function in CM is indi¤erent to
output variability). FS demonstrates that these extensions have several important implications,
but that paper mainly considers exogenously …xed transparency and control, and does not
consider what levels would endogenously emerge.3
This paper takes up the endogenous choice of transparency and control under the Faust-
Svensson extension of CM. While CM only considers the choice of control-error variance under
commitment, we consider the separate choices of transparency and control under both commit-
ment and discretion. With regard to the degree of control, under commitment, we …nd that the
choice of a less than maximum degree of control is far less likely (con…ned to a smaller and less
plausible portion of the parameter space) under the standard quadratic loss function than for
the more special loss function used by CM. Under discretion, the maximum degree of control is
the only equilibrium for the standard loss function. Thus, both the standard loss function and
discretion weaken the CM result. With regard to the degree of transparency, under commit-
ment, we restate the FS result that a su¢ciently patient bank with a su¢ciently low average
in‡ation bias will always choose minimal transparency. Under discretion, both minimum and
maximum transparency are equilibria. We argue that discretion over the degree of control and
2 Stein [23] provides an alternative account of imprecise communication that we take up below.
3 Several papers, including Andersen [1], Cukierman and Meltzer [7], Persson and Tabellini [20], Muscatelli
[17] and Walsh [29] examine how announcements by central banks may potentially reveal private information
about the goals of the banks or the state of economy, but they do not consider central banks’ endogenous choice
of transparency.
2