



-1-
"If I may be allowed to appropriate the term speculation for the activity of forecasting the psychology of the
market, and the term enterprise for the activity of forecasting the prospective yield of assets over their whole life, it is
by no means always the case that speculation predominates enterprise. As the organisation of investment markets
improves, the risk of the predominance of speculation does, however, increase. ...Speculators may do no harm as
bubbles on a steady stream of enterprise. But the position is serious when enterprise becomes the bubble on a whirlpool
of speculation." (J. M. Keynes, The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money, pp.158-159)
1. Introduction
In the aftermath of the Mexican crash of 1994, several emerging stock markets fell as investors
"ran for cover," expecting that vulnerable countries like Argentina and Brazil, or even rising stars as
Chile or Singapore, would be next in a series of currency crises.1 Similarly, the spreading of the financial
crisis that originated in Thailand across several countries in East Asia in 1997 and the global financial
turmoil triggered by Russia’s default in 1998 are widely attributed to unprecedented contagion effects
across globalized securities markets. In all these instances, investors seemed to follow the "market"
rather than take the time and expense to make their own assessments of each country’s fundamentals,
perhaps guessing that "market" portfolios embodied relevant information, or fearing the consequences of
disagreeing with the "market.” A similar phenomenon, albeit at a smaller scale, also appears to operate
in the recurrent waves of optimism by institutional investors observed in industrial countries.2
The extreme volatility of these speculative capital flows, and the costly economic crises that have
accompanied recent financial crashes, have led researchers and policy-makers to reconsider the merits of
the trend toward the liberalization of global asset trading that prevailed during the last 15 years. The
introduction of controversial capital controls, taxes, and other barriers to asset trading is gaining
increasing popularity in the wake of the recent financial turmoil. Chile's taxes and timing restrictions on
inflows and outflows of short-term capital, which had been in place since the early 1990s, are an often-
cited example of the type of controls that could be useful to prevent contagion. Malaysia's decision to
suspend foreign trading in its currency and impose widespread capital controls in 1998 is a more radical
1Calvo and Mendoza (1996) review factual evidence of herding by holders of Mexican securities. Calvo and
Reinhart (1995) provide some statistical evidence of contagion effects in emerging markets.
2See the survey data analysis of contagion by word of mouth by Shiller and Pound (1986) and (1987).

-2-
example. Even at the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), there are automatic trading halts that stop
trading for periods of time during market sessions when stock prices fluctuate too much. However, given
that our understanding of the distortions that may produce contagion, and of how these distortions
interact with the globalization of capital markets, is very limited, one must remain skeptic about the
effectiveness and desirability of these policies.
The aim of this paper is to demonstrate that contagion can be an outcome of optimal portfolio
diversification that becomes more prevalent as securities markets grow. Contagion is defined as a
situation in which utility-maximizing investors choose not to pay for information that would be relevant
for their portfolio decision -- thereby making them susceptible to react to country-specific rumors -- or in
which investors optimally choose to mimic arbitrary “market” portfolios. Using a basic framework of
mean-variance portfolio diversification, the paper shows that two characteristics of imperfect information
can produce equilibria in which incentives for contagion grow stronger as capital markets grow:
(1) If there is a fixed cost of gathering and processing country-specific information, and institutional
arrangements or government regulations impose binding short-selling constraints, the utility gain of
paying the fixed information cost generally falls as the number of countries where wealth can be invested
grows. Portfolio allocations also become more sensitive to changes in asset returns as markets grow,
and thus contagion is more likely to prevail and to produce larger capital flows in globalized markets.
(2) If portfolio managers face a variable cost or gain that depends on the mean return of their
portfolios relative to that of a given market portfolio, and the marginal cost exceeds the marginal gain,
there is a range of multiple equilibria inside of which investors rationally choose to mimic market
portfolios. When a rumor favors another portfolio in that range, all investors "follow the herd." In this
case, globalization exacerbates contagion because the indeterminacy range widens as the market grows.
Since the potential magnitude of contagion effects is largely unknown, and the model proposed
here lacks in general tractable analytical solutions, the paper also examines the model's quantitative
implications. The quantitative analysis is based on historical data from equity markets and country credit