



HOW OFFSHORE FINANCIAL COMPETITION DISCIPLINES EXIT
RESISTANCE BY INCENTIVE-CONFLICTED BANK REGULATORS
Financial contracts promise to move wealth across time and space. Due to the
difficulty of neutralizing bad luck and counterparty conflicts of interest, the economic
value and enforceability of financial contracts are never certain. Even though no one can
ever completely verify the accuracy or timeliness of information that purports to describe
either the condition of a financial institution or the creditworthiness of a borrower or
other counterparty, some parties are more informationally disadvantaged than others.
Recent financial crises in Latin America, Asia, and Russia underscore the extent to which
differences in information can intensify the valuation and performance risks that inhere
even in straightforward banking transactions.
Rational investors recognize the uncertainty of current information and future
events and try to manage its effects. Asset-valuation theory assumes that at any time
investors translate whatever information they possess into an estimated probability
distribution of how future events are apt to affect the flow of net earnings allocable to
different financial contracts. One application of this theory is to explain the existence of
financial markets and institutions as instrumentalities that lower the cost to individual
firms and households of coping with questionable information and uncertain events (see
Ohlson, 1987, Chapter 4).
Contemporary financial institutions offer both innovative and tried-and-true
opportunities for increasing or decreasing a customer’s exposures to informational risk
and event uncertainty. In any given country, informationally disadvantaged parties
benefit when government supervision of banking institutions can assure that the
operations of these institutions are efficient, fair, and safe.
The three central tasks of bank supervisors and regulators are: (1) to control risks
of fraud and contract non-performance; (2) to operate a safety net designed to control
risks of fire-sale losses associated with FSF insolvencies and unjustified bank runs, and
(3) to operate the fraud controls and safety net honorably and at minimum cost to
taxpayers. Wall and Eisenbeis (1999) focus on conflicts that complicate the pursuit of
such public-policy goals. Minimizing regulatory costs entails striking an optimal balance
between the opportunity cost of government supervisory and disciplinary activities
2

(“current regulation”) and future costs associated with variation in the probability and
severity of financial crises. Economists take it as axiomatic that, if the incentives of
regulators were perfectly aligned with those of taxpayers, the optimal balance would be
struck.
This paper emphasizes that the balance struck by real-world regulators is distorted
by the brevity of their expected time in office and influenced by side payments that
regulatees and other powerful parties offer precisely to create incentive conflict. It is
assumed throughout this paper that regulators earn short-term rents from adopting
policies that seek simultaneously: to facilitate a flow of cheap loans to politically favored
sectors; to cover up the impact that below-market loans have on banks’ net worth and
depositors’ loss exposures; and to protect banks in one of two ways. The first method is
to help banks to preserve the existing market structure by limiting outside entry through
restrictions on the size, scope, and geographic origin of would-be competitors. The other
method is to support weak and insolvent banks by giving them subsidized government
guarantees. Support is eventually needed because the more politically directed credits a
nation’s banks book, the more their net worth is undermined. With such subsidies (as,
e.g., in the U.S. Savings and Loan Mess), financial disaster can bubble beneath the
surface for years.
The paper explains that innovations in financial technology and regulatory
strategy discipline the opportunity costs of regulatory systems that are mismanaged in
either of these ways. The goal of the analysis is to explain how competition from better-
adapted “alien” institutions –located offshore or in a more flexibly regulated domestic
sector-- hastens the breakdown of regulatory arrangements that artificially enhance short-
run bank profitability either by retarding efficient adjustments in a nation’s financial
market structure or by tolerating widespread insolvency among domestic competitors.
The analysis is Schumpeterian, in that ongoing technological and regulatory
innovations continually shock the system. These shocks expand the margin of
competition from differently regulated financial institutions and lower the costs of
entering nontraditional markets or operating in distant lands. Intensified alien
competition reduces the profitability of incumbent banks and enhances opportunities for
3