



1. Introduction
Over the last 20 years, the stock market has discounted diversified firms.1 At the same time,
many diversified firms have become more focused by divesting assets.2 Some firms become more
focused by divesting an asset in an industry that is unrelated to their core industry and other firms
divest assets in their core industry. Studies by John and Ofek (1995) and Daley, Mehrota and
Sivakumar (1997), among others, show that shareholders gain when firms become more focused
by divesting non-core assets but not when they divest core assets. Divesting a major asset is one
of the most important decisions that the internal capital market of diversified firms makes.
Despite these studies, however, we have only limited knowledge about why firms choose to
divest a particular asset and how the characteristics of the asset divested affect shareholder
wealth. We investigate these issues using a sample of 168 firms that focus by divesting one or
more segments over the 1978-94 period.
Our sample enables us to evaluate the economic importance of three possible
explanations for focusing. Each has implications for the segments that firms divest:
1) The portfolio model of focusing. A firm could focus simply because it has one or
several segments that could be better managed outside the firm. With this view of the
diversified firm, managers pick winners and divest losers as if they were portfolio
managers.3 The portfolio model implies that a segment is divested if it underperforms its
industry and does not have offsetting synergies. If unrelated diversification has fewer
synergies than related diversification, this model predicts that for a given level of
1 See Lang and Stulz (1994), Berger and Ofek (1995), and Servaes (1996) for estimates of the
diversification discount.
2 See Liebeskind and Opler (1992) for evidence.
3 See Stein (1997) for a model where the management of a diversified firm picks winners. Note that a
segment could be valuable to the firm at a point in time and cease to be so later. For a model of
diversification and divestitures that emphasizes this, see Matsusaka (1997). Kaplan and Weisbach (1992)
consider divestitures of acquisitions. Weisbach (1995) points out that divestitures are more likely as
management changes.
1

segment performance relative to its industry, a segment unrelated to the core activities of
the firm is more likely to be divested.
2) The financing hypothesis of focusing. Lang, Poulsen and Stulz (1994) present a
financing hypothesis of asset sales. They emphasize that management values firm size
and is reluctant to sell assets. It does so only when management cannot pursue its goals
without raising funds and alternate financing sources are too expensive. With the
financing hypothesis, divesting firms are financially constrained. Because of illiquidity in
the market for corporate assets, firms may fail in divesting assets. As emphasized by
Shleifer and Vishny (1992), liquidity in the market for corporate assets falls with asset
size. Consequently, firms are more likely to succeed in divesting small segments. Further,
they want divestitures to generate cash or, if they cannot divest segments to generate
cash, they want to divest those segments that have large cash requirements because they
require significant investment. While Lang, Poulsen, and Stulz (1994) do not address
internal capital markets explicitly, the view that management values benefits from control
and that these benefits increase with firm size implies that firms are more likely to divest
unrelated segments for two reasons. First, managers acquire unrelated segments when the
alternative use of cash flow generated by core activities is to return it to the firm's
owners. When the firm faces financial constraints, management has a better use for the
cash parked in unrelated segments, so that unrelated segments are the first ones converted
into cash when the firm has to divest segments. Second, management wants to protect its
position. The Shleifer and Vishny (1989) model of managerial entrenchment predicts that
management wants to remain associated with the segments whose value depends more on
management’s specific capital.4 These segments are the core segments.
4 Boot (1992) can also be viewed as predicting that small segments are more likely to be divested. In his
model, managers are reluctant to divest assets because doing so is viewed as evidence that they failed. The
adverse impact on reputation of selling an asset should be inversely related to its size to the extent that if a
divestiture is interpreted by the market as a managerial failure, failure on a smaller scale is less damaging to
management's reputation.
2