



I. Introduction
A basic first-order condition holds that firms invest in produced capital to
the point that its discounted return is equal to its production cost. How effective
are firms in satisfying this condition? The endogenous investment hypothesis
considered in this paper holds that the condition applies as a workable
approximation, if not from year to year, at least over longer periods. Under the
reasonable assumption that the securities issued by a firm are claims on its capital
and therefore have a total value equal to the value of the capital, the observed
value of the securities reveals the quantity of capital. The endogenous investment
hypothesis implies that securities markets provide a way to measure intangible
capital accumulated by the corporate sector, where both the flow of investment
and the stock of capital are not directly observed. There are good reasons to
believe that otherwise unmeasureable intangible capital is an important part of the
capital of a modern economy.
The endogenous investment hypothesis involves more than the proposition
that the stock market capitalizes future shareholder returns. Capitalization occurs
whether the returns earned by firms are exogenous or endogenous. Claims on
endowments are valued in the stock market according to principles set forth in
Lucas [1978]. But there is no investment in the endowment economy. The
endogenous investment hypothesis holds that firms will purchase newly produced
physical capital whenever such a purchase generates an expected gain, with
suitable discounting for risk. In that case, there is feedback from financial markets
to the substantive activities of firms, via the discount rate. Capital accumulation
and stock market valuations are jointly determined. A key implication of the
hypothesis is that, in equilibrium with zero expected discounted profit, the value
1

of the stock market and other securities equals the production cost of corporate
assets. In other words, we can read the quantity of produced capital from the value
of the securities of a firm or a sector. This paper considers the ramifications of
that conclusion, using data from the U.S. non-farm, non-financial corporate
sector.
I formulate the polar opposite of the endogenous investment hypothesis as
the endowment hypothesis. Here, the productive facilities of a firm or sector are
fixed and exogenous, and the flow of value derived from the facilities is an
endowment flow. Although the problem of valuing corporate securities under the
endowment hypothesis was formulated and solved in Lucas’s celebrated paper, I
make no claim that Lucas or any other economist actually believes that the
endowment hypothesis is a useful way to characterize the U.S. economy. Rather,
the endowment hypothesis plays a role in the explanation of the testable
implications of the endogenous investment hypothesis.
Under the endogenous investment hypothesis, the quantity of capital is
endogenous and its price is exogenous. Capital earns no rent because it is in
perfectly elastic supply. Under the endowment hypothesis, the quantity of capital
is exogenous and its price is endogenous. The price of capital is determined
entirely by the rents that capital earns.
Although the endogenous investment hypothesis is not a statement about
the values of securities in relation to the returns paid by the securities,
nonetheless, I will examine the data used in this paper within modern valuation
theory. If there are anomalies in the valuation of corporate securities, they become
anomalies in the measurement of produced capital, under the endogenous
investment hypothesis.
With important exceptions—notably Cochrane [1991, 1996]—financial
economics has not emphasized real capital. On the other hand, the theory of the
stock market implicit in all macroeconomic models in the Dynamic Stochastic
2