



I. Introduction
When an economy is well organized, it is more productive. Organization
results from the matching of factors of production. But the formation of matches
and the replacement of degraded matches require resources. The most visible use
of resources for reorganization is unemployment. During the time that workers are
trying to find positions that exploit their comparative advantages, they are not
producing output. Consequently, the economy faces a tradeoff between
production and reorganization. The tradeoff is similar to the tradeoff between
producing consumption goods and producing investment goods.
A probabilistic matching model provides a good starting point for studying
reorganization. In the model I use, matches gradually deteriorate over time.
Eventually, the time comes when it is in the interest of the matched factors (here,
two workers) to part company. That decision launches a period when they invest
in reorganization. Each worker makes a new, high-productivity match and
resumes producing output. In the steady state, these decisions occur randomly
over time and the aggregate flow of reorganizational investment is constant over
time.
In the comparison of steady states, there is a single decision—the cutoff
age where matches are broken and reorganization begins. In an economy with a
stringent cutoff that ends matches before they have deteriorated very much, the
flow of reorganizational investment is high. Output available for consumption is
correspondingly lower. On the other hand, the average match has a higher
productivity, so output is higher on that account. If there are no externalities in
matching, the decentralized economy will find the optimal balance of
reorganization and production. As I will show, there is an exact analogy in steady
2

states between a model with a flow reorganizational investment and one with a
flow of investment in physical capital.
The opportunity to substitute between reorganization and production
results in interesting dynamics. First, a period when productivity is temporarily
low in the production of goods causes a sharp move toward reorganization, whose
value becomes relatively higher during the period. That is, a temporary decline in
productivity causes a spike in unemployment. The remaining dynamics are
controlled by the speed of matching the burst of unemployed workers.
Second, in a model where the interest rate is an exogenous driving force, a
period of a temporarily increased interest rate can also cause a burst of
reorganization. This may appear paradoxical. An increased interest rate ordinarily
discourages investment. A higher interest rate should keep workers in jobs longer
than normal, because the output they are currently producing has a higher value in
relation to the improved productivity they would enjoy later if they searched for
new jobs. Two realistic factors in the model offset this general tendency,
however. Once is that the model takes physical capital to be complementary to
labor input. Consequently, a temporarily high interest rate induces disinvestment
in that capital, and, at the same time, the release of the corresponding workers to
find new jobs. This mechanism is described in detail in Hall [1999a] with
accompanying empirical evidence. The other factor is to make the period of a
high interest rate occur so quickly that the output that would be produced by
retaining workers who otherwise would have terminated their matches and sought
new ones. This assumption removes the intertemporal substitution effect toward
lower reorganization and leaves only the substitution effect away from physical
capital.
3