



1. Introduction
Adherence to fixed parities and convertibility of national currencies into gold served as a
signal of financial rectitude or a “good housekeeping seal of approval” during the classical gold
standard era from 1870-1914. Peripheral countries that adhered faithfully to the gold standard
rule had access at better terms to capital from the core countries of Western Europe than did
countries with poor records of adherence (Bordo and Rockoff, 1996)1. In this paper we extend
the approach developed in that paper to ascertain whether the “good housekeeping seal” was also
an important institution under the interwar gold exchange standard, which prevailed only from
1925 to 1931.
In simplest terms, the “good housekeeping seal” hypothesis views the gold standard as a
commitment mechanism. Adherence to the fixed parity of gold required that members follow
domestic monetary and fiscal policies and have other institutions of financial probity (such as
having a monetary authority which holds gold reserves) consistent with long-run maintenance of
the peg. It also signaled to potential overseas lenders that the borrowers were “good people”.2
An important part of the hypothesis is that the gold standard should be viewed as a
“contingent rule” or a rule with escape clauses. Members were expected to adhere to
convertibility except in the event of a well-understood emergency such as a war, a financial
crisis, or a shock to the terms of trade. Under these circumstances, temporary departures from
the rule would be tolerated on the assumption that once the emergency passed, convertibility at
the original parity would resume (Bordo and Kydland, 1995).
1 Also see Flandreau et al (1998).
2 Our approach is similar to but not the same as the signaling hypothesis first developed by Spence (1974).
2

An implication of the contingent rule is that the countries which returned to gold parity at
a devalued parity after an emergency would be judged as having “weak resolve” and countries
which never returned to gold or never adhered would be even worse. In other words, following
the gold standard rule served as a signal, other things equal, to lenders that these loans would be
safe, both in the sense that they would not be defaulted upon and in the sense that they would not
be repaid in a devalued currency. Hence they would charge a lower risk premium to these
borrowers than to borrowing countries which were not good gold standard adherents.
In Bordo and Rockoff (1996) we tested this hypothesis for 9 widely different capital
importing countries. We found that the risk premium charged on loans in London was lowest for
a group of orthodox gold standard countries that never left gold, slightly higher for those
countries that temporarily devalued, and still higher for those countries that temporarily left gold
and permanently devalued or that never adhered. In this paper we extend this methodology to
the interwar gold exchange standard.
The interwar gold exchange standard generally has a bad press. It only lasted six years
before collapsing in the debacle of the Great Depression. It is viewed as a flawed attempt to
restore the glories of the classical gold standard. Its flaws included the fact that the principle
member, the United States, did not deflate sufficiently after the inflation of World War I to
restore the real price of gold to its pre-war level, hence imparting a deflationary bias on the
system once other countries restored convertibility (Johnson, 1997). It was also flawed because
the United Kingdom rejoined gold at an overvalued parity while France did the opposite. Most
important however was the fact that the US and France each followed policies of sterilizing gold
inflows that exacerbated the underlying disequilibrium.3
3 Other flaws stressed in the literature include: the use of multiple reserve countries; an incipient “Triffin dilemma”
that the use of foreign exchange as a substitute for increasingly scarce gold would expose the center countries to a
3