NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ON MUTUAL FUND
INVESTMENT STYLES
Louis K.C. Chan
Hsiu-Lang Chen
Josef Lakonishok
Working Paper 7215
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7215
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1999
This paper has been presented at the American Finance Association 1999 meetings and the University of
Rochester. We thank Ray Ball, Eugene Fama, Wayne Ferson, Jason Karceski, Mark Laplante, Scott Ritter,
and Jerry Warner for comments, and Martin Gruber, the discussant. All opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by Louis K.C. Chan, Hsiu-Lang Chen, and Josef Lakonishok. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

On Mutual Fund Investment Styles
Louis K.C. Chan, Hsiu-Lang Chen, and Josef Lakonishok
NBER Working Paper No. 7215
July 1999
JEL No. G11, G23
ABSTRACT
We provide an exploratory investigation of mutual funds’ investment styles. Funds’ styles
tend to cluster around a broad market benchmark. When funds deviate from the benchmark they are
more likely to favor growth stocks with good past performance. There is some consistency in styles,
although funds with poor past performance are more likely to change styles. Some evidence suggests
that growth funds have better style-adjusted performance than value funds. The results are not
sensitive to style identification procedure, but an approach based on fund portfolio characteristics
performs better in predicting future fund returns.
Louis K.C. Chan Hsiu Lang Chen
Department of Finance Department of Finance
College of Commerce and College of Commerce and
Business Administration Business Administration
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
1206 South Sixth Street 1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 62820 Champaign, IL 62820
l-chan2@uiuc.edu
Josef Lakonishok
Department of Finance
College of Commerce and
Business Administration
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 62820
and NBER
lakonish@ux1.cso.uiuc.edu

Many crucial investment decisions rest on identifying and selecting portfolio
managers who are
expected to deliver superior performance. Professional investment
managers, however, follow a vari-
ety of approaches. Some rely solely on quantitative models. Others are more qualitatively-oriented
and consider information from sources such as firm
managers, press reports and security analysts'
recommendations. They adopt different criteria for stock selection —
identifying underpriced se-
curities, seeking growth potential, or following past price trends, to use a handful of examples.
The bewildering variety of approaches complicates the already difficult
problem of evaluating the
performance of investment managers.
One segment of the institutional investment community,
namely, pension funds, has responded
to the proliferation of investment approaches by paying more attention toa manager's investment
style. The focus on style stems from several motivations. Taking a
manager's style into account
helps in performance evaluation by giving a clearer picture about the
manager's skill. For example,
a manager who invests in small stocks should not necessarily deserve all the credit if the
portfolio
did well in a particular period; rather, small stocks in generalmay have done better than the market
benchmark. A second stimulus arises from plan sponsors' desires to control therisk of the overall
portfolio. A plan sponsor might select a few active
managers who are expected to achieve superior
performance, but this may be scant comfort if they all follow similar styles. In this
case they would
tend to select similar stocks, resulting in an overall portfolio that is
highly undiversified relative
to a broad-based benchmark. By picking managers with different styles,a sponsor can avoid large
deviations in performance away from a general index.
The focus on style has gradually carried over into another
group of institutional investors,
mutual funds. Investor interest in mutual funds has exploded in
recent years. At the end of
1990, fund net assets stood at 246 billion dollars but soared to 1.3 trillion dollars
by 1995 and 2.4
trillion dollars by 1997. In part, the growth has been fueled by the increase in defined contribution
or 401(k) pension assets. Administrators of such plans have a fiduciary responsibility to
provide
an appropriate variety of asset classes to participants. As a result,
many administrators screen
1

funds and present to employees a menu of funds
representing different styles. More generally,
individual investors are becoming more educated and sophisticated about
allocating their assets
across mutual funds with different objectives. To a growing extent, therefore, fund
managers and
fund investors alike recognize the importance of differentiating funds interms of their investment
styles. For example one leading vendor of information on mutual funds,
Morningstar, classifies
funds by investment style in terms of two dimensions: market
capitalization and value-growth
orientation. Consulting firms and software vendors are also providing investors with the tools to
identify investment style.'
Academic research has generally lagged behind investors' interest in fundstyles. To help cor-
rect the imbalance, this paper provides an exploratory investigation of the investment
styles of
mutual funds. In doing so we hope to improve our understanding of the behaviorof this large and
growing group of investors. Specifically, we begin by documenting the characteristics of fund
port-
folios. When placed alongside results on the pension fund industry
(see, for example, Lakonishok,
Shleifer and Vishny (1997)), our findings help uncover reasons why so few institutional investors
demonstrate consistently superior performance. We also provide evidenceon consistency in fund
styles over time, and the forces that may drive managers to change styles. In addition
to being an
important practical issue to fund investors, shifts in style may reflect situations where managers'
behavior are influenced by considerations other than the maximization of
portfolio risk-adjusted
performance. Although the issue of fund performance is not our main
concern, our analysis also
lets us check whether differences in style are associated with differences in
performance. Finally,
this paper provides a comparative evaluation of the performance of different
methodologies for style
identification.
In studying the distribution of fund styles we intend to providesome clues to resolve an apparent
paradox in fund performance. Previous academic research on mutual funds has extensively studied
their investment performance. Important contributions have been made
by, among others, Jensen
1Hemmerick (1998), for example, reports on software provided over the Internet, basedon work by William Sharpe,
to analyze fund style.
2