NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE TRANSMISSION MECHANISM
OF MONETARY POLICY IN EUROPE:
EVIDENCE FROM BANKS’
BALANCE SHEETS
Carlo A. Favero
Francesco Giavazzi
Luca Flabbi
Working Paper 7231
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7231
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1999
We thank seminar participants at the Oesterreichische Nationalbank, at the University of Vienna, Rony
Hamaui and Vladimiro Ceci for comments on an earlier draft.
All opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by Carlo A. Favero, Francesco Giavazzi and Luca Flabbi. All rights reserved. Short sections of

text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Transmission Mechanism of Monetary Policy in Europe:
Evidence from Banks' Balance Sheets
Carlo A. Favero, Francesco Giavazzi and Luca Flabbi
NBER Working Paper No. 7231
July 1999
JEL No. E51, E52 G21
ABSTRACT
Available studies on asymmetries in the monetary transmission mechanism within Europe are
invariably based on macro-economic evidence: such evidence is abundant but often contradictory. This
paper takes a different route by using micro-economic data. We use the information contained in the
balance sheets of individual banks (available from the BankScope database) to implement a case-study on
the response of banks in France, Germany, Italy and Spain to a monetary tightening. The episode we study
occurred during 1992, when monetary conditions were tightened throughout Europe. Evidence on such
tightening is provided by the uniform squeeze in liquidity, which affected all banks in our sample. We study
the first link in the transmission chain by analysing the response of bank loans to the monetary tightening.
Our experiment provides evidence on the importance of the "credit" channel in Europe, and thus on one
possibly important source of asymmetries in the monetary transmission mechanism. We do not find
evidence of a significant response of bank loans to the monetary tightening, which occurred during 1992,
in any of the four European countries we have considered. However, we find significant differences both
across countries and across banks of different dimensions in the factors that allow them to shield the supply
of loans from the squeeze in liquidity.
Carlo A. Favero Francesco Giavazzi
IGIER IGIER
Università Bocconi Università Bocconi
via Salasco, 5 via Salasco, 5
20136 Milan 20136 Milan
ITALY ITALY
carlo.favero@uni-bocconi.it and NBER
francesco.giavazzi@uni-bocconi.it
Luca Flabbi
IGIER
Università Bocconi
via Salasco, 5
20136 Milan
ITALY

1 Introduction
This paper studies the monetary transmission mechanism in Europe, a topic that has
attracted new attention following the start of the EMU. Asymmetries in the monetary
transmission mechanism across the members of the monetary union could be a critical
factor in determining the effects of the single monetary policy. Consider, as an example,
an EMU-wide symmetric inflationary shock. The ECB would respond by raising
short-term interest rates. If the consequences of the monetary contraction were
different from one country to another--both in terms of the timing and the magnitude
of the responses of the relevant real variables--the output cost of maintaining price
stability could be quite unevenly distributed across EMU.
We consider a potentially important channel for such asymmetries, related to
the response of bank lending to monetary policy. When looking, in Europe, for
asymmetries in the monetary transmission mechanism, it is natural to start from
banks. As it is well known, banks are at the center of financial intermediation in
continental Europe. The share of bank loans in total debt liabilities of non-financial
firms is 85 per cent in Germany, 80 in France, 95 in Italy and 77 in Spain—by
contrast, in the U.S., this share is about 30 per cent.
In this paper we use balance sheet information from a sample of 651 banks
from four EU states (France, Germany, Italy and Spain) to study how bank lending
responded to an episode of monetary tightening. The episode we investigate occurred
during 1992. As opposed to the four continental countries, British monetary policy
was looser in 1992 than it had been in 1991: this is the reason why we excluded the
UK from our sample of large EU states.
When the central bank tightens monetary policy by squeezing bank reserves,
it can generate a corresponding reduction in the supply of bank loans. There are two
ways in which a bank can prevent this from happening. It can change the composition
of its liabilities by issuing instruments not subject to a reserve requirement (such as
CD’s or interbank loans); alternatively it can sell bonds. If this does not happen, and
the supply of loans is reduced, the monetary contraction will affect the real economy,
unless firms can substitute at no cost bonds and commercial paper for loans. This
effect (known as the “credit channel”, see e.g. Bernanke and Gertler, 1995) works on
the supply side and amplifies the more traditional “money channel”--i.e. the demand
effect of a monetary contraction, which affects new marginal spending by modifying
2

borrowing conditions and by affecting asset prices, and thus the market value of
wealth.
Our use of micro data to study the transmission of monetary policy from the
central bank to banks is motivated by the well-known observation that
macroeconomic time-series are ill-suited to identify a “credit” channel from a
“money” channel: the money channel works through banks' liabilities, and the credit
channel works through their assets, but assets and liabilities are tightly related by
accounting identities, thus posing a difficult identification problem. For this reason the
evidence proposed by macroeconomic studies which look at output and price
fluctuations in response to shifts in the quantities of loans and deposits is rarely
decisive (see Bernanke and Blinder, 1992). On the contrary, micro-economic data
allow one to identify the presence of a credit channel by testing the specific empirical
implication of the credit view: namely that the responses of banks (and firms) to a
shift in monetary policy should differ depending on their characteristics. Small banks,
for instance, find it more difficult to insulate their loans' portfolio from a squeeze in
central bank liquidity because they typically cannot substitute CD’s and interbank
loans for deposits at no cost. Moreover, Kashyap and Stein (1997b), and Kashyap,
Stein and Wilcox (1993) show that, in the case of the U.S., small banks are typically
“weak” (that is their share of cash+securities+reserves over total assets is low) and are
thus unable to use their liquid assets as a buffer.
So far, tests of the credit channel based on the importance of bank
characteristics in determining the response of loans to a shift in monetary policy have
been limited to U.S. data. Our paper is the first study of this kind concerning Europe.
The result of our analysis is a new twist in the study of asymmetries in the monetary
transmission mechanism in Europe. In this area too, macroeconomic data, have been
unable to detect significant asymmetries in the transmission mechanism 1. Studies based
on macroeconomic data typically look at the impact of a shift in interest rates on
inflation and output country-by-country. Such evidence, however, is hardly decisive.
First, the standard errors are often large, so that one can seldom reject the hypothesis
of symmetry even if the point estimates are very different across countries. Second,
the estimates are not robust to the 'Lucas critique' since they are based on samples
1 See Gerlach and Smets 1995, Ramaswamy and Sloek 1997, Barran, Coudert and Mojon 1997, Britton
and Whitley 1997, Dornbusch, Favero and Giavazzi 1998, Kieler and Saarenheimo 1998, Cecchetti
1999.
3