NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
JAPAN’S BIG BANG AND
THE TRANSFORMATION OF
FINANCIAL MARKETS
Takatoshi Ito
Michael Melvin
Working Paper 7247
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7247
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1999
This paper was written for the conference on Japan in the 21st century, University of Hawaii, January 1999.
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by Takatoshi Ito and Michael Melvin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given

to the source.
Japan’s Big Bang and the Transformation of Financial Markets
Takatoshi Ito and Michael Melvin
NBER Working Paper No. 7247
July 1999
JEL No. G1, F3
ABSTRACT
A first step in the "big-bang" deregulation of Japanese financial markets was the deregulation of the
foreign exchange market on April 1, 1998. This paper examines how the bid-ask spread and conditional
volatility in the yen/dollar foreign exchange market changed around the time of the deregulation. Intra-day
data are analyzed with the following results: (1) Holding constant the effects of volume and volatility, the
deregulation was associated with a convergence of Japanese quoted spreads toward those of other banks.
(2) Modeling the persistence in volatility reveals that deregulation lowered conditional volatility.
Takatoshi Ito Michael Melvin
Institute of Economic Research Department of Economics
Hitotsubashi University College of Business
Naka 2-1, Kunitachi Arizona State University
186-8603 Tokyo Box 873806
JAPAN Tempe, AZ 85287-3806
and NBER michael.melvin@asu.edu
itointokyo@aol.com

This paper was written for the conference on Japan in the 21st
century, University of Hawaii, January 1999.
1. Introduction
The “Big Bang” of Japanese financial markets was proposed in November
1996 by the Hashimoto government. This was the beginning of the end to the
“convoy” system—no failure and regulatory protection—that had ruled the
Japanese financial markets since the end of the Second World War. It is a
bold idea to deregulate and liberalize the financial sectors, if not belatedly.
There were three main objectives. First, the Big Bang aims at making
the Japanese market more efficient and internationalized. The market will
become more active and competitive, and users, such as the Japanese
corporations and retail consumers, will be beneficiaries. Second, the Japanese
institutions, with competitive pressures from foreign institutions, will have to
become more efficient. Third, it would deflect the political pressures,
representing vested interest, on the Ministry of Finance.
After the bubble burst, the Tokyo financial markets had been losing its
steam. The Tokyo Stock Exchange lost more than half of its capitalization
since the peak of the bubble (December 1989). There had been a mass exodus
of foreign stock listings from the Tokyo Big Board. The trading volumes of the
Tokyo foreign exchange market have not been growing in the 1990s, and
Hong Kong and Singapore were catching up fast. The usage of the yen in Asia
1

has not grown as some economists had predicted, partly because of the
cumbersome rules and regulations in Tokyo. The first motivation of the Big
Bang was to stop the skidding of Tokyo as an (if not ‘the’) Asian financial
center.
Making the Tokyo markets efficient does not necessarily mean that the
Japanese institutions will flourish. If foreigners have a competitive
advantage in financial products, then they will take greater market shares in
Tokyo. It must be endured, the policy makers argued. However, it was hoped
that intensified competition would make Japanese institutions more efficient
and stronger. The second objective, which derives from the first one, was
more nationalistic, but try to force Japanese financial institutions to try
harder.
Although the objectives were unanimously hailed as appropriate and
desirable, the timing of the announcement was not so obvious. The Ministry
of Finance was heavily criticized for its role in first creating and then
bursting the bubble and not guiding the banking industry through the sea of
nonperforming loans. First, the Ministry tried to maintain the “convoy”
system, not failing one bank by forcing banks to share the burden and
allowing banks to postpone provisioning and sales of bad assets, and then
abandoning it without an sufficiently funded safety net (deposit insurance
system). The Big Bang is a constructive way to steer attention away from the
sorry past to a bright future.
2