NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ARE ALL BANKING CRISES ALIKE?
THE JAPANESE EXPERIENCE
IN INTERNATIONAL COMPARISON
Michael Hutchison
Kathleen McDill
Working Paper 7253
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7253
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1999
The authors thank the UC Pacific Rim Research Program, the International Centre for
the Study of East Asian Development and the UCSC Committee on Research and
Division of Social Sciences for financial support. We thank participants at the SCIIE
International Economics Conference at UC Santa Cruz, the NBER-TCER Japan
Project Meeting in Tokyo (October 1998) and the Japan Economic Seminar at Harvard
University, and especially Michael Dooley, Eric Rosengren and Andrew Rose, for
helpful comments. All opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Michael Hutchison and Kathleen McDill. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Are All Banking Crises Alike?
The Japanese Experience in International Comparison
Michael Hutchison and Kathleen McDill
NBER Working Paper No. 7253
July 1999
JEL No. E44, G21
ABSTRACT
This paper examines episodes of banking sector distress for a large
sample of developed and developing countries, highlighting the experience of
Japan. By a host of criteria, Japan appeared to be in a stronger position than
most countries at the onset of banking problems— low inflation, appreciating
currency, balanced government budget, and large external surpluses.
However, Japan followed a clear international boom-and-bust pattern in terms
of real output growth, credit growth and stock price movements. We estimate
a multivariate probit model that links the likelihood of banking problems to
a set of macroeconomic variables and institutional characteristics. The model
predicts a high probability of banking sector distress in Japan in the early
1990s. In particular, the likelihood of an episode of banking distress rose in
line with the sharp drop in asset prices, deepening recession and “moral
hazard” problem (financial liberalization combined with explicit deposit
insurance). The Japanese case is also noteworthy by the long duration of the
banking crisis, the length of the coincident recession and general malaise over
the economy, the slow regulatory response, and the long delay in the
commitment of public funds to re-capitalize the banking sector.
Michael Hutchison Kathleen McDill
Department of Economics Department of Economics
Social Sciences 1 Social Sciences 1
University of California, Santa Cruz University of California, Santa
Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064 Santa Cruz, CA 95064
hutch@cats.ucsc.edu kmcdill@cats.ucsc.edu

1. Introduction
Recent events in Japan and East Asia draw renewed attention to the many problems
associated with financial sector distress—h ow quickly and unexpectedly crisis situations arise,
disruption in credit channels, economic contraction, and the difficulty in designing effective
policy responses. Japan’s banking problem emerged gradually and received scant attention in
the early 1990s. The problem grew to crisis proportions by the end of the decade, however,
ranking it among the largest episodes of financial sector distress experienced by any industrial
country over the past fifty years. Amidst a series of bankruptcies, nationalization and forced-
mergers of financial institutions, the Japanese government and Diet were virtually forced in
1998 to commit huge amounts of public funds to shore up the deposit insurance fund and re-
capitalize problem banks.
Banking crises have become commonplace during the past two decades, but the range of
experience in terms of the nature of the crisis, causes and effects, vary widely across countries
and time periods. Japan’s banking problem is distinctive in several dimensions, as seen by
comparison with similar episodes in developed and developing countries over the 1975-1997
period (Table 1).1 The average duration of an episode of banking sector distress is 3.9 years.
Japan’s banking problem had continued for 7 years by end-1998 and is likely to continue
through the end of the decade. The public commitment of funds to resolve banking sector
distress in Japan (12 percent of GDP through 1998)2 is also substantially larger than the
international average (with estimates ranging from 6-10 percent of GDP), and may grow greater
yet.
The full impact of the banking crisis on the Japanese economy in uncleara t this point, but
is clearly substantial. Costly recessions such as that experienced by Japan have usually coincided
with periods of severe banking distress, most likely reacting to and reinforcing each other.
When measured as the present discounted value of deviations from trend output, the average
output loss during 61 episodes of banking sector distress worldwide was 7.3 percent of GDP.3
Focusing on those countries experiencing recessions following the onset of banking problems
(49 countries), estimated output loss was 9.7 percent of GDP and output was below trend for
about 3 years. This measure indicates that the depth of Japan’s economic contraction to date

has been less severe that typical (with output loss of around 4.0 percent of GDP through 1997),
but Japan’s recession continued into 1998—the sixth year of economic weakness (below
potential GDP).4 Japan’s weak economy has already lasted more than twice as long as the
average recession experienced by other countries experiencing serious banking problems5.
These distinctive features might carry over to other dimensions—the factors leading up to
and coincident with Japan’s ongoing episode of banking sector distress may or may not fit with
the experiences of other countries. To address this question we investigate the causes and
consequences of banking sector distress in a large sample of developed and developing
countries, focusing in particular on the special circumstances that distinguish the current
Japanese episode. In addition to macroeconomic developments—especially asset prices-- we
consider specific institutional characteristics that may increase the likelihood of a banking
problem emerging. We pay special attention to the moral hazard problem—particularly the
interaction of a recent bout of financial liberalization with explicit deposit insurance—and how
the institutional position of the central bank may affect the likelihood of a banking problem
emerging.
Several recent research papers have attempted to identify the key factors preceding or
coincident with episodes of banking sector distress in a systematic way (i.e. Demirgüç-Kunt and
Detragiache, 1998a,b; Eichengreen and Rose, 1998; Hardy and Pazarbasioglu, 1998; Kaminsky
and Reinhart, 1996). We contribute to this literature in five ways. First, our focus is on Japan.
Our statistical analysis, including the probit model used to predict the likelihood of banking
sector distress, investigates the causes and consequences of the Japanese case in detail and
addresses the question of whether this episode fits an internationally recognizable pattern.
Second, we consider a substantially larger sample of developed and developing countries
(updated to include the 1997 banking crises in Asia) than other studies. We analyze the
statistical characteristics of countries experiencing banking sector distress (65 episodes) and test
several empirical propositions about the factors that affect the likelihood of severe banking
problems arising.6
Third, we pay particular attention to how institutional characteristics—the extent of
financial liberalization, the presence of explicit deposit insurance, moral hazard, and the position