NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
FOR REDUCING GLOBAL
FINANCIAL INSTABILITY
Kenneth Rogoff
Working Paper 7265
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7265
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1999
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 1999 by Kenneth Rogoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
International Institutions for Reducing
Global Financial Instability
Kenneth Rogoff
NBER Working Paper No. 7265
July 1999
JEL No. F02, F33
ABSTRACT
This paper asks how recent developments in research on banking and sovereign lending
can help inform the debate on choosing a new international financial architecture. A broad
range of plans is considered, including a global lender of last resort facility, an international
bankruptcy court, an international debt insurance corporation, and unilateral controls on capital
flows.
Kenneth Rogoff
Economics Department
Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138-3001
and NBER
krogoff@kuznets.fas.harvard.edu

Introduction1
It is hard to open a business newspaper or magazine these days without confronting another
sweeping proposal to reform the "international financial architecture." George Soros (1998) has
called for the formation of an international deposit insurance corporation, while Jeffrey Sachs
(1995) advocates the formation of international bankruptcy court. Paul Krugman (1998a, b)
suggests that economists need to rethink their traditional antipathy towards controls on capital
controls outflows, whereas Barry Eichengreen (1999) is among many who advocate Chilean-style
controls on capital inflows. Henry Kaufman (1998) recommends creating a single global super-
regulator of financial markets and institutions, and Jeffrey Garten (1998) proposes a world central
bank with responsibility for overseeing a new global currency. Fischer (1999) makes the case that,
with a range of improvements in the system, an multilateral lender can effectively perform the main
functions of a lender of last resort, even without being able to issue currency. Many of these ideas
are not new, but they are being vented more forcefully, and taken more seriously, that at any time
since Harry Dexter White and John Maynard Keynes masterminded the creation of the World Bank
and the International Monetary Fund at the Bretton Woods conference at the end of World War II.
Is there a "crisis in global capitalism"? Is the current system actually in desperate need of
repair? In this paper, I will provide an overview of some of the main problems, and critically assess
some illustrative alternative plans for dealing with them. The first part of this paper gives an
overview of the current system, and a brief discussion of some of the conceptual issues. I then
proceed to consider a range of plans that would purportedly improve things. My focus is more on
1
The author has benefited from discussions with Peter Garber, Charles Goodhart, and Mervyn
King, and from detailed comments by Timothy Taylor and Brad DeLong on an earlier draft.
2

ambitious grand schemes than on small marginal changes. Even though such schemes tend to be
impractical, especially in the absence of a genuine world government, they throw the problems
facing global leaders into sharp relief. I try throughout to highlight important research questions
and show how they relate to the evaluating the various plans. The third section of the paper reviews
reforms that developing countries can implement unilaterally to reduce the costs of capital flow
volatility. The final section highlights the importance of the bias in the current system towards debt
financing and bank intermediation in sovereign lending.
The Current System
Before turning to proposals for radical change of the international financial system, it is
important to give a brief critical assessment of the main issues and motivations for change.
Alternative Perspectives on the Global Financial System
Whether one views technology-driven innovation in the global financial system as an
engine of growth, or as an agent of destruction, depends on where you sit. In the United States,
where financial markets are the deepest and most sophisticated in the world, their benefits seem
obvious. Despite having one of the lowest savings rates in the industrialized world, the U.S.
economy has enjoyed a remarkable period of sustained growth over the past seven years. The
efficacy with which financial markets have helped lever a small pool of savings into a large
effective increase in capital is remarkable, even when one takes into account the help of foreign
capital inflows. Hyper-efficient U.S. financial markets can also be credited with helping to fuel the
extensive corporate restructuring of the 1980s, thereby laying the foundations for the sustained
rapid growth of the 1990s. Europe, with its introduction of the euro and its efforts at stimulating
3