NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EFFECTS OF DIRECT FOREIGN
INVESTMENT ON LOCAL
COMMUNITIES
David N. Figlio
Bruce A. Blonigen
Working Paper 7274
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7274
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1999
We thank Eckhard Janeba, John List, Kei-Mu Yi and session participants at the 1998 Winter Econometric
Society meetings for helpful comments. We also thank the staff of the South Carolina State Library and Clarice
Gray for their excellent research assistance. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the College
of Arts and Sciences of the University of Oregon. Any errors or omissions are the sole responsibility of the
authors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
© 1999 by David N. Figlio and Bruce A. Blonigen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
The Effects of Direct Foreign Investment

on Local Communities
David N. Figlio and Bruce A. Blonigen
NBER Working Paper No. 7274
July 1999
JEL No. F23, J21, H71
ABSTRACT
The large increase in direct foreign investment (DFI) into the United States in the late 1980s
has generated considerable research on why these flows occurred and where these foreign firms
located. However, very little has been done to evaluate the impact these foreign firms have on the
local communities in which they locate. As a first step in addressing this topic, we use detailed
county-level panel data from South Carolina across 5 year intervals from 1980 through 1995 to
investigate the effect of foreign manufacturing firms on local labor markets and on the level and
distribution of local government budgets. We find that manufacturing employment by foreign firms
has a substantial impact on industry wages and county budgets which is significantly different from
domestic manufacturing employment. With respect to wages, we find that while increased
manufacturing employment generally increases county wages in an average two-digit industry, this
effect is more than seven times larger when the employment growth comes from a foreign firm, rather
than a domestic one. On the budget side, we find that foreign employment leads to larger declines
in per capita revenues and expenditures at the county level, and to significant redistribution of county
expenditures away from public school funding and toward transportation and public safety.
David N. Figlio Bruce A. Blonigen
Department of Economics Department of Economics
University of Florida University of Oregon
Gainesville, FL 32611-7140 Eugene, OR 97403-1285
figliodn@dale.cba.ufl.edu and NBER
bruceb@oregon.uoregon.edu

Introduction
The United States experienced a large wave of direct foreign investment (DFI) flows in the second
half of the 1980s and the early 1990s. This has generated an extensive literature both on why these flows
occurred and where these new firms located.1 Surprisingly, very little has been done to analyze the costs
and benefits to the United States from the substantial stock of foreign firms now operating here. Yet, there
are many obvious policy questions that relate to the impact of DFI stock on a country. At the economy-
wide level, the influx of DFI raises questions such as trade balance effects, technology spillovers and
competitive effects on the domestic industry.2
However, there are also important policy questions connected to the impact of DFI on local
communities. Bhagwati et al.’s (1992) concept of quid pro quo DFI suggests that DFI will directly
stimulate “goodwill” with local communities, which in turn will lead to lower levels of future trade
protection. They argue this may be an important motivation for DFI flows into the United States. In prior
work (Blonigen and Figlio, 1998), we find that DFI generally increases the likelihood of trade protection
votes by U.S. congressmen, but that paper does not address whether this is due to any specific effects (or
lack thereof) of DFI on local communities. At the same time, policymakers and economists have
questioned whether the competitive bidding for foreign investment by local communities is actually
harmful. A number of recent high profile foreign investments in the United States, particularly in the
automobile industry, generated considerable debate about whether state and local governments have offered
unreasonably large incentives to entice foreign firms to invest in their area. The main concern is that
1 See Graham and Krugman (1995) for a survey of possible explanations for the wave of inward
DFI in the U.S. and related literature. Papers on location of DFI in the United States include Coughlin,
Terza, and Arromodee (1991), Woodward (1992), and Head, Ries and Swenson (1995)
2 Graham and Krugman also survey the economy-wide impacts of DFI. Blomström and Kokko
(1994) examine the effects of outward DFI on domestic investment, exports, and employment in the
Swedish economy.
1

various localities may end up in a bidding war that results in a “prisoner’s dilemma” that benefits the
foreign firms at the expense of the winning community and the welfare of the entire country. In fact, to the
extent that communities have a common valuation of the foreign firm located in their area, the community
that receives the investment may suffer a “winner’s curse.” The most notable of these incidents may have
been the incentives offered by the State of Alabama to attract Mercedes-Benz AG. As detailed by a
November 24, 1993 article in the Wall Street Journal, Alabama ended up promising over $300 million in
incentives to Mercedes, including free land, employee salaries the first year of operation, property tax
relief, payroll tax credits, state spending on Mercedes automobiles, etc. This led many to believe Alabama
may have paid too high of a price, as expressed by George Autry, head of an economic development group
based in North Carolina (a rival bidder): “They’re [Alabama] losing money to invest in their people, their
roads, their state in general. For a state like Alabama, which needs money for education, that’s a problem.”
(Wall Street Journal, September 30, 1993, p. A12)
At first glance, it may not be clear why one would expect foreign firms to have different impacts on
communities than do domestic firms. In fact, studies examining the effect of new manufacturing jobs on
local communities, and particularly their impact on local labor markets,3 may be sufficient for gauging the
local effect of manufacturing DFI. However, recent studies have found significant economic differences
between foreign-owned and domestic-owned establishments. Howenstein and Zeile (1994) use plant level
data from the Annual Survey of Manufactures for 1989 and 1990 and find that foreign affiliates in the
United States are larger, more capital intensive and pay higher wages than domestic plants. Globerman,
Ries and Vertinsky (1994) find qualitatively identical results to those of Howenstein and Zeile using data
3 These include Marston (1985), Topel (1986), Crihfield (1989), Bartik (1991), Terkla and
Doeringer (1991), and Glaeser et al. (1992). Bartik gives perhaps the most comprehensive overview of the
effects of local job growth. Both his extensive review of the literature and his own analysis find that local
job growth has a positive and significant long-run impact on real earnings in the community. He also finds
evidence that long-run unemployment rates decrease and housing prices increase with local job growth.
2