NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EVOLVING MARKET FOR
CATASTROPHIC EVENT RISK
Kenneth A. Froot
Working Paper 7287
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7287
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1999
Ernie Asaff, Christopher McGhee, and Patrick Sullivan of Guy Carpenter Advisors, Inc., Bruce Thomas of
IndexCo, and John Major, Jonathan Norton, and Daniel Bar-Yaacov of Guy Carpenter & Company assisted
in the preparation of text and data . The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Kenneth A. Froot. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Evolving Market for Catastrophic Event Risk
Kenneth A. Froot
NBER Working Paper No. 7287
August 1999
JEL No. G22
ABSTRACT
This paper discusses the recent changes in the market for catastrophe risk. These risks have
traditionally been distributed through the insurance and reinsurance systems. However, because insurance
companies tend to share relatively small amounts of their cat exposures and because insurance companies’
capital is threatened by large event, these risks are now being shared partly through the capital markets.
In looking to likely future developments, the paper enumerates five key ingredients that successfully
structured cat instruments are likely to share: retentions should be substantial; layers of protection should
not be too high; dollar amounts of risk transfer should not be too small; loss triggers should be beyond
cendent control; and loss triggers should be symmetrically transparent.
Kenneth A. Froot
Graduate School of Business
Harvard University
Soldiers Field Road
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
kfroot@hbs.edu

Executive Summary
• Catastrophe risks have traditionally been distributed through the insurance and reinsurance systems.
Insurance companies cumulate the catastrophe risk of individual entities and redistribute the risk to the
global reinsurance industry, and, ultimately, to shareholders.
• Insurance companies retain large exposures to catastrophe events. For cat events generating an $8
billion industry loss —onehalf the losses from Hurricane Andrew —only20 percent of losses are
covered by reinsurance. This means that insurance companies are using their own equity to finance this
risk, an inefficient way to use capital.
• Because of the inadequacy of reinsurance capacity and the potentially enormous size of catastrophe
risks, insurance companies and corporations have sought to spread these risks to the capital markets.
• The development of computer modeling of natural perils and the growing knowledge of cat risk among
institutional investors is increasing market capacity.
• Evidence of the improving efficiency of the market can be observed in the decline in price for
catastrophe reinsurance over the past four years. The price decline only partly explained by the absence
of major cat events; much of it is permanent.
• Further progress can be seen in the development of capital market instruments to address cat event risk.
In 1997, the first large and truly successful "cat" bonds were issued.
• Looking to the future, successfully structured cat bonds issues are likely to require five key ingredients:
I. Retentions should be substantial. This is partly for institutional reasons. Bond markets prefer
issues where there is a low probability of loss of principal, and high retentions mean that the
probability of loss will be low.
2. Layers of protection should not be too high. High levels of protection involve extremely low
probabilities of loss. For example, earthquakes in the 8+ range on the Richter scale may only
occur in 1000 years. Very low probabilities mean that the bonds will be priced low and these
prices cannot justif,' the expense load of underwriting cat bond issues.
3. Dollar amounts of risk transfer should not be too small. A large portion of the issuance costs
of bonds are fixed and need to be spread over a large base.
4. Loss triggers should be beyond cendent control. Cat event risks cannot generally be
controlled by cedent insurers. However, aggressive mitigation and claims manage-ment may
be reduced for losses beyond the trigger. This problem can be contained by using industry-
wide loss triggers, such as the Guy Carpenter Catastrophe Index.
5. Loss triggers should be symmetrically transparent. Cedent companies normally will know
more about the risks they face than investors. The use of industry loss triggers can reduce
this problem.
• Additional investment groups are expected to take on insurance risk. The first group is traditional
reinsurers, who are raising equity from investors to write insurance risks. A second group is also
raising capital, but is placing the risk in tax advantaged markets such as Bermuda. Finally, a third
group is expected to emerge looking more like mutual funds, where investors own shares of the fund
assets.
• The new sources of capital will tend to undercut the reinsurance pricing cycle. Large price movements
will attract capital to these markets. This increased supply will minimize the upward movement in
prices that would normally occur following a cycle turn.
2

I. Introduction
In the last year, the market for catastrophic event risk has witnessed important change.
The first large and truly successful "cat" bonds have been issued. New exchanges have opened
and exchanged contracts have been created. Indexes of cat losses have been introduced. The
array of products confronting issuers and investors has widened substantially.
This paper provides a brief overview of these changes. It also takes a functional approach to
diagnosing the problems in the market for cat event risk in order to understand how change
going forward is likely to occur. Finally, it provides information to companies looking to
assess whether these new markets are useful for solving their problems.
II. Background
The distribution of catastrophe risk is highly unfavorable without insurance and reinsurance.
Individual households and companies are highly exposed to their own property damage and
because they are not exposed to others' property damage, these entities are not rewarded
with a financial gain if no cats occur. Households and corporations dislike this situation; they
face large potential downside from cats that affect them, yet receive no upside when no cats
occur.
Insurance, reinsurance, and the capital markets provide an obvious redistribution mechanism
whereby those who are exposed can protect themselves against cat loss. Households and
companies are risk averse; therefore they will pay more than actuarial losses for insurance.
This demand translates then into upside for others. When there are no catastrophes, each
entity's premiums are redistributed to others in the form of financial gains.
A. Inefficient catastrophe risk distribution
Clearly, a catastrophe risk distribution mechanism exists for cat risk. But how well has it
functioned historically? The answer is not particularly well. Many entities, particularly
businesses, have large assets that remain highly exposed to cat risk. This is because large-size
insurance and reinsurance policies are difficult and costly to obtain. Indeed, even insurance
companies that underwrite policies affected by cat events have experienced difficulty
transferring substantial quantities of cat risk to reinsurers.
To demonstrate this, Figure 1 shows the fraction of cat losses that insurers protect through
reinsurance, averaged across insurers. It shows that the fraction of protection is high for
relatively small cat losses, but low for moderate sized cat events. For example, for cat events
generating an $8 billion industry loss, only about 20% of marginal insurer losses would have
been covered by reinsurance as of 1994.1,2
A well-working risk distribution mechanism would have an insurer, like any other company,
ceding most of its own cat exposure. By self-insuring, companies are requiring their equity
holders implicitly to provide the insurance.3 After all, equity returns are the first to suffer
Figure 1 actually overstates the fraction of losses covered, since it averages across only those insurers that
purchase some amount of reinsurance. If insurers that purchase no reinsurance were included, the fraction
shown in Figure 1 would decline.
2Acat event that generates a loss of $8 billion (1996 dollars) is not extremely unlikely, with a probability
of exceedence of approximately 15 percent.
Of course, to the extent that the firm has insufficient capital Isurplusto sustain a loss, equity holders
share the risk with other claimants of the firm: bondholders, trade creditors, and policy holders.
3