NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
AN INDUSTRY-ADJUSTED INDEX
OF STATE ENVIRONMENTAL
COMPLIANCE COSTS
Arik Levinson
Working Paper 7297
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7297
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1999
This paper has benefited from funding provided by the National Science Foundation, helpful comments by
Wayne Gray, Kevin Hassett, John List, and Domenico Siniscalco, and research assistance by Victor Davis
and Joe Hendrickson. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Arik Levinson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
An Industry-Adjusted Index of State
Environmental Compliance Costs
Arik Levinson
NBER Working Paper No. 7297
August 1999
ABSTRACT
This paper describes a new, industry-adjusted index of state environmental compliance costs from
1977 to 1994. The index has two principal advantages: it controls for states’ industrial compositions, and
it can be calculated for 17 years, thus facilitating comparisons both among states and within states over
time. Several notable facts emerge. First, differences in states’ industrial compositions play a large role
in determining their environmental compliance costs. Second, after controlling for industrial composition,
the variance across states in compliance costs declined steadily between 1977 and 1994. Third, this cost
index is negatively correlated with subjective indices of state environmental efforts compiled by various
environmental organizations. In sum, the cost index described here provides some new data on historical
trends in state regulatory differences, differs from the conventional wisdom regarding states’ relative
environmental efforts, and provides a useful tool for researchers exploring the effects of compliance costs
on economic activity.
Arik Levinson
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin, Madison
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
amlevins@facstaff.wisc.edu

1
An Industry-Adjusted Index of State Environmental Compliance Costs
I. Introduction.
This paper describes a new industry-adjusted index of state environmental compliance
costs that can be used to compare regulations both across states in a given year and within states
over time.' It compares that index to others used in the environmental economics literature, and
uses the index to answer several often-raised questions about the pattern of environmental
regulations in the United States and how that pattern has changed over time. Finally, the paper
describes an application of the index, as used to assess the effect of environmental regulatory
stringency on foreign direct investment to U.S. states.
There are three key motivations for creating this index. First, the EPA has worried
publicly that some states are laggards in enforcing federal standards.2 The index described here
documents the variation across states in their environmental compliance costs. Second, since
1980, responsibility for monitoring and enforcement of environmental regulations has been
devolving from the federal government to state and local regulators. In theory, this could cause
states to become less or more similar in their standard stringency as they are freed to set their
own level of stringency and to compete with neighbors to attract industry or clean their
environments. This index provides data on the degree of convergence in state standard
stringency over time. Third, analysts studying the effects of environmental regulations on local
and national economies have been hampered by the difficulty of accurately measuring and
comparing the stringency of those regulations (Jaffe et al., 1995). In particular, studies of the
effect of regulations on local economies rely almost exclusively on cross-section data,3 subjective

2
indices of state standards, or on cost-based measures that do not control for industrial
composition.
Existing measure of environmental regulatory stringency take two forms. First, there are
the environmental groups' rankings of states. These are subjective, and typically only measure
perceptions of states' efforts at one point in time, so intertemporal comparisons are not possible.
Most analysts have therefore relied on the Census Bureau's Pollution Abatement Costs and
Expenditures (PACE) survey data to construct measures of statewide compliance costs per unit
of output. These measures, however, fail to control for states' industrial compositions.
Consequently, states with a lot of polluting industry have relatively high environmental
compliance costs, regardless of their regulations.
To address these concerns, the next section describes the new, industry-adjusted index,
and reports findings about relative stringency and how it has changed over time. Section ifi
describes existing, subjective measures of environmental standard stringency, and compares them
to the industry-adjusted index. Section IV describes an application of the index to assess the
effect of environmental stringency on foreign direct investment to U.S. states.
II. An industry-adjusted index of state environmental compliance costs.
Many researchers have relied on the Census Bureau's Pollution Abatement Costs and
Expenditures (PACE) survey to construct indices of state environmental regulatory stringency.
The PACE survey collected data from manufacturing establishments about their pollution
abatement operating and capital costs from 1977 to 1994, when it was discontinued.4 Most
commonly, studies use these costs divided by some measure of state economic activity, such as