NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HAVE EMPLOYMENT REDUCTIONS
BECOME GOOD NEWS FOR
SHAREHOLDERS? THE EFFECT OF
JOB LOSS ANNOUNCEMENTS ON
STOCK PRICES, 1970-97
Henry S. Farber
Kevin F. Hallock
Working Paper 7295
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7295
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1999
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 1999 by Henry S. Farber and Kevin F. Hallock. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed

two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Have Employment Reductions Become Good News
for Shareholders? The Effect of Job Loss
Announcements on Stock Prices, 1970 - 97
Henry S. Farber and Kevin F. Hallock
NBER Working Paper No. 7295
August 1999
JEL No. G14, J63
ABSTRACT
We study the reaction of stock prices to announcements of reductions in force (RIFs) using a
sample of nearly 3878 such announcements in 1176 large firms during the 1970-97 period collected from
the Wall Street Journal Index. We note that, although there has been a dramatic secular increase in news
stories related to job loss, the total number of actual announcements fro the firms in our sample follows the
business cycle quite closely. We then examine changes over time in standard summary statistics (means,
meridians, fraction negative) of the distribution of stock market reactions as well as changes over time in
kernel density estimates of this distribution. We find clear evidence that the distribution of stock market
reactions has shifted to the right (became less negative) over time. One possible explanation for this change
is that, over the last three decades, RIFs designed to improve efficiency have become more common
relative to RIFs designed to cope with reductions in product demand. We find that, although this
explanation shows some promise, most of the decline in the negative stock price reaction remains
unexplained.
Henry S. Farber Kevin F. Hallock
Industrial Relations Section Department of Economics
Firestone Library College of Commerce & Business Admin.
Princeton University University of Illinois
Princeton, NJ 08544 1206 South Sixth Street
and NBER Champaign, IL 61820
farber@princeton.edu hallock@uiuc.edu

Have Employment Reductions Become Good News for Shareholders?
The Effect of Job Loss Announcements on Stock Prices, 1970-97
Henry S. Farber and Kevin F. Hallock
1. Introduction
There has been substantial discussion in the business press and elsewhere recently
about the effects of "downsizing" on firms, workers, and families. In fact there has been an
explosion in the number of newspaper articles written about job loss, reductions in force,
layoffs and the like in the past decade (see figure 1). 1 While the effects of job loss on
workers are clearly negative (see, for example, Farber, 1997), there have been suggestions
in the business press and by policy groups that owners of firms profit handsomely as stock
prices increase around the time of job loss announcements (Anderson and Cavanagh, 1994,
and Sloan, 1996). These suggestions persist despite a growing body of empirical work that
finds fairly consistent negative reactions of stock prices to announcements of reductions in
the labor force (RIFs).
A straightforward interpretation of a negative relationship between announcements of
RIFs and stock prices is that the RIFs signal a reduction in product demand relative to
existing production capacity. It is more difficult to understand why stock prices might
respond positively to announcements of R1IFs. One interpretation that resonates with
much of the recent attention paid to corporate "downsizing" and "restructuring" is that
announcements of RIFs might signal that management has found more efficient ways to
We thank Yacine Ait-Sahalia, Orley Ashenfelter, Marianne Bertrand, Ken Chay, Martin Conyon, Erica
Groshen, Casey Ichniowski, Jeff Kling, Stacey Kole, Alan Krueger, David Lee, David Levine, participants in
the Princeton Labor Lunch group, those attending our presentation at the 1999 meeting of the Industrial
Relations Research Association, and at seminars at BYU, CIRANO, the NBER, Texas A & M, and
UCLA/RAND. We are grateful to Michelle Arthur, Sherrilyn Billger, John Deke, Erica Field, and Kristin
Stanton for excellent research assistance. The Institute of Labor and Industrial Relations at the University
of Illinois and the Industrial Relations Section at Princeton University provided financial support.
Figure 1 is a plot of the number of articles in the Wall Street Journal collected from Pro Quest's
Newspaper Abstracts that included the following set of words: layoff, laid off, downsize, downsizing, or
plant closing for 1985-1995 period. We do not use these data or this method for collecting our data
elsewhere in the paper. Note that it is not the case that the higher level of news stories about job loss in
the 1990s simply reflects a higher number of announcements by firms. This is clear from the time series
of the frequency of job loss announcements shown in figure 2 and described in section 3.
1

produce using less (or cheaper) labor.2 To the extent that "efficiency" RIFs have become
more common relative to "deficient demand" RIPs over the last three decades, we would
expect that the average relationship between announcements of RIFs and stock prices
would have become less negative (or even positive) over time.
In order to address this issue, we used the Wall Street Journal Index to create as
complete a list as possible of announcements of RIFs by every firm that was ever listed
in the Fortune 500 for each of the 28 years from 1970 though 1997. We collected data on
3878 RIFs. This is about three times more than examined in any previous study, and the
28 years are roughly four times more than any previous work.3 These data offer us the
opportunity to investigate whether and, to some extent, why there has been a changing
relationship between share prices and announced RIFs over time.
We find some evidence that the stock market reaction to announcements of RIFs has,
in fact, changed. The average share price reaction was most negative in the early part of
the period covered, and the average reaction has become less negative in more recent years.
We estimate the averge share price reaction over the entire 1970-1997 period to be -0.375
percent (s.e. = Broken down by decade, the average reaction was -0.647 (s.e. =
0.06).
in the 1970s, -0.261 (s.e. = in the 1980s, and -0.112 (s.e. = in the 1990s.
0.10) 0.10) 0.11)
We go on to consider whether the mix of reasons for the announced RIFs, the industry
makeup or other RIF characteristics have changed over time and whether any of these
have any explanatory power in describing the changing trend. We find that although some
of these show promise in helping to explain the less negative relationship between share
prices and announced RIFs over time, a complete explanation awaits further research.
2. Data
Our data come from three distinct sources. The first is a comprehensive set of infor-
mation collected from the Wall Street Jovrnal Index of every announcement we could find
2 See, for example, Dial and Murphy (1995) whopresent an interesting intensive case study of restruc-
turing at General Dynamics in the early 1990s. They argue that the restructuring, which included RIFs,
resulted in efficiency improvements and value creation.
Jacoby (1994) discusses downsizing in the context of a view of "welfare capitalism" from an historical
point of view over the last century.
2