NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ORDER FLOW AND
EXCHANGE RATE DYNAMICS
Martin D. D. Evans
Richard K. Lyons
Working Paper 7317
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7317
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1999
We thank the following for valuable comments: Menzie Chinn, Peter DeMarzo, Petra Geraats, Richard
Meese, Michael Melvin, Andrew Rose, Mark Taranto, Ingrid Werner, and seminar participants at UC
Berkeley and the 1999 NBER Summer Institute (IFM). Lyons thanks the National Science Foundation for
financial assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by Martin D. D. Evans and Richard K. Lyons. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to

exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Order Flow and Exchange Rate Dynamics
Martin D. D. Evans and Richard K. Lyons
NBER Working Paper No. 7317
August 1999
JEL No. F31, G15
ABSTRACT
Macroeconomic models of nominal exchange rates perform poorly. In sample, R2 statistics as high
as 10 percent are rare. Out of sample, these models are typically out-forecast by a naïve random walk. This
paper presents a model of a new kind. Instead of relying exclusively on macroeconomic determinants, the
model includes a determinant from the field of microstructure-order flow. Order flow is the proximate
determinant of price in all microstructure models. This is a radically different approach to exchange rate
determination. It is also strikingly successful in accounting for realized rates. Our model of daily exchange-
rate changes produces R2 statistics above 50 percent. Out of sample, our model produces significantly
better short-horizon forecasts than a random walk. For the DM/$ spot market as a whole, we find that $1
billion of net dollar purchases increases the DM price of a dollar by about 1 pfennig.
Martin D. D. Evans Richard K. Lyons
Department of Economics Haas School of Business
Georgetown University UC Berkeley
Washington, DC 20057 Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER and NBER
evansm1@gunet.georgetown.edu lyons@haas.berkeley.edu

Order Flow and Exchange Rate Dynamics
Omitted variables is another possible explanation for the lack of explanatory power in
asset market models. However, empirical researchers have shown considerable imagina-
tion in their specification searches, so it is not easy to think of variables that have es-
caped consideration in an exchange rate equation.
Richard Meese (1990)
1. Motivation: Microstructure Meets Exchange Rate Economics
Since the landmark papers of Meese and Rogoff (1983a, 1983b), exchange
rate economics has been in crisis. It is in crisis in the sense that current macroeco-
nomic approaches to exchange rates are empirical failures: the proportion of
monthly exchange rate changes that current models can explain is essentially zero.
In their survey, Frankel and Rose (1995) write “the Meese and Rogoff analysis at
short horizons has never been convincingly overturned or explained. It continues to
exert a pessimistic effect on the field of empirical exchange rate modeling in par-
ticular and international finance in general.” 1
Which direction to turn is not obvious. Flood and Rose (1995), for example,
are “driven to the conclusion that the most critical determinants of exchange rate
volatility are not macroeconomic.” If determinants are not macro fundamentals like
interest rates, money supplies, and trade balances, then what are they? Two
alternatives have attracted attention. The first is that exchange rate determinants
include extraneous variables. These extraneous variables are typically modeled as
rational speculative bubbles (Blanchard 1979, Dornbusch 1982, Meese 1986, and
Evans 1986, among others). Though the jury is still out, Flood and Hodrick (1990)
conclude that the bubble alternative remains unconvincing. A second alternative to
macro fundamentals is irrationality. For example, exchange rates may be deter-
mined in part from avoidable expectational errors (Dominguez 1986, Frankel and
1 The relevant literature is vast. Recent surveys include Frankel and Rose (1995), Isard (1995), and
Taylor (1995).
1

Froot 1987, and Hau 1998, among others). On a priori grounds, many economists
find this second alternative unappealing. Even if one is sympathetic to the presence
of irrationality, there is a wide gulf between its presence and accounting for ex-
change rate variability. This, too, remains an unconvincing alternative.
Our paper moves in a new direction: the microeconomics of asset pricing. This
direction makes available a rich set of models from the field of microstructure
finance. These models are largely new to exchange rate economics, and in this sense
they provide a fresh approach. For example, microstructure models direct attention
to new variables, variables that have “escaped the consideration” of macroeconom-
ists (borrowing from the opening quote). The most important of these variables is
order flow.2 Order flow is the proximate determinant of price in all microstructure
models. (That order flow determines price is therefore robust to differences in
market structure, which makes this property more general than it might seem.) Our
analysis draws heavily on this causal link from order flow to price. One level deeper,
microstructure models also provide discipline for thinking about how order flow itself
is determined. Information is key here—in particular, information that currency
markets need to aggregate. This can include traditional macro fundamentals, but is
not limited to them. In sum, our microeconomic approach provides a new type of
alternative to the traditional macro approach, one that does not rely on extraneous
information or irrationality.
Turning to the data, we find that order flow does indeed matter for exchange-
rate determination. By “matter” we mean that order flow explains most of the
variation in nominal exchange rates over periods as long as four months. The graphs
below provide a convenient summary of this explanatory power. The solid lines are
the spot rates of the DM and Yen against the Dollar over our four-month sample
(May 1 to August 31, 1996). The dashed lines are marketwide order-flow for the
respective currencies. Order flow, denoted by x, is the sum over time of signed trades
between foreign exchange dealers worldwide.3
2 Order flow is a measure of buying/selling pressure. It is the net of buyer-initiated orders and seller-
initiated orders. In a dealer market, it is the dealers who absorb this order flow, and they are
compensated for doing so. (In an auction market, limit orders absorb the flow of market orders.)
3 For example, if a dealer initiates a trade against another dealer's DM/$ quote, and that trade is a $
purchase (sale), then order flow is +1 (–1). These are cumulated across dealers over each 24-hour
trading day (weekend trading—which is minimal—is included in Monday). In spot foreign exchange,
roughly 75% of total volume is between dealers (25% is between dealers and non-dealer customers).
2