NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MODELING THE IMPACTS OF MARKET
ACTIVITY ON BID-ASK
SPREADS IN THE OPTION MARKET
Young-Hye Cho
Robert F. Engle
Working Paper 7331
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7331
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1999
We thank Clive W. Granger, Allan Timmermann, Kenneth Kroner, Bruce Lehmann, Alex Kane, and
Giampiero M. Gallo for discussions and suggestions. We are grateful to Halbert White for the data. This
paper has also benefited from comments of seminar participants at ESSEC, France, 1999. We are solely
responsible for any error. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by Young-Hye Cho and Robert F. Engle. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given

to the source.
Modeling the Impacts of Market Activity
on Bid-Ask Spreads in the Option Market
Young-Hye Cho and Robert F. Engle
NBER Working Paper No. 7331
September 1999
JEL No. G14
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we examine the impact of market activity on the percentage bid-ask spreads of S&P
100 index options using transactions data. We propose a new market microstructure theory which we call
derivative hedge theory, in which option market percentage spreads will be inversely related to the option
market maker’s ability to hedge his positions in the underlying market, as measured by the liquidity of the
latter market. In a perfect hedge world, spreads arise from the illiquidity of the underlying market, rather
than from inventory risk or informed trading in the option market itself.
We find option market volume is not a significant determinant of option market spreads. This finding
leads us to question the use of volume as a measure of liquidity and supports the derivative hedge theory.
Option market spreads are positively related to spreads in the underlying market, again supporting our
theory. However, option market duration does affect option market spreads, with very slow and very fast
option markets both leading to bigger spreads. The fast market result would be predicted by the
asymmetric information theory. Inventory model predicts big spreads in slow markets. Neither result
would be observed if the underlying securities market provided a perfect hedge. We interpret these mixed
results as meaning that the option market maker is able to only imperfectly hedge his positions in the
underlying securities market.
Our result of insignificant options volume casts doubt on the price discovery argument between
stock and option market (Easley, O’Hara, and Srinivas (1998)). Asymmetric information costs in either
market are naturally passed to the other market maker’s hedging and therefore it is unimportant where the
informed traders trade.
Young-Hye Cho Robert F. Engle
Department of Finance and EconomDicespartment of Economics, 0508
Graduate School of Management University of California -- San Diego
Rutgers University 9500 Gilman Drive
New Brunswick, NJ 08903 La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
ycho@business.rutgers.edu and NBER

rengle@ucsd.edu

I. Introduction
Widespread attention has been focused on the question of how bid-ask spreads are
affected by the level of market activity. Inventory and asymmetric information models
purport to explain the relationship between market activity and spreads. Although these
models have been developed to explain the relation between spreads and stock market
activity, they should be applicable to option market spreads and their market activity as
well. However, bid-ask spreads in derivative markets, especially in option markets, may
be determined not only by their own market but also by underlying market activity. In
this case, option spreads should be examined in terms of activities in both markets.
This paper examines the impact of market activity on the percentage bid-ask
spreads of S&P 100 index options using transaction data. For this purpose, we propose a
new market microstructure theory called "derivative hedge theory" in order to address the
relation between options and underlying asset markets. If market makers in derivative
markets can perfectly hedge their positions with an underlying security, then liquidity and
spreads in derivative markets will be determined by liquidity in the underlying market.
Therefore, in a perfect derivative-hedge world, spreads arise because of the illiquidity of
an underlying market, rather than because of inventory risk or informed trading in the
option market itself. Spreads in option markets increase when there is informed trading
in the underlying market.
We model bid-ask percentage spreads in relation to market activities in order to
investigate market microstucture theories to explain option market makers' quoting. For
this purpose, we propose three models: a static model, a dynamic model, and a cross-
market model. The last includes cross-option market as well as underlying market
3