NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE DETERMINANTS OF CROSS-
BORDER EQUITY FLOWS
Richard Portes
Hélène Rey
Working Paper 7336
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7336
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1999
We have received outstanding research assistance from Gino Cateau, Yonghyup Oh and Chris Walters, and
additional help from HaYan Lee, Daniel Halmer, and Elisabetta Falcetti. Angela Cozzini of Cross Border
Capital very kindly provided the data on equity investment flows. Zvi Eckstein, Thomas Gehrig, Stéphane
Grégoir, Vassilis Hajivassiliou, John Helliwell, Boyan Jovanovic, Paul Krugman, Philip Lane, Philippe Martin,
Andy Rose, Giovanni Urga and Holger Wolf gave helpful comments, and we have benefited from seminars
at MIT, Berkeley, the Centre for Financial Studies (Frankfurt), DELTA (Paris), and the CEPR European
Summer Symposium in Macroeconomics. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by Richard Portes and Hélène Rey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two

paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Determinants of Cross-Border Equity Flows
Richard Portes and Hélène Rey
NBER Working Paper No. 7336
September 1999
JEL No. F3, F21, F12
ABSTRACT
We apply a new approach to a new panel data set on bilateral gross cross-border equity flows
between 14 countries, 1989-96. The remarkably good results have strong implications for theories of asset
trade. We find that the geography of information heavily determines the pattern of international transactions.
Our model integrates elements of the finance literature on portfolio composition and the international
macroeconomics and asset trade literature. Gross asset flows depend on market size in both source and
destination country as well as trading costs, in which both information and the transaction technology play
a role. The resulting augmented ‘gravity’ equation has equity market capitalisation representing market size
and distance proxying some informational asymmetries, as well as a variable representing openness of each
economy. But other variables explicitly represent information transmission (telephone call traffic and
multinational bank branches), an information asymmetry between domestic and foreign investors (degree
of insider trading), and the efficiency of transactions (‘financial market sophistication’).
This equation accounts for almost 70% of the variance of the transaction flows. Dummy variables
(adjacency, language, currency or trade bloc, and a ‘major financial centre’ effect) do not improve the
results, nor does a variable representing destination country stock market returns. The key role of
informational asymmetries is confirmed. Our information transmission variables also substantially improve
standard gravity equations for trade in goods.
Richard Portes Hélène Rey
Department of Economics Center for Economic Performance
London Business School London School of Economics
Sussex Place Houghton Street
Regent’s Park London WC2A 2AE
London NW1 4SA UNITED KINGDOM
UNITED KINGDOM h.m.rey@lse.ac.uk
and NBER
rportes@lbs.ac.uk

1. Introduction
There are very few well-established results on the determinants of trade in assets,
especially securities. Such work has been impeded by data problems, and there is little
theory behind it. The literature on portfolio investment focuses on portfolio choice and the
determinants of returns.
We now have a set of data on cross-border equity transaction flows. These are exceptional
insofar as they give a panel of observations of cross-border purchases and sales of equities.
They include all major equity markets (Europe, United States, Asia). They are annual
bilateral (source and destination) gross portfolio equity flows, 1989-96.
We provide new, clear-cut evidence on the determinants of these flows: we explain 70%
of their variance with a parsimonious set of variables. Our results demonstrate that market
size, openness, efficiency of transactions, and distance are the most important
determinants of transaction flows. The very significant negative impact of distance on
transactions is at first sight quite puzzling: unlike goods, assets are ‘weightless’, and
distance cannot proxy transportation costs. Moreover, if investors seek to diversify their
portfolios, they may want to buy many equities in distant countries whose business cycles
have a low or negative correlation with their own country’s cycle. If that were the case,
distance could have potentially a positive effect on asset trade because of the
diversification motive1.
We show that distance is largely a proxy for information asymmetries: we use in particular
telephone call traffic and multinational bank branches to account for information
transmission, and an index of the degree of insider trading for information asymmetries
between domestic and foreign investors. All these variables are highly significant2. In our
1
Note however that our data are for transactions, not asset holdings, so this argument is valid only if there is
a positive relationship between flows and stocks. Frankel and Rose (1998) show that trade between country
pairs is positively related to the correlation of their business cycles; since trade decreases with distance,
business cycle correlation does as well. Imbs (1999) provides direct evidence that correlations of business
cycles decrease with distance.
2 It is also remarkable that our information transmission variables perform very well for a comparable panel
of goods trade (Section 5). This suggests to us that the empirical goods trade literature overestimates the
importance of transportation costs (proxied by distance) and considerably underestimates the importance of
information asymmetries (also proxied by distance).
- 1 -

sample, the diversification motive is therefore completely dominated by the information
effect. The geography of information appears central for the distribution of asset flows.
Our empirical results suggest that theoretical modelling of asset trade should embark on
the same type of radical change that we have seen in the literature on goods trade: it
should shift away partly from models based on factor endowments, comparative advantage
and autarky prices3 towards models including differentiated assets, transaction costs and
information asymmetries.
The finance literature has emphasised information asymmetries much more than the asset
trade literature, but it has largely focused on portfolio choice and asset pricing, rather than
transaction volumes for trade in equities. Yet there are very interesting, important issues
here.
First, understanding flows may tell us something about stocks, i.e. about the determinants
of portfolio composition. On this issue, the effort to relate theory to the data has led to an
impasse represented by the ‘home bias puzzle’ (Tesar and Werner, 1995; Lewis, 1998).
We use ‘home bias’ in a very general sense, referring to the evidence that residents of a
given country invest much less abroad than portfolio allocation models would appear to
suggest as optimal diversification. There is continuing controversy over whether this home
bias is due to transaction costs, including informational asymmetries. Our analysis and
results throw some light on these questions.
Second, the equity portfolio flows that we study are a substantial component of the huge
international capital flows that feature in 'globalisation’. These are at the centre of current
macroeconomic policy concerns. A better understanding of their determinants may help
us, for example, to interpret herding behaviour and contagion effects.
Third, financial market integration (e.g., in the euro area, as discussed in Portes-Rey
1998a, Martin-Rey 1999b) will have a wide range of consequences for asset trade.
Improvements in our knowledge about a major dimension of this trade could help us to
3 See Helpman and Razin (1978), Svensson (1988).
- 2 -