NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PERFORMANCE INCENTIVES
WflHIN FIRMS: THE EFFECT OF
MANAGERIAL RESPONSIBILITy
Rajesh K. Aggarwal
Andrew A. Samwick
Working Paper 7334
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7334
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA02138
September 1999
Wethank Sheri Aggarwal, Syd Finkeistein, Bob Gibbons, Leonhard Knoll, Margaret Meyer,and seminar
participants at Boston College, Columbia, Dartmouth, the NYU Accounting and Finance Conference, and the
UNH Spring Finance Conference for helpful comments. We also thank Sarah Leonard, Evan \Valsh, and
Yevgeny Neginsky for exceptional research assistance and Andy Halula for assistance with the ExecuComp
database. Financial support from the American Compensation Association and the Presidential Scholars
Program at Dartmouth College is gratefully acknowledged. Any errors are our own. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Researchor of
theAmericanCompensation Association.
© 1999 byRajesh K. Aggarwal and Andrew A.Samwick. All rightsreserved, Shortsections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit.including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Performance Incentives Within Firms:
The Effect of Managerial Responsibility
Rajesh K. Aggarwal and Andrew A. Samwick
NBER Working Paper No. 7334
September 1999
JELNo. 03, J3
ABSTRACT
Empirical research on executive compensation has focused almost on the
exclusively
incentives provided to chief executive officers. However, firms arerunby teams of managers, and
a theory of the firm should also explain the distribution of incentives and responsibilities for other
members of the top management team. An extension of the standard principal-agent model to allow
for multiple signals of effort predicts that executives who have other, more precise signals of their
efforithan firm performance will have compensation that is less sensitive to the overall performance
of the firm. We test this prediction in a comprehensive panel dataset of executives at large
corporations by comparing executives with explicit divisional responsibilities to those with broad
oversight authority over the firm and to CEOs. Controlling for executive fixed effects and the level
of compensation, we find that CEOs have pay-performance incentives that are $5.85 per thousand
dollar increase in shareholder wealth higher than the pay-performance incentives of executives with
divisional responsibility. Executives with oversight authority have pay-performance incentives that
are $1.26 per thousand higher than those of executives with divisional responsibility. The aggregate
pay-performance sensitivity of the top management team is quite substantial, at $30.24 per thousand
dollar increase in shareholder wealth for the median firm in our sample. Our work sheds light on the
alignment of responsibility and incentives within firms and suggests that the principal-agent model
provides an appropriate characterization of the internal organization of the firm.
Rajesh K. Aggarwal Andrew A. Samwick
Amos Tuck School Department of Economics
Dartmouth College Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755 Hanover, NH 03755
rajesh.aggarwal@dartmouth.edu and NBER
samwick@dartmouth.edu

1. Introduction
Public corporations are I-un by teams of top managers. Each of thesemanagers has different
responsibilities. Chief operating officers, for example, have broad oversight authority for the firm
as a. whole. Heads of large divisions have more narrowly defined authority but bear direct
respon-
sibility for a subset of the firm's activities. As top managers have different levels and areas of
authority, they will have different measures of performance that can be used to provide incentives.
Using a standard principal-agent model, we show that the sensitivity of compensation to firm
performance will depend on how precisely performance is measured for all areas for which the
manager is responsible. In particular, managers with precise signals of effort other than firm per-
forma.nce will receive less exposure to overall firm performance in their compensation. We test the
predictions of the model and find evidence that managers with explicit divisional responsibilities
have lower pay-performance sensitivities than managers with broad oversight authority, who in
turn have lower pay-performance sensitivities than do chief executive officers (CEOs).
The finding that incentives differ across job classifications is important for two reasons. First,
a central issue for understanding the internal organization of the firm is the alignment of incentives
and responsibilities among the top management team. An analysis based solely on CEOs cannot
determine whether incentives are affected by differences in managerial responsibility We show
that pay-performance incentives differ across executives according to their responsibilities and are
structured to motivate managers, subject to the shareholders' informational constraints about
each manager's effort. Second, most of the existing literature on the magnitude of incentives
provided by compensation contracts focuses exclusively on chief executive officers (e.g., Lambert
and Larcker (1987), Jensen and Murphy (1990), and Hall and Liebman (1998)). This approach
ignores the fact that there are other members of the top management team who may also have
significant incentives. We show that incentives provided to the CEO are 42 percent of the aggregate
incentives to the top management team (defined as the top five executives) in our data. The median
pay-performance sensitivity of the top management team is $30.24 per thousand dollar increase
in shareholder wealth.
We generate predictions using the principal-agent model of Holmstrom and Milgrom (1987).
In this model, the primary means for shareholders to ensure that managers take optimal actions is
1

to tie managers' compensation to the performance of their firms; that is, to provide high-powered
incentives for managers to maximize the returns to shareholders. We use a generalization of
the model that allows the shareholders to observe two potentially correlated signals about the
manager's effort. The first signal continues to be the performance of the firm as a whole, as in
the standard model. The second signal is an individual-specific measure of performance. For
example, the second signal for a manager with divisional responsibility could be a measure of
divisional performance based on accounting data. We show that the structure of incentives wifi
depend upon the relative precision of the two signals, with more weight placed on the more precise
signal.
The most informative signal for CEOs is firm performance, measured by total returns to share-
holders. Firm performance is also quite informative for managers with oversight authority for
the entire firm. Managers with oversight authority may also have an individual signal such as a
subjective report by the CEO on their performance. By contrast, managers with divisional respon-
sibility have a relatively more precise signal than overall firm performance. Their compensation
should depend more heavily on divisional performance. We argue that the pay-firm performance
sensitivity will be higher for CEOs than for managers with oversight authority, who will in turn
have a higher sensitivity than will managers with divisional responsibility. Our focus on man-
agerial responsibilities allows us to provide a new test of the principal-agent model of executive
compensation.
We use data on executive compensation from the Standard and Poor's ExecuComp dataset.
Our sample consists of comprehensive data for the top five executives (ranked annually by salary
and bonus) from the S&P 500,S&PMidCap 400, and S&P SmailCap 600 companies from 1993 to
1997. The sample design allows us to consider the pay-performance sensitivities of managers based
on their responsibilities within the firm. Because data on individual or divisional performance
within firms are not systematically available for a large cross-section of firms, we test predictions
relating to the sensitivity of compensation to firm performance rather than to individual or di-
visional performance measures. In general, the model can be tested without the econometrician
observing the other measures of performance. As we show, the sensitivity of compensation to
firm performance will be affected in a straightforward way by the presence of other performance
2