NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
OF CENTRAL BANK INTERVENTION
Kathryn M. Dominguez
Working Paper 7337
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7337
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1999
I thank NBER, University of Michigan and Georgetown University seminar participants and, in particular,
Richard Lyons, Matthew Shapiro, Larry Summers and Shang-Jin Wei for useful comments and suggestions.
Tatiana Nenova provided outstanding research assistance. I am grateful to Olsen and Associates for providing
the intradaily exchange rates and Reuter's news tape analyzed in the paper. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by Kathryn M. Dominguez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,

may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Market Microstructure of Central Bank Intervention
Kathryn M. Dominguez
NBER Working Paper No. 7337
September 1999
JEL No. F31, G14, G15, E58
ABSTRACT
One of the great unknowns in international finance is the process by which new information
influences exchange rate behavior. This paper focuses on one important source of information to the foreign
exchange markets, the intervention operations of the G-3 central banks. Previous studies using daily and
weekly foreign exchange rate data suggest that central bank intervention operations can influence both the
level and variance of exchange rates, but little is known about how exactly traders learn of these operations
and whether intra-daily market conditions influence the effectiveness of central bank interventions. This
paper uses high-frequency data to examine the relationship between the efficacy of intervention operations
and the "state of the market" at the moment that the operation is made public to traders. The results indicate
that some traders know that a central bank is intervening at least one hour prior to the public release of the
information in newswire reports. Also, the evidence suggests that the timing of intervention operations
matter – interventions that occur during heavy trading volume and that are closely timed to scheduled macro
announcements are the most likely to have large effects. Finally, post-intervention mean reversion in both
exchange rate returns and volatility indicate that dealer inventories are affected by market reactions to
intervention news.
Kathryn M. Dominguez
University of Michigan
School of Public Policy
440 Lorch Hall
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
kathrynd@umich.edu

I. Introduction
One of the great unknowns in international finance is the process by which new information
influences exchange rate behavior. Standard models of exchange rate determination distinguish the types of
information that should influence exchange rate movements, but there has been little focus on the way this
information is assimilated by market participants. For example, in most models of exchange rate
determination an unanticipated (and exogenous) monetary contraction in the home country leads to an
appreciation of the home currency relative to foreign currencies. Standard models have little to say about
how market participants learn of the monetary contraction, or of how the state of the foreign exchange
market might influence the immediate and longer-term reactions of individual foreign exchange traders to
the news of such a contraction. One possible explanation for the inadequate empirical performance of
standard exchange rate models1 is that they put so little emphasis on the market microstructure of the
foreign exchange market.
This paper focuses on one important source of information to the foriegn exchange markets, the
intervention operations of the G-3 central banks. Previous studies using daily and weekly foreign exchange
rate data suggest that central bank intervention operations can influence both the level and variance of
exchange rates,2 but little is known about how exactly traders learn about these operations and whether
intra-daily market conditions influence their effectiveness. This paper uses high-frequency spot market
data to examine the relationship between the efficacy of intervention operations and the "state of the
market" at the moment that the operation is made public to traders. The results indicate that some traders
know that a central bank is intervening at least one hour prior to the public release of the information in
newswire reports. Also, the evidence suggests that the timing of intervention operations matter –
interventions that occur during heavy trading volume and that are closely timed to scheduled macro
1 See, for example, Meese and Rogoff (1983) and Frankel and Rose (1995), and see Lyons (forthcoming) for a
thorough discussion of the role of market microstructure in international finance.
2 See, for example, Dominguez (1992, 1998) and Dominguez and Frankel (1993a,b).
1

announcements are the most likely to have large effects. Finally, post-intervention mean reversion in both
exchange rate returns and volatility indicate that dealer inventories are affected by market reactions to
intervention news.
Section II of the paper presents stylized facts on the foreign exchange market, cenratl bank
interventions, and Reuters news reports. Section III reviews the role of inventories and information in
market microstructure models. Section IV examines empirically the influence of market microstructure on
the efficacy of central bank intervention, and section V is the conclusion.
II. Stylized Facts
The Foreign Exchange Market
The foreign exchange market is de-centralized and open 24 hours a day. Even thoughfo rex trading
occurs at all hours, there appear to be three distinct geographical "markets" defined by daylight hours in
Tokyo, London and New York. There is a small overlap between European and Asian trading, no overlap
between American and Asian trading and substantial overlap between American and European trading.
The main players in the foreign exchange market are dealers, brokers and customers. Dealers are typically
located in large commercial banks, trade on their own accounts, and are required upon demand to quote
(and transact at) a bid or ask price on the currencies with which they deal. Brokers do not trade on their
own accounts, instead bringing together dealers that wish to buy or sell foreign exchange. Customers
purchase foreign exchange from dealers.
Dealers publicize their willingness to deal at certain prices by posting uqotes, typically on one of
three news services: Reuters, Telerate or Knight Ridder. These quotes appear on computer monitors
located on the desks of other foreign exchange market participants. Generally prices used in actual
transactions exhibit narrower spreads than the bids and asks quoted on the computers. Transaction prices
are proprietary information known only to the participants in the transaction. Consequently, quotes on news
service screens are the only publicly available information on current prices in the foreign exchange
2