NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CAViaR: CONDITIONAL VALUE AT
RISK BY QUANTILE REGRESSION
Robert F. Engle
Simone Manganelli
Working Paper 7341
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7341
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1999
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 1999 by Robert F. Engle and Simone Manganelli. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed

two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
CAViaR: Conditional Value at Risk By Quantile Regression
Robert F. Engle and Simone Manganelli
NBER Working Paper No. 7341
September 1999
JEL No. C14
ABSTRACT
Value at Risk has become the standard measure of market risk employed by financial institutions
for both internal and regulatory purposes. Despite its conceptual simplicity, its measurement is a very
challenging statistical problem and none of the methodologies developed so far give satisfactory solutions.
Interpreting Value at Risk as a quantile of future portfolio values conditional on current information, we
propose a new approach to quantile estimation which does not require any of the extreme assumptions
invoked by existing methodologies (such as normality or i.i.d. returns). The Conditional Value at Risk or
CAViaR model moves the focus of attention from the distribution of returns directly to the behavior of the
quantile. We postulate a variety of dynamic processes for updating the quantile and use regression quantile
estimation to determine the parameters of the updating process. Tests of model adequacy utilize the
criterion that each period the probability of exceeding the VaR must be independent of all the past
information. We use a differential evolutionary genetic algorithm to optimize an objective function which is
non-differentiable and hence cannot be optimized using traditional algorithms. Applications to simulated and
real data provide empirical support to our methodology and illustrate the ability of these algorithms to adapt
to new risk environments.
Robert F. Engle Simone Manganelli
Department of Economics Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego University of California, San Diego
San Diego, Ca. 92093 San Diego, Ca. 92093
and NBER
rengle@weber.ucsd.edu

CAViaR: CONDITIONAL AUTOREGRESSIVE VALUE AT RISK BY
REGRESSION QUANTILES
Robert F. Engle and Simone Manganelli
University of California, San Diego
July 1999
1. INTRODUCTION
Recent financial disasters have emphasized the importance of effective risk
management for financial institutions. The use of quantitative risk measures has become
an essential management tool to be placed in parallel with the models of returns. These
measures are used for investment decisions, supervisory decisions, risk capital allocation
and external regulation. In the fast paced financial world, effective risk measures must be
as responsive to news as are other forecasts and must be easy to grasp even in complex
situations. Many financial institutions have switched from management based on accrual
accounting (a practice according to which transactions are booked at historical costs plus
or minus accruals) to management based on daily marking-to-market. This switch has
caused an increase in the volatility of the apparent value of overall positions held by
financial institutions, which now reflects the volatility of the underlying markets and the
effectiveness of hedging strategies.
Value at Risk (VaR) has become the standard measure of risk employed by
financial institutions and their regulators. VaR is an estimate of how much a certain
portfolio can lose within a given time period and at a given confidence level. More

precisely VaR is defined so that the probability that a portfolio will lose more than its
VaR over a particular time horizon is equal to 0, a prespecified number. The great
popularity that this instrument has achieved among financial practitioners is essentially
due to its conceptual simplicity: VaR reduces the (market) risk associated with any
portfolio to just one dollar amountThe summary of many complex bad outcomes in a
single number, naturally represents a compromise between the needs of different users.
This compromise has received the blessing of a wide range of users and regulators.
Despite its conceptual simplicity, the measurement of VaR is a very challenging
statistical problem and none of the methodologies developed so far gives satisfactory
solutions. Since VaR can be computed as the quantile of future portfolio returns,
conditional on current information, and since the distribution of portfolio returns typically
changes over time, the challenge is to find a suitable model for time varying order
statistics.
The problem is to forecast a value each period that will be exceeded with probability
(1-0) by the current portfolio. That is, for {y, },find VaR1 such that
(1) Pr[y <—VaR1 c,_11= 0,
where Q11 denotes the information set at time t-1. Any reasonable model should solve
the following three issues:
1) provide a formula for calculating VaR1 as a function of variables known at time t-1
and a set of parameters that need to be estimated;
2) provide a procedure (namely, a loss function and a suitable optimization algorithm) to
estimate the set of unknown parameters;
3) provide a test to establish the quality of the estimate.
2