NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
COMPETITION AND THE COST OF CAPITAL
REVISITED: SPECIAL AUTHORITIES AND
UNDERWRITERS IN THE MARKET FOR
TAX-EXEMPT HOSPITAL BONDS
Alec Ian Gershberg
Michael Grossman
Fred Goldman
Working Paper 7356
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7356
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1999
We are extremely grateful to Abeni Crooms for her prodigious efforts as the research assistant who had the major
responsibility for carrying out our survey of health care financing authorities. We are also grateful to Patricia Kocagil,
Sara Markowitz, Mitch Strohminger, and Christian Lomax for additional research assistance. We are indebted to a
number of people for making data available to us, for advising us with regard to the use of the data and the interpretation
of certain variables, and for discussing the tax-exempt hospital bond market with us: Marc A. Katz, Melissa Marsh, Lou
Herman, John H. Van Gorkom, Joe Tannenbaum, Jack Ashby, Stephen J. Stern, Terry Partington and Lisa Winkler-Pieta.
Papers based on some of the material in this study were presented at the 1994 and 1998 North American Meetings of the
Regional Science Association International and at the 1996 Meetings of the Urban Affairs Association, as well as the
1998 Barnard Columbia Urban Issues Workshop. We would like to thank the participants in those sessions for useful
comments. In particular, we received helpful comments and support from Roger Bolton and Ester Fuchs. Finally, we are
grateful to two anonymous referees for additional insight. The research was supported by a grant to the National Bureau
of Economic Research from the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, USDHHS, grant No. R01 HS06095-04. Of
course, responsibility for all errors and interpretations lies solely with the authors , not with either NBER or AHCPR. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by Alec Ian Gershberg, Michael Grossman, and Fred Goldman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is

given to the source.
Competition and the Cost of Capital Revisited:
Special Authorities and Underwriters in the
Market for Tax-exempt Hospital Bonds
Alec Ian Gershberg, Michael Grossman, and Fred Goldman
NBER Working Paper No. 7356
September 1999
JEL No. I10, I11, I18, H74
ABSTRACT
We explore the effects of two kinds of competition on the cost of capital in the tax-exempt bond
market: (1) competition amongst underwriters and (2) competition amongst issuers (most of which are
quasi-public special authorities sanctioned by state governments). The first kind of competition--essentially,
competitive versus negotiated bidding processes--has received considerable attention in the literature. The
second kind of competition, the number of potential issuers available to a beneficiary of a bond issue, has
received far less attention and is related to the level of decentralization of the market for issuing bonds.
Studies of the effects of competition have often used small samples of bond issues--often in one or a few
states and for one or a few years--to reach their conclusions. Using a national database covering fourteen
years, we find that both kinds of competition lower interest rates, at least in the hospital sector.
Alec Ian Gershberg Michael Grossman
National Bureau of Economic Research National Bureau of Economic Research
365 Fifth Avenue 365 Fifth Avenue
New York, NY 10016-4309 New York, NY 10016-4309
Gersh@Newschool.edu mgrossman@gc.cuny.edu
Fred Goldman
National Bureau of Economic Research
365 Fifth Avenue
New York, NY 10016-4309
tpianoman@aol.com

Acknowledgments
We are extremely grateful to Abeni Crooms for her prodigious efforts as the research assistant
who had the major responsibility for carrying out our survey of health care financing authorities.
We are also grateful to Patricia Kocagil, Sara Markowitz, Mitch Strohminger, and Christian
Lomax for additional research assistance. We are indebted to a number of people for making
data available to us, for advising us with regard to the use of the data and the interpretation of
certain variables, and for discussing the tax-exempt hospital bond market with us: Marc A. Katz,
Melissa Marsh, Lou Herman, John H. Van Gorkom, Joe Tannenbaum, Jack Ashby, Stephen J.
Stern, Terry Partington and Lisa Winkler-Pieta. Papers based on some of the material in this
study were presented at the 1994 and 1998 North American Meetings of the Regional Science
Association International and at the 1996 Meetings of the Urban Affairs Association, as well as
the 1998 Barnard Columbia Urban Issues Workshop. We would like to thank the participants in
those sessions for useful comments. In particular, we received helpful comments and support
from Roger Bolton and Ester Fuchs. Finally, we are grateful to two anonymous referees for
additional insight. The research was supported by a grant to the National Bureau of Economic
Research from the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, USDHHS, grant No. R01
HS06095-04. Of course, responsibility for all errors and interpretations lies solely with the
authors , not with either NBER or AHCPR.

Competition and the Cost of Capital Revisited:
Special Authorities and Underwriters in the Market for Tax-exempt Hospital Bonds
This study explores the effects of two different kinds of competition on the cost of capital
in the tax-exempt bond market: (1) competition amongst underwriters and (2) competition
amongst issuers. The first kind of competition--essentially, competitive versus negotiated
bidding processes--has received considerable attention in the literature. The second kind of
competition, the number of potential issuers available to a beneficiary of a bond issue, has
received far less attention. Most bond issues are now done through special authorities sanctioned
by state governments, and some states allow more competition among these authorities than
others; consequently, the bond market in some states is more concentrated that in others. Studies
of the effects of competition have often used small samples of bond issues--often in one or a few
states and for one or a few years--to reach their conclusions. This study presents results based on
a large and comprehensive database for tax-exempt hospital bonds from 1980 to 1993 in all 50
states and the District of Columbia.
Regarding competition among underwriters, earlier investigations (e.g., Joehnk and
Kidwell, 1979; Kessel, 1971; Kidwell and Rogowski, 1983) tended to find higher costs through
negotiated bidding processes. Some later studies (Bland, 1984, 1985, 1986) assert that mitigating
circumstances, such as the level of an underwriter’s experience, help off-set the costs from a lack
of competition. Finally Simonsen and Robbins (1996) found that, for the State of Oregon, the
cost of capital for competitive sales was lower compared to negotiated sales.
Regarding competition among issuers, Hildreth (1993, 44) paints an excellent descriptive
picture of the bond-issuing environment and mentions “the extensive expansion of special
districts and other statutory authorities,” but neither he nor other analysts have provided
1