NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CAUSES OF THE LONG
STAGNATION OF JAPAN DURING
THE 1990S: FINANCIAL OR REAL?
Taizo Motonishi
Hiroshi Yoshikawa
Working Paper 7351
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7351
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1999
This paper was presented at the NBER Tokyo Conference on Japan in October, 1998. The authors benefited
from many comments made by participants of the Conference, in particular, Professors Paul Beaudry, Fumio
Hayashi and Anil Kashyap. We also thank Professor Takeo Hoshi for his helpful comments and suggestions.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 1999 by Taizo Motonishi and Hiroshi Yoshikawa. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Causes of the Long Stagnation of Japan
during the 1990’s: Financial or Real?
Taizo Motonishi and Hiroshi Yoshikawa
NBER Working Paper No. 7351
September 1999
JEL No: E22, E30, G21, N15
ABSTRACT
Corporate investment is the most important factor to explain the long stagnation of Japan
during the 1990’s. Using the Bank of Japan diffusion indices of ‘real profitability’ and ‘banks’
willingness to lend’, we estimate investment functions for four groups of firms: large/small and
manufacturing/non-manufacturing. Our results suggest that for large firms, financing constraints are
not significant whereas the converse is true for small firms. A fall of investment during 1992-94 is
largely explained by real factors. However, the credit crunch occurred beginning 1997 and it lowered
the growth rate of GDP by 1.6%.
Taizo Motonishi Hiroshi Yoshikawa
Faculty of Economics Faculty of Economics
Nagasaki University University of Tokyo
4-2-1 Katafuchi 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku
Nagasaki, 850-8506 Japan Tokyo, 113-0033 Japan
moto@net.nagasaki-u.ac.jp yoshikawa@e.u-tokyo.ac.jp

February 1991. At first, the recession appeared as a normal
adjustment after a long boom, but as it turned out, it was the beginning
of the stagnated decade. The average growth rate during 1992-98 is
merely 1%. During the same period, the U.S. enjoyed the steady 3%
growth. The reversal of growth rate between Japan and the U.S. for
such a long period is a new phenomenon.
What are the causes of the long stagnation of Japan during the
1990’s? Since the bubbles burst, economists have focused on the
financial problems. A fall in asset prices allegedly had the negative
wealth effect on household consumption. Through deterioration of
collateral, it also hurt investment of small firms. And banks suffering
from bad loans became reluctant to make new loans (kashi-shiburi), and
further depressed investment. The views have been expressed many
times, but not necessarily with substantial evidences. This paper
attempts to quantitatively assess the effects of credit crunches or bank’s
kashi-shiburi on investment.
We begin by providing an overview of the Japanese economy in
the next section. We can easily find that an extremely poor
performance of corporate investment is the most important factor to
explain the long stagnation of the Japanese economy during the 90’s.
An obvious question is then why investment so stagnated. A popular
answer is, of course, a credit crunch caused by bad loans banks hold.
There is a good consensus that the effect of credit crunch is much more
serious on investment of small firms than that of large firms because
large firms have better access to capital markets. Given this
observation, we estimate investment functions for large and small firms
in both manufacturing and non-manufacturing sectors. The
explanatory variables are the Bank of Japan Diffusion Indices (DI’s) of
‘real profitability’ and ‘banks’ willingness to lend.’ Taking the latter as
an indicator of possible financing constraints, we find that the financing
constraints do significantly affect investment of small firms, but not
that of large firms. This finding is consistent with the results other
researchers have obtained.
On the whole, the effects of the real factor on investment are
much more significant than those of the financial factor. In particular,
a fall of investment during 1992-94 was basically caused by worsening
real profitability; during the same period, financial factor was
supportive. However, beginning 1997 amid recession, the credit crunch
finally occurred. Based on our investment equations, we make an
estimate of the effects of the credit crunch on investment as a whole,
and also on GDP. The final section provides some concluding remarks.
2. The Japanese Economy during the 1990’s: An Overview
A sensible way to get an overview of the Japanese economy
during the 1990’s is to look at the demand-decomposition of the growth
rate of real GDP. Table 1 presents contribution of demand component
1

such as consumption, investment, and exports to growth rate of GDP.
æ D Xö æ Xö
Here, the contribution of X means ç ÷ç ÷ with Y as real GDP.
è ø è ø
X Y
The table shows that investment is the major factor to account
for the 1991-94 recession, the 1995-96 recovery, and also the most
recent recession beginning mid 1997. When the growth rate fell from
3.8% to 0.3% during 1991-93, the contribution of investment fell from
1.2% to –1.9% accounting for nearly 90% of a fall in the growth rate.
Similarly, when growth accelerated from 0.3% to 5.1% during 1993-96,
the contribution of investment rose from –1.9% to 1.8%, again
accounting for 80% of the recovery. To the negative growth in 1998,
declines in consumption, investment, public expenditures, and exports
all contributed. However, Table 1 clearly shows that investment is by
far the most significant factor to cause the most recent recession.
Before we turn to investment, we inquire into the following
questions; By historical standard, how anomalous a decline or fall in
each demand component had been during the 1990’s. To study this
problem, we first calculate the average, mand the standard deviation, s
of the growth contribution of each demand component for 1971-90
(quarterly), and then how many s’s the growth rate deviates from m for
1992. I–98. II. The results are shown in Table 2. By the usual
standard, the figures close to two in absolute value would indicate
anomaly. The table shows that a fall in investment during the 1992-94
recession was indeed anomalous. So is a decline in investment in 1998.
We notice that a fall in consumption beginning the second
quarter of 97 to the present is also anomalous by historical standard.
But perhaps more important, we must note persistence in the minus
sign for consumption throughout the 1990’s. Not the theme of the
present paper, but the long stagnation of consumption is a significant
factor to have depressed the Japanese economy during the 1990’s.
Many economists believe that the stagnation of consumption has been
in turn caused by job insecurity and uncertain future of the public
pension system: See Nakayama (1999).
By and large, corporate investment is the key factor to
understand the long stagnation of the Japanese economy during the
1990’s although consumption, and a major mistake in fiscal policy also
made significant contribution. The most popular explanation of weak
investment is credit crunch; Bad loan makes banks unwilling to lend,
and it hurts investment. In what follows, we focus on investment, and
attempt to estimate the effects of financial distress on investment.
3. Financing Constraints and Investment
Given the popularity of credit crunch as a possible explanation
of weak investment, it is natural to turn to financing constraints. Many
economists take high correlation between sales/profits/cash flows and
2