NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PRODUCTIVITY GAINS FROM
UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE
Daron Acemoglu
Robert Shimer
Working Paper 7352
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7352
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1999
This paper is prepared for the International Seminar on Macroeconomics 1999. Thanks to seminar
participants there, at the London Business School, and at the NBER Summer Institute, and to Gadi Barlevy,
Olivier Blanchard, Charles Bean, Robert Gordon, Jonathan Gruber, Per Krusell, James Poterba, two
anonymous referees, and the editor for comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by Daron Acemoglu and Robert Shimer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed

two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Productivity Gains From Unemployment Insurance
Daron Acemoglu and Robert Shimer
NBER Working Paper No. 7352
September 1999
JEL No. E24, J64, J65
ABSTRACT
This paper argues that unemployment insurance increases labor productivity by encouraging
workers to seek higher productivity jobs, and by encouraging firms to create those jobs. We use a
quantitative general equilibrium model to investigate whether this effect is comparable in magnitude to the
standard moral hazard effects of unemployment insurance. Our model economy captures the behavior of
the U.S. labor market for high school graduates quite well. When unemployment insurance becomes more
generous starting from the current U.S. levels, there is an increase in unemployment similar in magnitude
to the micro-estimates, but because the composition of jobs also changes, total output and welfare increase
as well.
Daron Acemoglu Robert Shimer
Department of Economics Department of Economics
MIT, E52-371 Princeton University
50 Memorial Drive 001 Fisher Hall
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347 Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER and NBER
daron@mit.edu shimer@princeton.edu

1 Introduction
This paper argues that unemployment insurance increases labor productivity by encouraging
workers to seek higher productivity jobs, and by encouraging firms to create those jobs. We
use a quantitative general equilibrium model to investigate whether this effect is comparable
in magnitude to the standard moral hazard effects of unemployment insurance (UI). Our
results indicate that a decrease in the generosity of UI from its current U.S. level would not
only decrease welfare but also reduce the level of output.
Most analyses of unemployment insurance focus on its consumption-smoothing and risk-
sharing roles. For example, Gruber (1997) finds that workers who receive more generous
unemployment benefits experience a smaller drop in consumption following the loss of a
job. Standard approaches to unemployment insurance compare this benefit with the adverse
moral hazard effects, and compute the optimal amount of UI by equating marginal costs and
benefits (Shavell and Weiss 1979, Hopenhayn and Nicolini 1997).
While this tradeoff is likely to be important, UI could also affect the type of jobs that
workers look for and accept.' This is the effect of UI that we emphasize. According to
the theory we develop, in a risk-averse economy without any UI, workers avoid the risk of
unemployment by applying to low productivity jobs that are easier to obtain. Firms offer
implicit insurance to workers by opening jobs with low unemployment risk, and charging
an insurance premium in the form of lower wages. The resulting composition of jobs is
inefficient and can he improved by a moderate level of unemployment insurance, which
encourages workers to take on more risk, and increases not only welfare hut also the level of
output. (see also Acemoglu and Shimer 1999a).
Although this effect is qualitatively reasonable, a major goal of this paper is to show
that it is likely to be quantitatively important as well. In a realistic environment, it must
outweigh two significant forces. First, unemployment insurance will encourage workers to
reduce their search effort, lowering employment and output. Second, workers can self-insure
by saving, considerably reducing the need for unemployment insurance.
To address these issues, we consider a quantitative dynamic general equilibrium economy.
Workers are risk averse, with constant relative risk aversion (CRRA). They optimally choose
their consumption, labor supply, and search effort while unemployed. Unfortunately this
'In the data, Ehrenberg and Oaxaca (1976) find that workers who receive niore UI find lugher wage jobs.
On the other hand, Meyer (1989) finds no evidence that more generous UI results in higher earnings for
covered workers. His estimates have large standard errors, however, and cannot rule out substantial earnings
effects.
1

model cannot be solved analytically,2 because the workers' optimal policy (their consumption,
labor supply, and search rules) depends on their wealth level, which is itself determined by
the optimal policy. We therefore undertake a calibration exercise, anchoring our model to
plausible preferences and to the unemployment rate and unemployment insurance system
faced by U.S. workers with a high school degree. With a coefficient of relative risk aversion
of four, a replacement rate a little below fifty percent for six months, and productivity
differences between good and bad jobs on the order of 30%, our model generates levels of
unemployment, the consumption drop upon job loss, and low-frequency income variability
similar to those found in U.S. data.
Moderate increases in the replacement rate or the duration of unemployment benefits
lead to increases in unemployment duration similar to those observed in the U.S. economy.
For example, Meyer (1989) finds that a 10 percent increase in unemployment benefits raises
unemployment duration by about a week, while Ehrenberg and Oaxaca (1976) and Atkinson
and I\4icklewright (1991) estimate a slightly smaller response. At the same time, the policy
change raises average wages by about 1.2 percent, which is a substantial effect, but still
somewhat less than the gains reported by Ehrenberg and Oaxaca (1976). The overall effect
of the policy change is therefore to raise output and welfare by a little over half a percent.
The result that economies with moderate UI have higher output and welfare than economies
without social insurance is very robust. Increasing the value of leisure, reducing risk aversion,
reducing the wage gap between different types of jobs, and allowing on-the-job search does
not alter this conclusion, although it does sometimes affect whether the output-maximizing
replacement rate is above or below U.S. levels.
Our paper is related to a number of previous studies. As mentioned above, we build
on Acemoglu and Shimer (1999a). Other papers have also pointed out beneficial effects of
UI, inter alia Diamond (1981), Acemoglu (1998), and Marimon and Zilibotti (1999). For
example, Acemoglu shows that UI may improve welfare by encouraging workers to wait for
higher capital jobs that pay higher wages because of holdup problems. Marimon and Zilibotti
emphasize matching between workers and firms according to comparative advantage, and
show that UI encourages workers to wait for jobs better suited to them. All these papers
consider risk-neutral agents, however, so unemployment benefits are simply a subsidy to
search. Our approach differs in explicitly modeling risk aversion and precautionary saving,
and in contrasting the beneficial effects of UI with its conventional costs. We are not aware
of any other study that has compared these costs and benefits in such a realistic setting.
Other studies, including Shavell and Weiss (1979), Hansen and Imrohoroglu (1992), Atke-
2Iii Acemoglu and Shimer (1999a), we provided closed form solutions for the case with constant absolute
risk aversion. In tIns paper, we use the more coaventional CRRA preferences, winch imply that poorer
workers may be unwilling to accept gambles that richer workers find attractive. The utility cost of low
consumption is also much larger with CRRA preferences, increasing the precautionary savings motive.
2