NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE FUTURE OF EMU: WHAT DOES
THE HISTORY OF MONETARY
UNIONS TELL US?
Michael D. Bordo
Lars Jonung
Working Paper 7365
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7365
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1999
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 1999 by Michael D. Bordo and Lars Jonung. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two

paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Future of EMU: What Does the History
of Monetary Unions Tell Us?
Michael D. Bordo and Lars Jonung
NBER Working Paper No. 7365
September 1999
JEL No. E42, N20
ABSTRACT
The creation of EMU and the ECB has triggered a discussion of the future of EMU. Independent
observers have pointed to a number of shortcomings or "hazard areas" in the construction of EMU, such
as the absence of a central lender of last resort function for EMU, the lack of a central authority supervising
the financial systems of EMU, unclear and inconsistent policy guidelines for the ECB, the absence of central
co-ordination of fiscal policies within EMU, unduly strict criteria for domestic debt and deficits, as set out
in the Maastricht rules, in the face of asymmetric shocks, and Euroland as not an "optimal" currency area.
Do these "flaws" represent major threats to the future of EMU? Or will they be successfully
resolved by the European policy authorities, leading to a lasting and prosperous EMU?
We provide answers to these questions by examining the historical record of monetary unions. We
try to extract the key conditions for establishing and for maintaining monetary unions intact. Our main lesson
from the history of monetary unions is that political factors will be the central determinants of the future of
EMU. The "economic" shortcomings of EMU will likely be overcome as long as political unity prevails
within EMU.
Michael D. Bordo Lars Jonung
Department of Economics Department of Economics
Rutgers University Stockholm School of Economics
New Brunswick, NJ 08903 Box 6501
and NBER 113 83 Stockholm, Sweden
Bordo@economics.rutgers.edu Nels@hhs.se

THE FUTURE OF EMU. WHAT DOES THE HISTORY OF MONETARY UNIONS TELL
US?
1. Introduction.1
On January 1st 1999 the exchange rates of eleven members of the European Union
were locked to each other at irrevocably fixed rates. This was a major step towards the
establishment of the European Monetary Union (EMU) and the European Central Bank
(ECB). Eventually, the eleven domestic currencies will be replaced by one single
currency, the euro. It will be circulating in an economic region probably larger than that
of any other currency area. January 1st 1999 marks an important transition not only in
the history of Europe but in the history of the global monetary system.
The creation of EMU and the ECB has triggered a discussion of the future of EMU.
Independent observers have pointed to a number of shortcomings, "flaws" or "hazard
areas" in the construction and workings of EMU. These include (1) the absence of a
central lender of last resort function for EMU, (2) the lack of a central authority
supervising the financial systems of EMU, (3) weak democratic control (accountability) of
the ECB, (4) unclear and inconsistent policy directives for the ECB, (5) the absence of
central co-ordination of fiscal policies within EMU combined with unduly strict criteria for
domestic debt and deficits as set out in the Maastricht rules and the Stability Pact in the
face of asymmetric shocks, and (6) Euroland is not an "optimal" currency area. The list
can be lengthened.
Do these shortcomings represent major threats to the future of EMU? Will they
eventually spell the demise and break-up of EMU? Or will they be handled by the
European policy authorities in a successful way, leading to a lasting and prosperous
EMU?
1 This report builds upon and extends our previous work on the history of monetary unions. See Bordo and Jonung
(1997). Anna Schwartz has generously helped us improve our arguments. We are greatly indebted to Pontus Hansson
for research support and to Anders Bornefalk, Benjamin Cohen and Kurt Schuler for helpful suggestions.
1

We answer these questions by examining the historical record of a number of unions
that have turned out to be lasting as well as some unions that have been dissolved. Our
aim is to extract the key conditions for the establishment and survival of monetary
unions. Our interpretation of the historical record serves as the basis for our forecast for
the future of EMU, although we are well aware that there is no clear precedent to EMU.
While by now the literature on monetary unions and European monetary co-operation is
voluminous, there are few systematic studies dealing with the stability or sustainability of
monetary unions and monetary integration.2
The paper is organized as follows. First, the most commonly asserted shortcomings of
EMU and of the ECB in the present debate are listed to serve as a guide for the
examination of the historical record. Next, we investigate why monetary unions were
created, focusing upon five major monetary unions established in the 19th century. Then
we examine the break-up of monetary unions in the 20th century. Finally, we confront
our account of monetary union performance with forecasts for the future of EMU and
evaluate the destabilizing effects of several shortcomings in the construction of EMU.
Much of recent analysis of monetary unions by economists is based on the framework
suggested by the literature on optimal currency areas. This approach is not well suited
for the analysis of the history of monetary unions. It is too static and ahistorical. Instead,
our approach is an evolutionary one, since we examine a long stretch of time and the
character of the processes causing the appearance and dissolution of monetary co-
operation and unification.
2. The shortcomings of EMU.
The economics profession has in general been sceptical of a European monetary union.
Economists have pointed to a large number of pitfalls on the road to a common
European currency. Indeed, the road so far has been a rocky one.
The ERM crisis in the early 1990s severely threatened the EMU-project. The last minute
effort in May 1998 to put a Frenchman in charge of the ECB as well as various attempts
in the early spring of 1999 by the German minister of finance to press for a lowering of
2 Exceptions are Cohen (1993, 1998), Goodhart (1995) and Graboyes (1990).
2