NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
UNCERTAINTY AND THE DISAPPEARANCE
OF INTERNATIONAL CREDIT
Joshua Aizenman
Nancy Marion
Working Paper 7389
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7389
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1999
This paper was presented at the conference on Financial Crises in Emerging Markets sponsored by the Center
for Pacific Basin Monetary and Economic Studies of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, September
for their
23-24, 1999. We wish to thank Mark Spiegel, our discussant, and other participants at the conference
comments. We wish to thank Changyong Rhee and officials at the Ministry of Finance and Economy of Korea
for help in obtaining data. Any errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
)
1999by Joshua Aizenman and Nancy Marion. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not toexceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,is given
to the source.

Uncertainty and the Disappearance
of International Credit
Joshua Aizenman and Nancy Marion
NBER Working Paper No. 7389
October 1999
JEL No. F2, F3
ABSTRACT
We show that increased uncertainty about the size of an emerging market's external debt has
a nonlinear and potentially large adverse effect on the supply of international credit offered to them.
We also show that if international creditors are first-order risk averse, attaching greater weight to
utility derived from bad outcomes than from good ones, a moderate increase in uncertainty about debt
overhang—or about other relevant factors affecting repayment prospects-- can cause the supply of
credit to dry up completely. We therefore offer one possible explanation for why emerging markets
may find themselves suddenly cut off from international capital markets.
Joshua Aizenman Nancy P. Marion
Department of Economics Department of Economics
Dartmouth College Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755 Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER nancy. p. marion@dartmouth.edu
joshua.aizenmandartmouth. edu

1. Introduction
In this paper, we examine how increased uncertainty about an emerging market's debt
overhang might affect the willingness of foreign investors to supply new international credit. We
show that increased uncertainty about the debt overhang has a nonlinear and potentially large
adverse effect on the supply of international credit. As a result, it can contribute to the liquidity
shortage often experienced by emerging markets during a crisis. We also show that if international
creditors have preferences characterized by first-order risk aversion, a moderate increase in
uncertainty about debt overhang—or about other relevant factors affecting repayment prospects-
- cancause the supply of credit to dry up completely. We therefore offer one possible
explanation for why emerging markets may find themselves suddenly cut off from international
capital markets.
We begin by describing events that contributed to increased uncertainty about the debt
overhang in two of the Asian economies hit hard by the financial crisis in 1997—Thailand and
South Korea. We then compare reported external debt levels before the crisis with higher figures
uncovered once the crisis began. We suggest that external debt levels for these two countries
turned out to be much higher than what was reasonably foreseen. Surprised by the size of the
upward adjustments, investors likely attached greater uncertainty to the size of the debt as well.
Previous investigations of debt overhang have generally focused on the level of
outstanding debt and its impact on the economy. We use a modified model of sovereign risk to
analyze the impact of greater uncertainty about the debt level. We show that more uncertainty
reduces the supply of international credit when there is a chance of default. More uncertainty
also magnifies the effect of news about the level of outstanding debt. We also observe that if we
abandon the capital asset pricing model as a way of explaining portfolio choice and instead rely
1

on a specification where agents attach more weight to utility from "bad' outcomes than from
"good" outcomes, investors will require a substantial risk premium to diversify internationally.
Further, a moderate increase in the perceived risk of lending can induce investors to shift out of
emerging-market assets completely.
The paper is organizes as follows. Section 2 illustrates the build-up of external debt levels
in Thailand and South Korea and makes a case for increased uncertainty about the debt. Section 3
uses a model to analyze the effects of increased uncertainty about debt overhang on the supply
of international credit offered emerging markets. Section 4 examines how greater uncertainty may
lead risk-averse investors to shift out of emerging-market assets entirely, even if those assets
offer a risk premium. Section 5 concludes.
2. External debt levels in Thailand and South Korea
Figure 1 shows the growth of Thailand's external debt over the 1990s. In 1990, the Bank
of Thailand reported an external debt of US$ 25.06 billion. By the end of 1995, this figure had
grown 172% to $68.13 billion. At the end of 1996, this figure was $79.85 billion, 17% higher
than the previous year. Once the financial crisis for Thailand began on July 2, 1997, the Bank of
Thailand reported revised debt figures. Total external debt for 1995 turned out to be $82.57
billion, a 21% upward adjustment over the previously-reported 1995 value, while the figure for
1996 was revised up by 26%, to $90.54 billion. Even before the crisis hit, however, there were
rumors and press reports about higher debt figures. On May 17, 1997, for example, The
Economist reported that Thailand's external debt was probably closer to $90 billion, with
perhaps $70 billion owed by the private sector.
2