NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TRADERS, MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
AND EXCHANGE RATE DYNAMICS
Yin-Wong Cheung
Menzie D. Chinn
Working Paper 7416
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7416
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 1999
We thank Helen Popper and Russ Root for useful comments, Eiji Fujii and Madhushree Dasgupta for research
assistance, and the UCSC Document Publishing and Editing Center for logistical assistance in conducting the
survey. The financial support of faculty research funds of the University of California is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by Yin-Wong Cheung and Menzie D. Chinn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Traders, Market Microstructure and Exchange Rate Dynamics
Yin-Wong Cheung and Menzie D. Chinn
NBER Working Paper No. 7416
November 1999
JEL No. F31, G15
ABSTRACT
We report findings from a survey of United States foreign exchange traders. Our results
indicate that: (i) The share of customer business, versus interbank business, has remained fairly
constant; (ii) The channels by which transactions take place have changed, as electronically-
brokered transactions have risen from 2% to 46% of total, mostly at the expense of transactions
undertaken by traditional brokers; (iii) The single most widely-cited reason for deviating from the
standard market convention on the bid-ask spread is a thin/hectic market; (iv) Half or more of
market respondents believe that large players dominate in the dollar-pound and dollar-Swiss franc
markets; and (v) 60% of respondents believe there is low predictability of exchange rates intraday.
Even at medium and long run horizons, only a third of traders believe that there is high
predictability.
Yin-Wong Cheung Menzie D. Chinn
Department of Economics Department of Economics
Social Sciences I Social Sciences I
University of California University of California
Santa Cruz, CA 95064 Santa Cruz, CA 95064
cheung@cats.ucsc.edu and NBER
chinn@cats.ucsc.edu

1. Introduction
The microstructure approach to exchange rates has garnered an increasingly large number
of adherents over recent years. This phenomenon is unsurprising given the well known
deficiencies of conventional macroeconomic models of exchange rates, especially at short
horizons (see for instance the critique by Flood and Taylor (1996)). Instead of focusing on the
typical macroeconomic fundamentals, such as inflation and interest rates, the microstructure
approach considers the effects of market configuration, information asymmetry, heterogeneity of
participants, and bounded rationality on exchange rate dynamics.
In the spirit of the microstructure approach, this paper uses information drawn from a
survey of U.S.-based foreign exchange traders designed to elicit information about several aspects
of exchange rate dynamics not observable in typical data sets. In contrast to the conventional
research methodology adopted in economics -- theoretical modeling, estimation, and testing -- our
survey attempts to ascertain directly how market participants behave, document their experiences,
and solicit their views on the workings of the foreign currency market.1
Two issues will likely arise in the reader’s mind. The first is the economists' skepticism of
survey methods, which has a long history. It derives from the aphorism of “watch what I do, not
what I say.” There is a concern that those individuals surveyed will respond strategically,
distorting their answer to gain some advantage. In general, there is little evidence that such
strategic distortion of responses occurs, and in any event, the responses to the questions
contained in this survey are unlikely to convey competitive advantage to the concerned agents.
1 A companion paper (Cheung and Chinn, 1999) examines the macroeconomic
implications of the survey responses. See also assessments of the East Asian markets in Cheung
and Wong (1999a,b).
1

Moreover, as argued by Blinder (1991), Shiller et al. (1991), among others, the results from a
properly designed survey can provide valuable facts that are not found in standard models and not
available to econometricians.
Furthermore, the use of survey data has some well-known advantages. Rather than using
the representative agent paradigm, one can document the extent to which agents are
heterogeneous in their beliefs and behavior. This allows a more fully fleshed-out interpretation of
observed exchange rate dynamics. In view of empirical inadequacies exhibited by extant exchange
rate models, the findings uncovered by a well-constructed survey may provide some useful
insights on the market structure and practitioners' behavior.
Admittedly, the use of survey data imposes certain limitations upon the researcher. In
certain instances, it is difficult to quantify the association between variables, and to construct
easily interpretable hypothesis tests. Hence, we cannot overstress the point that we view survey
data as a complement, rather than a substitute, for standard empirical analysis.
The second issue pertains to the relevance of microstructure for those aspects of economic
behavior of interest to macroeconomists. One is tempted to assert that the microstructural
activities are but a mere sideshow compared to the underlying movements in the macroeconomic
fundamentals. This perspective has held sway because, in part, economists have not been able to
observe what traders react to. In recent work, Evans (1998) has used previously unavailable
market (as opposed to individual trader) data on quotes and transactions to link up the activities
of traders and asset prices over several months. He finds a strong relationship between excess
purchases of a currency, and the DM/US$ exchange rate. This, then, is an explicit tie between the
microstructure of the forex market and a macroeconomic variable. As the availability of such
2