NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE FUTURE OF MONETARY POLICY:
THE CENTRAL BANK AS AN ARMY WITH ONLY A SIGNAL CORPS?
Benjamin M. Friedman
Working Paper 7420
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7420
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 1999
This paper was initially prepared for the conference on “Social Science and the Future,” held at Oxford, U.K.,
July 7-8, 1999. I am grateful to Kenneth Kuttner for helpful discussions, to Michael Klein, Adam Posen, Hal
Scott, participants in the conference, and an anonymous referee for helpful comments on an earlier draft, to
Stephen Weinberg for research assistance, and to the Harvard Program for Financial Research for financial
support. An expanded version of this paper will be published in Richard Cooper and Richard Layard (eds.),
Social Science and the Future (Cambridge and London: The MIT Press, forthcoming). The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by Benjamin M. Friedman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Future of Monetary Policy: The Central Bank as an
Army with only a Signal Corps?
Benjamin M. Friedman
NBER Working Paper No. 7420
November 1999
JEL No. E52 E58
ABSTRACT
The influence of monetary policy over interest rates, and via interest rates over nonfinancial
economic activity, stems from the central bank’s role as a monopolist over the supply of bank reserves.
Several trends already visible in the financial markets of many countries today threaten to weaken or even
undermine the relevance of that monopoly, and with it the efficacy of monetary policy. These developments
include the erosion of the demand for bank-issued money, the proliferation of nonbank credit, and aspects
of the operation of bank clearing mechanisms. What to make of these threats from a public policy
perspective — in particular, whether to undertake potentially aggressive regulatory measures in an effort
to forestall them — depends in large part on one’s view of the contribution of monetary policy toward
successful economic performance.
Benjamin M. Friedman
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 127
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
bfriedman@harvard.edu

The mid-1960s Henry Levin film Genghis Khan featured a rugged-looking Omar Sharif in
the title role playing opposite Robert Morley, at his plump and pompous best as the Chin emperor
Wang Wei-shao. One of the film’s early scenes shows the exquisitely attired Morley, calligraphy
brush in hand, elegantly composing a poem. With an ethereal self-assurance born of
unquestioning confidence in the divinely ordained course of worldly affairs, Morley explains that
the poem’s purpose is to express his displeasure at the Mongol barbarians who have lately been
creating a disturbance on the Chin empire’s western frontier, and, by so doing, cause them to
desist.
Today expressions of intentions by leaders of the world’s major central banks typically
have immediate repercussions in financial markets, and perhaps more broadly as well. Does
Chairman Greenspan believe that the U.S. business expansion has advanced to the point where a
new round of wage inflation may be imminent? Did President Duisenberg imply that because
Article 103 of the Maastricht Treaty refers to Article 102a, and both Article 102a and Article 105
refer to Article 2, Europe’s chronic high unemployment may be a proper object of policy concern
for the European Central Bank after all? Is Governor Hayami content to allow Japan to languish
in a slump for yet another half-decade? Central bankers’ public utterances and other, more subtle
signals on such questions regularly move prices and yields in the financial markets, and these
financial variables in turn affect nonfinancial economic activity in a variety of ways. Indeed, a
widely shared opinion today is that central banks need not actually do anything. With a clear
enough statement of intentions, “the markets will do the work for them.”
In truth, the ability of central banks to affect the evolution of prices and output in the

2
nonfinancial economy has always been something of a mystery. It is not that there are no good
accounts of how this influence might arise. There are many. The problem is rather that each such
story, while plausible enough at first or even second thought , turns out to depend on one or
another of a series of by-now familiar fictions: Households and firms need currency to purchase
goods and services. Banks can issue only reserve-bearing liabilities. No nonbank financial
institutions create credit. And so on.
This central mystery notwithstanding, at the practical level there is today little doubt that a
country’s monetary policy not only can but does largely determine the evolution of its general
price level over the medium to longer run, and almost as little doubt that monetary policy exerts
significant influence over aspects of real economic activity, like output and employment, over the
short to medium run. The assumptions necessary to explain in simple terms how this happens are
fictions, but they are useful fictions. Apart from purely empirical matters of magnitude and
timing, the live question today is which set of fictions (that is, which model) provides the most
useful description of the underlying causal process.
Circumstances change over time, however, and when they do the fictions that once
described matters adequately may no longer do so. A later scene in Levin’s film shows Morley
still magnificently clothed but now lying in the mud, face blackened by gunpowder, in the wake of
a Mongol attack on the Chin capital. There may well have been an earlier time when the might of
the Chin empire was such that the mere suggestion of willingness to use it was sufficient to make
potential invaders reconsider and withdraw. But by Wang Wei-shao’s day that time had evidently
passed.