NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INVESTOR PROTECTION: ORIGINS, CONSEQUENCES, REFORM
Rafael La Porta
Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes
Andrei Shleifer
Robert Vishny
Working Paper 7428
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7428
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1999
We are grateful to Nicholas Barberis, Simeon Djankov, Oliver Hart, Michael Jensen, Simon Johnson, Ross
Levine, and Daniel Wolfenzon for helpful comments, and to the NSF for financial support of this research.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 1999 by Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Investor Protection: Origins, Consequences, Reform
Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny
NBER Working Paper No. 7428
December 1999
JEL No.G21, G28, G32
ABSTRACT
Recent research has documented large differences between countries in ownership concentration
in publicly traded firms, in the breadth and depth of capital markets, in dividend policies, and in the access
of firms to external finance. We suggest that there is a common element to the explanations of these
differences, namely how well investors, both shareholders and creditors, are protected by law from
expropriation by the managers and controlling shareholders of firms. We describe the differences in laws
and the effectiveness of their enforcement across countries, discuss the possible origins of these differences,
summarize their consequences, and assess potential strategies of corporate governance reform. We argue
that the legal approach is a more fruitful way to understand corporate governance and its reform than the
conventional distinction between bank-centered and market-centered financial systems.
Rafael La Porta Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes
Department of Economics Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138 79 JFK Street
and NBER Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
f_lopezdesilanes@harvard.edu
Andrei Shleifer Robert W. Vishny
Department of Economics Graduate School of Business
Littauer M9 The University of Chicago
Harvard University 1101 E. 58th Street
Cambridge, MA 02138 Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER and NBER
ashleifer@harvard.edu vishny@gsb.uchicago.edu

1. Introduction.
Recent research on corporate governance around the world has established a number of
empirical regularities. Such diverse elements of countries’ financial systems as the breadth and
depth of their capital markets, the pace of new security issues, corporate ownership structures,
dividend policies, and the efficiency of investment allocation appear to be explained both
conceptually and empirically by how well the laws in these countries protect outside investors.
According to this research, the protection of shareholders and creditors by the legal system is
central to understanding the patterns of corporate finance in different countries.
Investor protection turns out to be crucial because, in many countries, expropriation of
minority shareholders and creditors by the controlling shareholders is extensive. When outside
investors finance firms, they face a risk, and sometimes near certainty, that the returns on their
investments will never materialize because the controlling shareholders or managers simply keep
them. (We refer to both managers and controlling shareholders as “the insiders”.) Corporate
governance is, to a large extent, a set of mechanisms through which outside investors protect
themselves against expropriation by the insiders. Expropriation can take a variety of forms. In
some countries, the insiders simply steal the profits. In other countries, the insiders sell the output
or the assets of the firm they control, but which outside investors have financed, to another entity
they own at below market prices. Such transfer pricing and asset stripping, though often legal,
have largely the same effect as theft. In still other instances, perfectly legal expropriation takes the
form of installing possibly unqualified family members in managerial positions, or overpaying
executives. In general, expropriation is related to the agency problem described by Jensen and
Meckling (1976), who focus on the consumption of “perquisites” by managers from the firm’s
1

profits. It means that the insiders use the profits of the firm to benefit themselves rather than
return the money to the outside investors.
If extensive expropriation undermines the functioning of a financial system, how can it be
limited? The legal approach to corporate governance holds that the key mechanism is the
protection of outside investors—whether shareholders or creditors—through the legal system,
meaning both laws and their enforcement. Although reputations or bubbles can help raise funds,
law and its enforcement are central to understanding why firms raise more funds in some countries
than in others. To a large extent, potential shareholders and creditors finance firms because their
rights are protected by the law. These outside investors are more vulnerable to expropriation, and
more dependent on the law, than either the employees or the suppliers, who remain continually
useful to the firm and hence are at a lesser risk of being mistreated.
The legal approach to corporate governance is a natural continuation of the field as it
developed over the last 40 years. Modigliani and Miller (1958) think of firms as collections of
investment projects and the cash flows these projects create, and hence naturally interpret
securities, such as debt and equity, as claims to these cash flows. They do not explain why the
managers would return the cash flows to investors. Jensen and Meckling (1976) point out that the
return of the cash flows from projects to investors cannot be taken for granted, and that the
insiders of firms may use these resources to their own advantage. Jensen and Meckling view
financial claims as contracts that give outside investors, such as shareholders and creditors, claims
to the cash flows. In their model, the limitation on expropriation is the residual equity ownership
by entrepreneurs that enhances their interest in dividends relative to perquisites.
Research by Grossman, Hart and Moore, summarized in Hart (1995), makes a further key
2