NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A THEORY OF BANK CAPITAL
Douglas W. Diamond
Raghuram G. Rajan
Working Paper 7431
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7431
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1999
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 1999 by Douglas W. Diamond and Raghuram G. Rajan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

A Theory of Bank Capital
Douglas W. Diamond and Raghuram G. Rajan
NBER Working Paper No. 7431
December 1999
JEL No. G20, G21, E50, E58
ABSTRACT
Banks can create liquidity because their deposits are fragile and prone to runs. Increased
uncertainty can make deposits excessively fragile in which case there is a role for outside bank capital.
Greater bank capital reduces liquidity creation by the bank but enables the bank to survive more often and
avoid distress. A more subtle effect is that banks with different amounts of capital extract different amounts
of repayment from borrowers. The optimal bank capital structure trades off the effects of bank capital on
liquidity creation, the expected costs of bank distress, and the ease of forcing borrower repayment. The
model can account for phenomena such as the decline in average bank capital in the United States over the
last two centuries. It points to overlooked side-effects of policies such as regulatory capital requirements
and deposit insurance.
Douglas W. Diamond Raghuram G. Rajan
Graduate School of Business Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street 1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60657 Chicago, IL 60657
raghuram.rajan@gsb.uchicago.edu

Does bank capital matter, and if so, what should its level be? This question has exercised
economists, regulators, and bank managers. On the one hand, some suggest that bank capital
structure is irrelevant in a full information, complete contract world, and to a first order of
approximation, also in the more imperfect "real" world (see Miller (1995), for example). At the
other extreme, economists appeal to the large literature on the high costs of equity issuance for
industrial firms to argue that banks will have similar difficulties in issuing long term equity (see
Stein (1998), for example), and greater bank capitalization will only be obtained at some cost. But
bank assets and functions are not the same as those of industrial firms.1 How do we know that
they will face similar costs of issuance? And does capital really play the same role in banks as in
industrial firms? What we really should do is to start by modeling the essential functions banks
perform, and then ask what role capital plays. This will help us answer whether capital issued by
banks should, in fact, be deemed “costly”. Moreover, such a model of banking can then help us
understand a variety of issues such as disintermediation, or the impact of regulations, better.
To analyze the role capital plays in the bank's activities, we start with the model of
relationship lending in Diamond and Rajan (1999). A number of entrepreneurs have projects
where the cash flows that each entrepreneur can generate from his project exceeds the value
anyone else can generate from it. An entrepreneur cannot commit his human capital to the project,
except in the spot market. Outside financiers can extract repayment only by threatening to
liquidate the project (taking away the project from the entrepreneur and selling it to the next best
user), but because of the entrepreneur's specific abilities, they can extract only a fraction of the
cash flows generated. Thus projects are illiquid in that they cannot be financed to the full extent of
the cash flows they generate.
1 In fact, one strand of the banking literature suggests banks have a role precisely because they reduce
asymmetric information costs of issuance (see Gorton and Pennachi (1990)).
1

In this world, we assume an outside financier who invests at an early stage can develop
specific abilities in that he can learn how best to re-deploy the project's assets, and become a
relationship lender. While these specific abilities enable the relationship lender to lend more to the
firm -- because the lender has a stronger threat with which to extract repayment -- they can
make the financial claim he holds against the entrepreneur illiquid; The relationship lender will not
be able to sell his loan (or equivalently, borrow against it) for anywhere near as much as the
payments he expects to extract from the entrepreneur, precisely because he cannot commit to
using his specific abilities on behalf of less capable outsiders. Thus the source of illiquidity of the
real asset (the project) and the financial asset (the loan to it) are the same: an agent's specific
abilities, which lead to non-pledgeable rents. In the case of the project, it is the entrepreneur's
greater ability to run it relative to a second best operator, in the case of the loan it is the
relationship lender's better ability to recover payments relative to someone who buys the loan (or
lends against it).
The illiquidity of the financial asset spills over to the entrepreneur. Since the initial outside
financier cannot borrow money against his loan when in need, he will liquidate the entrepreneur at
such times, or demand an excessive liquidity premium.
Since an asset is illiquid because specialized human capital cannot be committed to it,
devices that tie human capital to assets create liquidity. We show in Diamond and Rajan (1999)
that a bank is such a device. When the initial financier is structured as a bank -- financed by
demand deposits with a sequential service constraint where depositors get their money back in the
order in which they approach the bank until the bank runs out of money or assets to sell -- the
banker can commit to pass through the entire amount that that he expects to collect using his
specific abilities, to depositors. The reason the bank does not extract rents, thereby making the
financial assets it holds, and the claims against them, illiquid, is because it has a fragile capital
2