NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LIQUIDITY RISK, LIQUIDITY CREATION
AND FINANCIAL FRAGILITY:
A THEORY OF BANKING
Douglas W. Diamond
Raghuram G. Rajan
Working Paper 7430
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7430
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1999
We acknowledge helpful comments from an anonymous referee, Patrick Bolton, Michael Brennan, Phil
Dybvig, Ron Giammarino, Gary Gorton, Bengt Holmstrom, Oliver Hart, and Bruce Smith. We thank Heitor
Almeida for valuable research assistance. We are grateful for financial support from the Center for
Research in Security Prices and the National Science Foundation. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by Douglas W. Diamond and Raghuram G. Rajan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Liquidity Risk, Liquidity Creation and Financial Fragility:
A Theory of Banking
Douglas W. Diamond and Raghuram G. Rajan
NBER Working Paper No. 7430
December 1999
JEL No. G20, G21, E50, E58
ABSTRACT
Both investors and borrowers are concerned about liquidity. Investors desire liquidity because they
are uncertain about when they will want to eliminate their holding of a financial asset. Borrowers are
concerned about liquidity because they are uncertain about their ability to continue to attract or retain
funding. Because borrowers typically cannot repay investors on demand, investors will require a premium
or significant control rights when they lend to borrowers directly, as compensation for the illiquidity
investors will be subject to. We argue that banks can resolve these liquidity problems that arise in direct
lending. Banks enable depositors to withdraw at low cost, as well as buffer firms from the liquidity needs
of their investors. We show the bank has to have a fragile capital structure, subject to bank runs, in order
to perform these functions. Far from being an aberration to be regulated away, the funding of illiquid loans
by a bank with volatile demand deposits is rationalized in the context of the functions it performs. This
model can be used to investigate important issues such as narrow banking and bank capital requirements.
Douglas W. Diamond Raghuram G. Rajan
Graduate School of Business Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street 1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60657 Chicago, IL 60657
raghuram.rajan@gsb.uchicago.edu

Banks perform valuable activities on either side of their balance sheets. On the asset side,
they make loans to difficult, illiquid borrowers, thus enhancing the flow of credit in the economy.
On the liability side, they provide liquidity on demand to depositors. We know from Diamond
and Dybvig [1983] that banks can transform illiquid assets into more liquid demand deposits.
But there seems to be a fundamental incompatibility between the two activities -- the demands
for liquidity by depositors may arrive at an inconvenient time and force the fire-sale liquidation
of illiquid assets. Furthermore, because depositors are served in sequence, the prospect of fire
sales may precipitate self-fulfilling runs that further jeopardize bank activities. In country after
country, an army of regulators supervises banks to protect them from their own fragility. And
after every banking crisis, economists point to how risky the combination of bank activities is,
and how it makes sense to legislate the separation of banking activities. But is there logic,
hitherto unnoticed, for the bank's choice of activities? Is financial fragility a desirable
characteristic of banks?
Our paper suggests yes. Assets are illiquid in our framework because the best users of
the asset cannot commit to employ their specialized human capital on behalf of others. So, for
example, an entrepreneur with a project can threaten to quit at an interim stage. This gives him
bargaining power over the surplus generated, no matter what contract he signs at the outset with
financiers, hence he cannot promise to pay out surplus fully. Thus real assets are illiquid. They
cannot be sold or borrowed against for the full value they generate due to this limited ability to
commit.
Of course, lenders can be given control rights such as the right to seize assets and put
them to alternative use (i.e., liquidate). This will give them some bargaining power over the
surplus that the entrepreneur generates. Also, as a lender sees the entrepreneur's modus operandi
over the course of the financing relationship, she will understand the entrepreneur's business
better and thus will be able to liquidate assets for more. So is illiquidity no longer an issue if a
1

lender develops specific skills over the course of the relationship that give her a sufficiently
strong liquidation threat to extract full repayment?
The answer is no if the "relationship" lender is likely to face a need for liquidity. After
having made the loan, the lender may need money for a new business or for consumption and she
may not be able to raise money elsewhere to finance this need. She will have to sell the loan, or
use it as collateral, to raise money to meet either of these liquidity needs. The amount raised will
be unavoidably low if her specific ability to collect future loan payments from the entrepreneur is
lost when she undertakes the opportunity. Even if her loan collection skills persist after she
undertakes the new business or consumption opportunity, there is a potential problem. Because
she typically cannot commit to using her skills to extract repayment from the entrepreneur on
behalf of others, her loan to the entrepreneur is illiquid -- she cannot sell it or raise money against
it to the full value of the repayment she expects to extract from the entrepreneur.
The lender’s inability to sell, or borrow against, a loan for the full present value of what
she could extract in the future, when faced with a need for liquidity, affects the initial terms of
her loan, and her interactions with the entrepreneur. Even though the loan is riskless when held
to maturity, its low sale price makes it risky for one with potential liquidity needs. Since the loan
does not repay much when she has the highest use for money, the lender may demand a premium
from the entrepreneur, and may incorporate contractual terms that allow her to liquidate the
entrepreneur's project when she is in need of liquidity. Thus the lender's need for liquidity creates
liquidity risk for the entrepreneur, and the lender may even refuse to lend if her likelihood of
having a liquidity need is high enough.
The adverse consequences of illiquidity could be avoided if a relationship lender with
persistent loan collection skills could borrow the full value of the loan to the entrepreneur when
she faces a need for liquidity. She can do this only if she can commit to deploy her extraction
skills for free in the future on behalf of the new lender(s). One way to commit is for the
2