NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO TAXES AFFECT CORPORATE DEBT POLICY?
EVIDENCE FROM U.S. CORPORATE TAX RETURN DATA
Roger H. Gordon
Young Lee
Working Paper 7433
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7433
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1999
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 1999 by Roger H. Gordon and Young Lee. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Do Taxes Affect Corporate Debt Policy?
Evidence from U.S. Corporate Tax Return Data
Roger H. Gordon and Young Lee
NBER Working Paper No. 7433
December 1999
JEL No. H25, H52, G32
ABSTRACT
Past attempts to measure the impact of taxes on corporate debt policy have focused on larger firms.
Given that the top statutory corporate tax rate has varied little in recent years, tax incentives vary among
these firms, almost entirely due to current or prospective tax losses. Results are inevitably mixed, given that
firms with losses or nondebt tax shields may have different propensities to borrow even ignoring taxes.
This paper uses US Statistics of Income balance sheet data on all corporations, to compare the
debt policies of firms of different sizes. Given the progressivity in the corporate tax schedule, small firms
face very different tax rates than larger firms. Relative tax rates have also changed frequently over time.
Our results suggest that taxes have had a strong and statistically significant effect on debt levels.
In particular, the difference in corporate tax rates currently faced by the largest vs. the smallest firms (35%
vs. 15%) is forecast to induce larger firms to finance an additional 8% of their assets with debt, compared
with smaller firms.
Roger H. Gordon Young Lee
Department of Economics IRIS
University of Michigan Department of Economics
Ann Arbor, MI 48109 2105 Morrill Hall
and NBER University of Maryland
rgordon@umich.edu College Park, MD 20742
young@iris.econ.umd.edu



