NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE SHARE PRICE EFFECTS OF
DIVIDEND TAXES AND TAX IMPUTATION CREDITS
Trevor S. Harris
R. Glenn Hubbard
Deen Kemsley
Working Paper 7445
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7445
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1999
We are grateful to Julian Alworth, Alan Auerbach, Martin Feldstein, Bill Gentry, Larry Glosten, David Guenther, John
Hand, Kevin Hassett, Charlie Himmelberg, Jim Hines, Ed Maydew, Jack Mintz, Jim Ohlson, Jim Poterba, Doug
Shackelford, John Shoven, Joel Slemrod, René Stulz, Christoph Weber, and seminar participants at Columbia University,
Fondazione ENI Enrico Mattei, the 1998 Congress of the European Accounting Association, the University of California
at Berkeley, George Washington University, Harvard University, Hong Kong Institute of Science and Technology,
University of Illinois, University of Michigan, Oxford University, Stanford University, the 1998 Annual Meeting of the
American Accounting Association, the 1998 Tax Conference at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and the
1997 NBER Summer Institute Program on Public Economics, and two anonymous referees for helpful discussions and
suggestions. In addition, Harris and Kemsley are grateful to the Ernst & Young Foundation for supporting this research.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 1999 by Trevor S. Harris, R. Glenn Hubbard, and Deen Kemsley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The Share Price Effects of Dividend Taxes and Tax
Imputation Credits
Trevor S. Harris, R. Glenn Hubbard, and Deen Kemsley
NBER Working Paper No. 7445
December 1999
JEL No. H3
ABSTRACT
We examine the hypothesis that dividend taxes are capitalized into share prices by focusing on
investors’ implicit valuations of retained earnings versus paid-in equity. Retained earnings are distributable
as taxable dividends, whereas paid-in equity is distributable as a tax-free return of capital. Consistent with
dividend tax capitalization, firm-level results for the United States indicate that accumulated retained
earnings are valued less per unit than contributed capital. In addition, differences in dividend tax rates
across U.S. tax regimes are associated with predictable differences in the magnitude of the implied tax
discount for retained earnings, as are differences in dividend tax rates across Australia, Japan, France,
Germany, and the United Kingdom.
Trevor S. Harris R. Glenn Hubbard
Graduate School of Business Graduate School of Business
Columbia University Columbia University
610 Uris Hall 609 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027 New York, NY 10027
tshl@columbia.edu and NBER
rgh1@columbia.edu
Deen Kemsley
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
607 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
dk151@columbia.edu

THE SHARE PRICE EFFECTS OF
DIVIDEND TAXES AND TAX IMPUTATION CREDITS
1. Introduction
Researchers have long debated the role of taxes in corporate financial policy. Following
Modigliani and Miller (1963), numerous studies have considered the relationship between debt
and equity financing in the presence of tax-advantaged debt, and other research has focused on
the implications of dividend and capital gains taxation for different components of equity
financing. Many of the issues addressed in these research programs critically depend on whether
shareholder-level taxes on dividends are capitalized in share prices. Prior examinations of the
share price effects of dividend taxes, however, have primarily relied on event studies or indirect
tests, with inconclusive results about the specific question of dividend tax capitalization. In this
study, we examine the influence of dividend taxes on firm value directly for a sample of U.S. firms
from 1975 to 1994 and for a sample of non-U.S. firms from 1984-1995, and we find evidence
consistent with the hypothesis that a substantial portion of these shareholder-level taxes are
capitalized in share prices.
The firm valuation effects of dividend taxation have several fundamental implications. If,
for example, dividend taxes do not influence share prices as suggested by Miller and Scholes
(1978), then dividends impose a tax penalty on taxable shareholders. However, if share prices
absorb the effects of dividend taxation, then corporations could distribute dividends without
imposing a penalty on shareholders at the margin. That is, dividend policy would be unaffected by
1

dividend taxes.1 In addition, if dividend taxes reduce the market value of retained-earnings equity,
then it would reduce shareholders’ required return on this source of financing below the required
return on equity raised from external markets (see King, 1977; Auerbach, 1979a,b; and Bradford,
1981). This tax wedge between the costs of using internal versus external equity financing would
exist whether or not transactions costs and costs of asymmetric information accentuate the result
(see Myers and Majluf, 1984), and it would suggest that a simple dichotomy between “debt” and
“equity” financing is incomplete.2
Prior studies have sought to isolate tax share price effects by investigating ex-dividend-day
price reactions, dividend yields, or the financial policy implications of dividend tax capitalization
for dividend payouts, q, or the user cost of capital. In contrast to the prior studies, we use a firm
valuation approach to study the relationship between dividend taxes and share values. In the
United States and many other jurisdictions, retained earnings are subject to dividend taxes upon
distribution, but contributed equity can be returned to shareholders free from such taxation.3
Therefore we exploit variation in the relative proportions of retained earnings and contributed
capital to examine the direct prediction that retained earnings are valued less than dollar-for-dollar
1 This statement is true for a constant dividend tax; unanticipated temporary changes in the
dividend tax would affect payout decisions.
2Aside from the corporate financial implications, tax policymakers devote substantial
attention to the potential share price effects of dividend taxes (see, e.g., U.S. Department of the
Treasury, 1992; American Law Institute, 1993; and the reviews in Zodrow, 1991; and in Gentry
and Hubbard, 1998). If dividend taxes reduce share prices, then a portion of the economic
efficiency benefits of corporate tax integration or other fundamental income and consumption tax
reform would be dissipated in windfall gains to current shareholders.
3 Firms sometimes distribute retained earnings without triggering dividend taxes, as in
share repurchases and certain taxable acquisitions. In section 4.4, we address the influence of
these alternative equity distribution methods on our analysis.
2