



I. Introduction
A long-standing controversy in the political economy literature is whether and under what
circumstances politicians prefer to follow a policy of ambiguity versus clarity in their positions (e.g.,
Downs 1957, Shepsle 1972, Bernhardt and Ingberman 1985, Alesina and Cukierman 1990, Snyder
1990 and 1992, Glazer 1990, McCarty and Rothenberg 1996, Kroszner and Stratmann 1998, and
Aragones and Postlewaite 1998). On the one hand, a clear reputation on policy positions can help to
reduce uncertainty about what actions a politician is likely to undertake while in office and thus can
result in greater electoral support and/or higher campaign contributions from those favoring such
policies. On the other, politicians might wish to obscure their specific policy views in order to avoid
alienating those who disagree and to obtain campaign contributions from groups on both sides of an
issue. Whether politicians wish to increase or decrease the amount of credible information available
about their positions has important implications for how voters make decisions (as well as how well
informed voters may become), the contribution and lobbying patterns of special interest groups, and the
organization and structure of legislative institutions.
While the theoretical controversies continue, relatively little empirical work has been done to
examine the implications of the alternative views (e.g., Snyder 1990 and 1992, McCarty and
Rothenberg 1996, and Kroszner and Stratmann 1998). One of the reasons for the lack of empirical
work is the difficulty of developing a convincing proxy for ambiguity versus clarity and consistency of a
politician’s positions and relating this proxy to some measure of “success.” We will operationalize the
extent of clear and consistent reputations by examining the patterns of campaign contributions from
political action committees (PACs). Our proxy for the extent of reputational clarity is frequency of
1

repeat contributors to a legislator, and we measure the rewards in terms campaign fund-raising success.
Our data will concern corporate PAC contributions to members of the U.S. House of Representatives.1
Section II begins with a brief review of alternative theories of ambiguity and reputation-building
in politics. We then outline a model of reputation-building by legislators that emphasizes the role of the
committee system of Congress in helping to clarify or to disguise a legislator’s policy position. The
model allows us to draw contrasting implications for the relation of repeat contributions to committee
seniority, the probability of leaving office, and the level of campaign contributions under the “ambiguity
pays” and “clarity and consistency pays” hypotheses. Section III describes the data, sources, and
variable definitions. We then explain our research design and report the results in Section IV.
We find that, holding other factors constant, legislators with greater tenure on their committee
assignments have a higher frequency of repeat PAC contributors and that the frequency of repeat PAC
contributors falls as a legislator becomes more likely to leave office. These results are consistent with
legislators pursuing a strategy of reputational development rather than ambiguity. In addition, we find
that legislators with high reputational development are rewarded with a high level of corporate PAC
contributions, so ambiguity does not appear to “pay.” In the conclusion, we discuss prospects for
future research and how campaign finance reforms, changes in legislative organization, and term limits
can affect the incentive and ability for legislators to engage in reputation-building strategies that we
1 Our focus is on individual legislators, so we are not directly addressing the role of ambiguity for party
platforms or for the executive. Also, the part of the policy space we investigate concerns those issues
relevant to business interests.
2