



I. Introduction
In recent years a growing literature has studied knowledge spillovers and their effect on the performance of
industrial firms. This literature finds consistent evidence for increases in patenting and productivity due to
spillovers, holding firm research and development (R&D) constant1. In spite of these results few economists have
studied how spillovers occur and what this implies about the behavior and performance of firms2. And yet firms
decide how much to learn from external R&D and how much knowledge spills over, just as they decide the extent of
their involvement in many other activities, including investment, advertising and diversification. As a result,
exogenous spillovers may be unimportant when compared with spillovers that firms generate by their own efforts.
This paper provides new evidence on the endogeneity of knowledge spillovers. I show that firms actively
seek new information and that they increase their learning efforts when there is more to learn and thus more to be
gained from learning. Furthermore, by responding to these opportunities, firms amplify the effects of spillovers on
their patenting and innovation. This “magnification of spillovers effect” is later transmitted to process and product
innovation, to profits, and finally to general economic growth as the results of learning and internal research spread
from enterprise to enterprise3. According to this description of the learning process, spillovers affect the firm and
economy through a sequence of events. Learning effort increases first in response to knowledge spillovers. Later on
learning and internal research enlarge the flow of innovation. Over time profits increase in such a way that the short
run effect of innovation on profits is small, though the long run effect is substantial. Current innovation contributes
little to current profits, because most of the firm’s products date from earlier years, so that profits are determined by
the stock of innovation and by market forces.
By design R&D laboratories are centers of innovation within their firms4. Accordingly, section II builds a
simple model to describe the behavior of industrial R&D laboratories, and to guide the empirical work. The key
1 Griliches (1979) introduces the cosine measure of spillovers used in much subsequent research, while Griliches
(1991) is a history of spillover research. Mansfield (1991) discusses the effect of academic research on the speed of
industrial research, which complements the work of Mansfield, et al. (1977) on the high rate of return to industrial
research. See also Jaffe (1986), Adams (1990), Adams and Jaffe (1996), and Adams (1999) for more on academic
and industrial spillovers.
2 Two exceptions that I know of are Cohen and Levinthal (1989) and Sakakibara (1998). These papers focus on
learning and research in non-cooperative oligopoly. Mowery (1995) provides an historical perspective on this topic.
3 See Becker and Murphy (1992) for a related analysis of economic growth through the division of labor, which is
driven by increases in the aggregate stock of knowledge.
4 Throughout this paper the term “R&D laboratory” refers to any research group and not necessarily to a formal,
separately dedicated R&D establishment in a firm.
1

assumption is that the different components of R&D are not perfect substitutes, so that innovation depends on the
allocation of laboratory R&D as well as its level. As a consequence, I take a different view of the knowledge
production function, one where innovation is primarily a function of laboratory learning from external R&D and
internal research. Learning effort is itself a function of potential spillovers. This approach contrasts with a single
stage specification that treats innovation as a function of firm R&D and spillovers. The most important implication
of the new approach is that the full effect of spillovers exceeds the structural effect. The firm’s indirect innovation
function embodies this implication and results from substituting the optimized R&D components, which are
increasing functions of the spillovers, into the original innovation function. Spillovers have primary and secondary
effects in the indirect innovation function. The secondary effect results from induced learning in the laboratory that
is brought about by spillovers, and is the source of the magnification effect discussed above.
Section III describes the database. This section also spells out definitions of learning, internal research, and
spillovers of academic and industrial R&D. Most of the discussion concerns a recent survey of R&D laboratories in
the chemicals, machinery, electrical equipment, and transportation equipment industries. The survey was designed
to quantify learning, internal research, spillovers, and output of the laboratories. It serves as the principal data
source for this paper. Section III concludes by discussing data on academic R&D, industrial R&D, and patents of
parent firms that supplements the survey evidence.
Section IV presents the results. I find that the elasticity of patent counts with respect to laboratory R&D is
about 0.6. We shall see that this appearance of diminishing returns is partly due to the exclusion of value weights on
patents. The core of the work on patents explores a decomposition of laboratory budget between learning and
internal research. In the most refined estimates I find that learning accounts for about 12% of the effect of R&D. I
uncover substantial evidence that learning contributes to patents, in addition to internal research and spillovers.
These findings for patents suggest that learning is important for the transmission of knowledge to the firm. In
addition, both learning expenditures and the fraction of laboratory workforce composed of Ph.D. researchers
increase in response to potential spillovers. Learning expenditures are to an extent specific to particular spillovers.
Learning about university R&D tends to be more sensitive to university spillovers, while industrial learning
responds more to industry spillovers. Finally there is evidence that learning directed towards university research is
more pervasive than industrial learning efforts. Spillovers of university research bring about a strong increase in
general R&D spending, unlike industrial spillovers.
2