



I. INTRODUCTION
The financial crisis that hit Korea in the last half of 1997 had a devastating impact on the
Korean economy, causing Korea's worst recession in the postwar era. Real GDP growth fell from
levels which had been running in the positive 5 to 10% range before the crisis to a negative 5.8%
rate in 1998. In the aftermath of the crisis, unemployment rose from pre-crisis levels of 2% to 6.8%
in 1998 and 8.1% in March 1999.
Why did this crisis happen and what lessons does it hold for how the Korean economy
could be better managed in the future?
This paper answers these questions by using an asymmetric information framework to
understand the causes and propagation mechanisms of the financial crisis in Korea. It shows that
the Korean data is consistent with this explanation of the crisis. The final section of the paper then
uses the asymmetric information analysis of the Korean financial crisis to outline several lessons
that can guide Korean policymakers in the future.
II. A GENERIC, ASYMMETRIC INFORMATION ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CRISES
The financial system plays a critical role in the economy because, when it operates properly,
it channels funds from those who have saved surplus funds to those who need these funds to engage
in productive investment opportunities. The major barrier to the financial system performing this
job properly is asymmetric information, the fact that one party to a financial contract does not have
the same information as the other party, which results in moral hazard and adverse selection
problems. An asymmetric information view of financial crises, described in more detail elsewhere
in Mishkin (1996a, 1997a), defines a financial crisis to be a nonlinear disruption to financial
markets in which the asymmetric information problems of adverse selection and moral hazard
become much worse, so that financial markets are no longer able to efficiently channel funds to
those who have the most productive investment opportunities.
1

1. The Causes of Financial Crises
Financial intermediaries, and particularly banks, have a very important role in financial
markets since they are well suited to engage in information-producing activities that facilitate
productive investment for the economy. Thus, a decline in the ability of these institutions to engage
in financial intermediation and to make loans will lead directly to a decline in investment and
aggregate economic activity. When shocks to the financial system make adverse selection and
moral hazard problems worse, then lending tends to dry up − even for many of those with
productive investment opportunities, since it has become harder to distinguish them from potential
borrowers who do not have good opportunities. The lack of credit leads individuals and firms to
cut their spending, resulting in a contraction of economic activity that can be quite severe. Four
factors can lead to increases in asymmetric information problems and thus to financial instability:
deterioration of financial sector balance sheets, increases in interest rates, increases in uncertainty,
and deterioration of nonfinancial sector balance sheets due to changes in asset prices. We will
discuss each in turn.
Deterioration in Financial Sector Balance Sheets
If banks (and other financial intermediaries making loans) suffer a deterioration in their
balance sheets, and so have a substantial contraction in their capital, they have two choices: either
they can cut back on their lending; or they can try to raise new capital. However, when banks
experience a deterioration in their balance sheets, it is very hard for them to raise new capital at a
reasonable cost. Thus, the typical response of banks with weakened balance sheets is a contraction
in their lending, which slows economic activity. Recent research suggests that weak balance sheets
1
led to a capital crunch which hindered growth in the U.S. economy during the early 1990s.
If the deterioration in bank balance sheets is severe enough, it can even lead to bank panics,
in which there are multiple, simultaneous failures of banking institutions. Indeed, in the absence of
a government safety net, there is some risk that contagion can spread from one bank failure to
1 For example, see Bernanke and Lown (1991), Berger and Udell (1994), Hancock, Laing and Wilcox
(1995) and Peek and Rosengren (1995) and the symposium published in the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York Quarterly Review in the spring of 1993, Federal Reserve Bank of New York (1993).
2