



1 Introduction
Thetraditional economic paradigm assumes that individualsare “rational,” meaning they
make optimal decisions based on the information available to them. In the field of asset-
pricing, the implications derived from this view, described in papers by Grossman and
Stiglitz (1980) and others, are that prices reflect all available information, so that op-
portunities to earn extraordinary returns arise only from private information. According
to this view, investors without special information, no matter how savvy they may be,
cannot improve on the performance of index portfolios.1
The recent behavioral finance literature offers an alternative paradigm in which indi-
viduals make systematic mistakes in the way that they process information. In this paper,
we consider one of these biases, that of overconfidence. There are a number of reasons
why we concentrate on this particular bias: first, it is perhaps the best established of
these biases. Second, we view it as a bias that is likely to manifest itself in the sort of
analysis that is necessary in security valuation. Finally, we argue that overconfidence is a
trait that is likely to arise through evolutionary selection. We believe this last argument is
extremely important. Behavioral biases that distort decisions with no offsetting benefits
are likely to be eliminated by natural selection. Hence, we should be considerably more
skeptical about the existence of biases that cannot be explained in this way.
Although many economists are sympathetic to the view that behavioral biases play
a role in economic decisions, they generally believe that irrational investors have only a
minor effect on prices. The standard argument is that, in competing to take advantage
of the profit opportunities created by the trades of irrational investors, rational investors
will push prices to a level where the profit opportunities virtually disappear. Thus, in the
end, prices will be determined in the market “as if” all investors are rational.
However, there is now considerable evidence at odds with this “as if” hypothesis.
Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam (1998) summarize this evidence and argue that,
1Roberts (1967) and Fama (1970) lay out the definitions of weak, semi-strong, and strong-form effi-
ciency. There is considerable evidence that is at odds with the strong-form efficient markets hypothesis
that investors with private information cannot make extraordinary profits. When we refer to traditional
market-efficiency, we mean semi-strong form efficiency.
1

takenasawhole,thedataismoreconsistentwithanoverconfidencemodelthanastandard
rationalmodel. Theempiricalevidencepresentedinthispaperprovidesstillmoreevidence
inconsistent with the “as if” proposition. In particular, we find that a portfolio strategy
suggested by the overconfidence theory consistently realized excess returns in the 1963
to 1997 period. This long-short (zero cost) portfolio strategy, which is based on market
capitalization, momentum, and book-to-market ratios, has a Sharpe ratio that is more
than three times as high as that of the market and realizes positive returns in virtually
every year.
The returns from this strategy cannot be explained by traditional measures of risk;
indeed, the betas of the strategies are negative. Also the returns cannot be explained
by the popular Fama and French (1993) three-factor model.2 Moreover, they cannot be
explained by less traditional risk factors that measure the degree to which these portfolios
contributetothetrackingerrorofportfoliomanagerswhoareevaluatedrelativetoavalue-
weighted index like the S&P 500. In addition, we argue that it is unlikely that the strong
performance of these strategies were spuriously uncovered as a result of the data mining
efforts of the hundreds of academics and practitioners who have analyzed this data.
Although this evidence indicates that overconfident investors systematically influence
market prices, it does not necessarily imply that the past 30 years offered easy profit
opportunities to quantitative investors who were not inflicted with behavioral biases. As
we will later argue, anticipating and exploiting apparent profit opportunities would have
required an implausible level of knowledge about the rationality and trading strategies of
other investors. In reality, most investors will have incomplete knowledge of the tastes,
strategies, and cognitive limitations of other investors and, like academics, can only im-
perfectly infer these from the past pattern of returns.
To account for the fact that investors must learn about pricing anomalies from his-
torical prices we introduce a somewhat weaker concept of market efficiency that we call
2Whilewedonotwishtoruleoutthepossiblitythatsomemodelwithfullrationalitymightexplainthe
returns of this strategy, we note that, given the high Sharpe-ratio of the portfolio, such a model would
require investors with very peculiar preferences, based on the arguments of Hansen and Jagannathan
(1991).
2