NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANK AND THE EURO:
THE FIRST YEAR
Martin Feldstein
Working Paper 7517
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7517
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2000
This paper is an expanded version of remarks prepared for presentation at the annual meeting of the
American Economic Association, January 8, 2000, and replaces both the initial version and the slightly
revised version that was issued shortly after the meeting. This paper and the others that were presented at
the American Economic Association session will be published in The Journal of Policy Modeling. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2000 by Martin Feldstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The European Central Bank and the Euro: The First Year

Martin Feldstein
NBER Working Paper No. 7517
February 2000
JEL No. F33
ABSTRACT
The creation of the euro and the European Central Bank is a remarkable and unprecedented
event in economic and political history: creating a supranational central bank and leaving eleven
countries without national currencies of their own. The experience of the first year confirms that
“one size fits all” monetary policy is not suitable for Europe because cyclical and inflation conditions
vary substantially among countries. Labor market policies during this first year will increase this
problem in the future and may lead to more trade protectionism. The paper explores reasons why
cyclical unemployment, structural unemployment, and inflation may all be higher in the future as a
result of the single currency. Although some advocate the euro despite its economic problems
because of its assumed favorable effects on European political cohesiveness, the paper argues that
it is more likely to lead to political conflict within Europe and with the Unites States.
Martin Feldstein
President of the National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
and Professor of Economics at Harvard University
msfeldst@nber.org

We are meeting today to commemorate the first anniversary of the creation of the euro, a
remarkable and unprecedented event in economic and political history: the creation of a super-
national currency that will, when it is fully implemented two years from now, leave the major
nation’s of Europe without any currencies of their own. Never before has a major country not had
its own currency.
I say that we are here to commemorate rather than to celebrate this first birthday of the
euro because I believe that the creation of the euro and of the European Economic and Monetary
Union is at best an act of uncertain merit. As I have noted before1 , the euro is likely to have
adverse medium-term and long-term effects on employment and inflation and is likely to be the
source of political conflicts within Europe and between Europe and the United States. If I am
correct, this is certainly not a cause for celebration.
But whether it is for better or for worse, the introduction of the euro and its survival are
remarkable events. There were many skeptics who thought it could not come into being. But in
the end Germany agreed to abandon its own beloved currency in favor of the unknown euro and
to open the new EMU club to countries that met the tests of membership only by heroic acts of
accounting manipulation.
1See my articles “The Case Against EMU,” The Economist, June 13, 1992; “The Political
Economy of the European Economic and Monetary Union: Political Sources of an Economic
Liability.” Journal of Economic Perspectives , Fall 1997; and “EMU and International Conflict,”
Foreign Affairs, March-April 1998.
-1-

The First Year Record
The eleven parents of the newborn child gathered a year ago to admire their offspring and
to predict great things for its future. They declared that it would be a strong new player in the
global economy, reflecting the size of the European market relative to that of the United States.
They warned that the shift of global portfolios to euro assets would depress the value of the
dollar relative to the euro.
Things have not quite worked out that way. The value of the euro has declined by about
15 percent during the year relative to the dollar and even more relative to the yen. The European
economy remained weak and unemployment remained at more than twice the level in the United
States. The counterproductive tax and social benefit policies, the excessive regulations, and the
anti-business policies of the governments in both France and Germany have contributed to both
of these poor measures of performance. These policies repelled foreign domestic investment
and encouraged European firms to invest outside the euro area; both tendencies depressed the
demand for the euro and therefore its value. Those same policies prevented a decline in
unemployment rates by keeping wage costs uncompetitively high and reducing the incentive for
individuals to seek work or to accept any but the best jobs.
It nevertheless remains true that this remarkable new and unprecedented currency did
come into being and did survive the first year. Those who projected strength for the euro were
concerned less with economic fundamentals than with political symbols. However the currency
is not the flag and there is no reason to be unhappy that it fell in value, especially since that has
helped to strengthen aggregate demand by increasing Europe’s net exports and has done so
without any obvious increase in overall inflation.
-2-