NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
U.S. BANKS, CRISES, AND BAILOUTS:
FROM MEXICO TO LTCM
Bong-Chan Kho
Dong Lee
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 7529
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7529
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2000
Prepared for the session "The near crash of 1998," American Economic Association Meetings, Boston,
January 2000. Respectively, Lecturer, Seoul National University, Ph.D. student, The Ohio State University,
and Everett D. Reese Chair of Banking and Monetary Economics, The Ohio State University and NBER.
We are grateful for comments from Steve Buser, Andrei Shleifer, Tony Sanders, Ralph Walkling, and
participants at seminars at the IMF and the Ohio State University. The views expressed herein are those of
the author and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2000 by Bong-Chan Kho, Dong Lee, and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

U.S. Banks, Crises, and Bailouts: From Mexico to LTCM
Bong-Chan Kho, Dong Lee, and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 7529
February 2000
JEL No. F3, F33, F43, F4, F42, G15, G21
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates the impact on bank stock prices of emerging market currency crises and
bailouts. The stock market distinguishes between banks with exposure to a crisis country and other banks.
In general, banks with exposures to a crisis country are affected adversely by currency events and
positively by bailouts. Other banks are mostly unaffected by events in countries experiencing a crisis. The
paper uses the impact of the LTCM crisis on bank stock prices to put the emerging market events in
perspective. The LTCM crisis had no significant contagion effects in the banking sector either, but banks
that participated in the LTCM rescue experienced negative stock returns when the rescue was announced.
René M. Stulz
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
806A Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
stulz@cob.ohio-state.edu

A striking development in the 1990s has been the emergence of the view that events in
emerging markets could endanger the stability of the global financial system. As former Secretary
of the Treasury Rubin puts it in an interview, "I can't imagine that twenty or twenty-five years
ago my predecessors would have been worried about an economic crisis in Thailand or Indonesia,
or even Korea." (Friedman (1999), p. 186). The events of 1998 seem to provide evidence in
support of this view. As one observer puts it, "the entire global economic system as we know it
almost went into meltdown, beginning with Russia's default" (Friedman (1999), p. 212).
As a response to the perceived threat to financial stability from emerging market crises, the
1990s have seen bailouts of unprecedented size. Mexico, Korea, and Brazil received packages of
aid in excess of $40 billion each. Thailand, Indonesia, and Russia received packages between $10
billion and $40 billion. The proponents of bailouts have argued that they were necessary to
prevent contagion and systemic threats. The critics of bailouts have pointed out that they heighten
moral hazard, so that banks find it optimal to take bigger gambles because they do not suffer as
much if the gambles fail.
In this paper, we examine the impact of crises and bailouts on U.S. bank stock prices to
assess some of the issues raised by proponents and opponents of bailouts. First, we investigate
whether currency crises in emerging markets had a significant impact on banks. After taking into
account movements in the stock market, banks without exposure to the country in trouble were
generally not affected by the adverse events but banks with exposure were. Second, we examine
the impact of the largest bailouts. We find that they significantly benefited banks with exposure to
the bailed out country and generally had no significant impact on banks without exposure. Third,
we consider the LTCM crisis, which is useful to put emerging market crises in perspective since
no public funds were used in the bailout. The banks which participated in the LTCM rescue lost
dramatically when the LTCM losses became known and when the rescue was announced.
1

The paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 presents our sample and exposure measures. Section
2 provides estimates of the impact of adverse currency events in the Mexican, Korean, Russian,
and Brazilian crises on U.S. banks. Section 3 shows the effect of the bailouts of Mexico, Korea,
and Brazil on U.S. banks. Section 4 focuses on the LTCM events. Section 5 concludes.
1. Data and measurement issues.
We use the method of event studies commonly used in finance. We therefore identify
relevant events and estimate their impact on stock prices. Our hypothesis is that systemic threats
decrease bank stock prices because they affect adversely the value of banking franchises.
To evaluate the impact of events, we regress bank portfolio daily excess returns (the
return minus the risk-free rate) on the excess returns of the Datastream U.S. market index, on
changes in the 7-day Eurodollar rate, and on dummy variables for the event days. The estimates
of the dummy variables are the abnormal returns reported in this study. Table 1 provides the
abnormal returns on key dates.1 One might argue that controlling for market movements is
inappropriate since the events might be causing the market movements. We discuss market
movements when relevant. For all the crises considered, we start the sample period in January of
the year of the crisis and include at least 319 trading days. We use the banks that belong to the
Datastream retail banking index.
Event studies are based on the presumption that the market impounds all the new
information in stock prices immediately. Because of this presumption, there are two difficulties
with event studies. First, the importance of an event might be underestimated because stock prices
already partially or completely reflected its economic impact before it occurred. Second, an
announcement may take place after markets are closed on that day, so that the stock-price
1 The appendix reproduces the regression estimates, the list of exposed and non-exposed banks for each
country, and the list of relevant dates. Kho and Stulz (2000) apply this approach to events of the East Asian
crisis and discuss the robustness of results when this approach is used.
2