NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW DO UK-BASED FOREIGN EXCHANGE DEALERS
THINK THEIR MARKET OPERATES?
Yin-Wong Cheung
Menzie D. Chinn
Ian W. Marsh
Working Paper 7524
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7524
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2000
This study was begun while Marsh was at the University of Strathclyde and he is grateful for the grant that
financed the survey. We would also like to thank, without implication, Torsten Boehler (BNP), Mark Clark
(Indosuez), Hugh Macdonald (Royal Bank of Scotland), Ronnie MacDonald, Marcin Przybyla, Mark Salmon,
Jamie Thom (Bank of England), Michela Vecchi and seminar participants at City University, Central Bank
of Malta and the Bank of Valletta for assistance and helpful comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2000 by Yin-Wong Cheung, Menzie D. Chinn, and Ian W. Marsh. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.



1. Introduction
One week spent at the side of a top foreign exchange trader led a recognised expert in the field to realise
the extent of the gap between how academic economists view exchange rate determination and the way
market professionals work (Lyons, 1999, Chapter 1). This realisation contributed significantly to the
emergence of a new literature in exchange rates – market microstructure – and hence to a wider
appreciation of the important role played by traders. This paper seeks to add to our knowledge of the
actions of foreign exchange traders by presenting the results of a survey of their beliefs and actions. It
addresses three main topics: the microeconomic operation of the foreign exchange market (including trader
techniques, counterparties, and trading mechanisms); traders’ views on exchange rate determination
(including the (ir)relevance of the concept of fundamental value, the factors that are thought important over
a range of horizons, and the predictability of exchange rate trends); and further market microstructure
factors (the size of bid-ask spreads, and the factors that determine them). Further aspects of the market
are addressed in the survey, but are not discussed in this paper to conserve space. A copy of the full
survey, incorporating the results of all questions, is given in Appendix A.
The results of the survey do not in general set a new research agenda for international economists.
Rather, they highlight the areas where the gap between academic teaching and traders’ views remain large.
These divergences do not necessarily mean that academics are wrong due to ivory tower isolation. Instead,
they indicate where further work is needed if we are to understand why workers at the sharp-end of the
industry disagree.
The results point to three areas of divergence between academic writing and traders’ views. First,
fundamental value is seen as a relevant concept by a large proportion of traders at horizons much shorter
than mainstream academic theory can explain. Maybe practitioners have better models than academics,
or maybe academics with good models become traders and keep their findings secret. Alternatively, since
the majority of traders close out positions by the end of a working day, horizons of six months are of only
academic interest to most traders. But it remains that over half the respondents think exchange rate
changes over a six-month horizon (or less) accurately reflect changes in economic fundamentals. The
academic consensus is closer to thirty-six months.
1

Second, ‘speculative forces’ appear to be an important factor in determining short-term currency
movements. This is over and above the contribution made by economic factors (which is in any case tiny),
news, technical trading effects and bandwagon effects. Answering the question of what factors precipitate
speculative flows in addition to the alternatives may contribute to our knowledge of exchange rate
determination.
Third, although much has been made of the differences between chartists and fundamentalists, this
survey shows very little evidence of systematic differences of opinion between these two groups.
Furthermore, two relatively unresearched groups – jobbers and customer-led traders – appear to be
equally important in the market. Arguably, models of the exchange rate market should incorporate a richer
cast of participants. However, there is clear evidence of heterogeneity in the foreign exchange market as
a whole. There is no consensus among traders on a wide range of important issues relating to fundamental
value and the determinants of exchange rate movements.
The results also suggest a new answer to an old puzzle. The concept of purchasing power parity
as a measure of an exchange rate’s fundamental value is supported by a sizeable proportion of traders.
However, a much smaller percentage of respondents would trade in such a way as to move exchange rates
closer to PPP levels. This suggests an alternative reason for the ambiguous empirical results of tests of PPP.
In addition to the standard arguments such as measurement difficulties and price frictions, traders, who
jointly determine exchange rates, in the main do not act so as to restore equilibrium.
Finally, the results point to a new puzzle. Traders do not vary their bid-ask spread either very often
or for some of the reasons thought important in the microstructure literature. Instead, market convention
appears to exert a strong hold over traders. Why this is so deserves further research, and the importance
of ‘market norms’ should be incorporated into microstructure models.
The next section describes the survey and the findings relating to the operation of the market.
Section 3 contains results of questions collected under the broad heading of fundamental value, and section
4 considers additional microstructural affects. The paper closes with a brief conclusion and overview.
2