NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CAPITAL GAINS REALIZATIONS OF THE
RICH AND SOPHISTICATED
Alan J. Auerbach
Jonathan M. Siegel
Working Paper 7532
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7532
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2000
This paper was presented at the AEA meetings, January 7-9, 2000. We are grateful to Larry Ozanne, Gerry
Auten, Len Burman, and Bill Randolph for helpful advice and comments. The views expressed in this paper
are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as those of the Congressional Budget Office or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2000 by Alan J. Auerbach and Jonathan M. Siegel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Capital Gains Realizations of the Rich and Sophisticated
Alan J. Auerbach and Jonathan M. Siegel
NBER Working Paper No. 7532
February 2000
JEL No. H31, G11
ABSTRACT
This paper attempts to bring theoretical and empirical research on capital gains realization behavior
closer together by considering whether investors who appear to engage more in strategic tax avoidance
activity also respond differently to tax rates. We find that such investors exhibit significantly smaller
responses to permanent tax rate changes than other investors. Put another way, a larger part of their
response to capital gains tax rates reflects timing, consistent with their closer adherence to tax avoidance
strategies emphasizing arbitrage based on tax rate differentials. This finding holds for two alternative
specifications of realization behavior, one of which suggests larger permanent responses to capital gains tax
rates than those of previous panel studies.
Alan J. Auerbach Jonathan M. Siegel
Department of Economics Department of Economics
University of California University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880 Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER siegel@econ.Berkeley.edu
auerbach@econ.berkeley.edu

The literature on capital gains realizations reflects an inadequate integration of theory and
empirical research. While theory has emphasized strategies to convert ordinary income into
capital gains, to minimize capital gains realizations, and to generate capital losses, empirical
research has utilized simple models to relate capital gains realizations to capital gains tax rates,
finding large responses that are difficult to interpret in light of theoretical predictions. One step
toward integration has been to distinguish long-run responses from the timing responses to short-
term tax rate variation, with estimates based on aggregate time series (Auerbach 1988) and panel
data (Leonard Burman and William Randolph 1994) identifying the latter as the primary source
of responsiveness. Still, we are far from understanding the determinants of capital gains
realizations. In our own study of a panel of taxpayers (Auerbach, Burman, and Siegel 2000), we
found that only a relatively small group – concentrated among the wealthy and “sophisticated”
(as described below) – appeared to be engaged in tax-avoidance strategies, evidenced by
generating net capital losses in a persistent manner. Here, we attempt to bring theory and
evidence closer together by considering whether these investors also respond differently to tax
rates. In particular, we find that they exhibit significantly smaller responses to permanent tax
rate changes than other investors. Put another way, a larger part of their response to capital gains
tax rates reflects timing, consistent with their closer adherence to tax avoidance strategies
emphasizing arbitrage based on tax rate differentials.
I. Empirical Model
Taxpayers do not decide to realize capital gains directly, but rather make decisions to sell
capital assets, each of which has embedded a taxable gain or deductible loss. While a more
direct modeling of this sale decision is desirable, this approach has not been generally feasible
with available data. In this paper, we follow the prior research by estimating a reduced-form

equation for net capital gains. We use the empirical model of Burman and Randolph (1994),
which specifies the semilog relationship:
( ) ( )
(1) ElogG =X +γτ +γ τ −τ +γ τ −τ
0 1 p 2 t p 3 t t−1
where E is the expectation operator and G is a taxpayer’s net long-term capital gains at time t.
The vector X consists of non-tax variables, τis the long-run (or “permanent”) marginal tax rate
p
on gains, and τ is the current marginal tax rate on capital gains. Equation 1 decomposes the
t
response of gain realizations to tax rates into three parts: a long-run relationship to the level of
rates and two transitory timing effects. The long-run marginal tax rate can be thought of as what
the taxpayer expects his marginal tax rate to be in a typical year, independent of transitory
circumstances. The deviation of the current tax rate from that long-run expected rate relates to
the tax cost of timing a realization in the current year versus waiting to sell in a later year. If
either of these two tax rates affects realizations, then prior tax rates will have influenced the
stock of unrealized gains available for current year realization, and thus merit inclusion.
The vector X includes several variables that may also affect realizations, including
current-year income and an estimate of permanent income, an imputed measure of taxpayer
wealth, measures that capture the composition of wealth, and the few demographic variables
available in our data – age, marital status, and family size. We also use annual dummy variables,
which remove changes in realizations that arise from capital market returns, economic
conditions, and tax law changes that are common to the sample. Thus, we measure responses to
tax rate changes only to the extent that these changes are not common across individuals.
Finally, we include dummy variables for four geographical regions as controls for possible
differences in economic conditions and portfolio characteristics.
2