NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
OPTIMAL EXERCISE PRICES FOR EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS
Brian J. Hall
Kevin J. Murphy
Working Paper 7548
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7548
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2000
We thank Harry DeAngelo, Linda DeAngelo and John Matsusaka for valuable comments. The spreadsheets
and macros used in this article are available from the authors at www-rcf.usc.eduJ---kjmurphy. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
2000 by Brian J. Hall and Kevin J. Murphy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including notice, is given
to the source.

Optimal Exercise Prices for Executive Stock Options
Brian J. Hall and Kevin J. Murphy
NBER Working Paper No. 7548
2000
February
JEL No. JO, J3, GO, G3
ABSTRACT
Although exercise prices for executive stock options can be set either below or above the
grant-date market price, in practice virtually all options are granted at the money. We offer an
economic rationale for this apparent puzzle, by showing that pay-to-performance incentives for risk-
averse, undiversified executives are typically maximized by setting exercise prices at (or near) the
grant-date market price. We provide an operationally useful alternative to Black-Scholes (1973) for
the purpose of both valuing executive stock options and measuring the incentives created by options.
Our framework has implications not only for exercise-price policies, but also for indexed options,
option repricings, exchanges of cash for stock-based compensation, and the design of bonus plans.
Brian J. Hall Kevin J. Murphy
Harvard Business School USC
Soldiers Field Marshall School of Business
Boston, MA 02163 MC 1427
and NBER Los Angeles, CA 90089-1427
bhall@hbs.edu kjmurphyusc.edu

Stock options, which give the recipient the right to buy a share of stock at a pre-
specified "exercise" price for a pre-specified term, have emerged as the single largest
component of compensation for US executives (Brian J. Hall and Jeffrey Liebman, 1998). In
fiscal 1998, the grant-date value of stock options accounted for 40% of total pay for S&P 500
CEOs, up from only 25% of total pay in 1992.' Stock-options have become increasingly
important for rank-and-file workers as well: 45% of US companies awarded options to their
exempt salaried employees in 1998, while 12% and 10% awarded options to their non-
exempt and hourly employees, respectively.2
One of the most striking facts about executive stock options is that the exercise price of
virtually all options is set equal to the current stock price at the grant date. For example, 94%
of option grants to S&P 500 CEOs in 1998 were at-the-money grants. In theory, exercise
prices can be set below the grant-date stock price (discount options), above the grant-date
stock price (premium options), or indexed to some industry or market index (indexed
options). Premium and indexed options have strong proponents (e.g., Alfred Rappaport,
1999), who argue that discount and at-the-money options create huge rewards for below-
market performance, especially during a bull market.
Exercise-price policy is perhaps the central design issue regarding options. Setting the
exercise price, like setting the "performance threshold" in any incentive plan, defines the
standard against which performance is measured, and determines the likelihood of an
ultimate payout. To our knowledge, no one has advanced a convincing (or even
Data extracted from Compustat's ExecuComp database, using grant-date option values based on
ExecuComp's Black-Scholes' calculations.
2
Prevalence data are based on the American Compensation Association's 199 7-1998 Salary Budget Survey,
and include survey results from 735publiclytraded corporations.

PAGE 2
unconvincing) economic rationale for the near-uniform practice of issuing options at-the-
money. Accounting and tax considerations may explain why discount and indexed options
are unpopular, but do not explain the paucity of premium options.3 And, while inertia and
corporate conformity ("mimicry") can explain why policies are similar across companies, we
would not expect the observed practice to sustain itself in the long run if it were sufficiently
inefficient.
We explore the optirnality of various exercise-price policies by developing a
framework for measuring the value of, and incentives provided by, non-tradable executive
(and employee) stock options. Our framework provides an alternative to traditional option
pricing methodologies, which overestimate option values for risk-averse executive-
recipients. We show that there is a fairly wide range of exercise pricing policies that yield
close-to-optimal pay-to-performance incentives, and that this range typically includes grant-
date market values. Risk-averse executives discount small probabilities of large option gains,
and setting exercise prices at (or near) the grant-date market price maximizes incentives by
ensuring a relatively high probability of ultimate payout. Our framework, developed and
described more fully in Hall and Kevin J. Murphy (2000), has implications not only for
exercise-price policies, but also for option repricings, exchanges of cash for stock-based
compensation, and the design of bonus plans.
Under US accounting rules, as long as the exercise price and term are fixed in advance, the accounting
charge for options equals the spread between the grant-date market price and exercise price. There is
therefore no charge for at-the-money or premium options, but there is a charge for discount options (the
grant-date spread) and itidexed options (because the exercise price is not fixed in advance). Under US tax
rules, options must have exercise prices at or above the grant-date price to qualify for favorable tax
treatment; however, most top executives receive "non-qualified" options which are not subject to this
restriction.