NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE INFORMATION IN THE HIGH YIELD BOND
SPREAD FOR THE BUSINESS CYCLE:
EVIDENCE AND SOME IMPLICATIONS
Mark Gertler
Cara S. Lown
Working Paper 7549
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7549
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2000
Prepared for the Conference on Financial Instability at Oxford University, July 1999. Thanks to Ken Kuttner,
Colin Mayer, John Meullbauer and Philip Hartmann for helpful comments and to Federico Ravenna and
Nathaniel Baum-Snow for excellent research assistance. Gertler also wishes to thank the National Science
Foundation and the C.V. Starr Center for financial support. The views expressed here are those of the
authors and not of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the National Bureau of Economic Research, or
the Federal Reserve System.
© 2000 by Mark Gertler and Cara S. Lown. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The Information in the High Yield Bond Spread for the
Business Cycle: Evidence and Some Implications
Mark Gertler and Cara S. Lown
NBER Working Paper No. 7549
February 2000
JEL No. E37, E44
ABSTRACT
The market for high yield (below investment-grade) corporate bonds developed in the middle
1980s. We show that, since this time, the high yield spread has had significant explanatory power for the
business cycle. We interpret this finding as possibly symptomatic of financial factors at work in the business
cycle, along the lines suggested by the financial accelerator. We also show that over this period the high
yield spread outperforms other leading financial indicators, including the term spread, the paper-bill spread
and the Federal Funds rate. We conjecture that changes in the conduct of monetary policy over time may
account for the reduced informativeness of these alternative indicators, all of which are tied closely to
monetary policy.
Mark Gertler Cara S. Lown
Department of Economics Federal Reserve Bank of New York
New York University 33 Liberty St.
269 Mercer St., 7th Floor New York, NY 10045-0001
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
gertlerm@fasecon.econ.nyu.edu

1 Introduction
Until the early 1980s only the highest quality firms could issue marketable debt. By the
middle1980s,however,amarketemergedforcorporatebondswithbelowinvestmentgrade
ratings. Firmsthattraditionallydidnothavethefinancialstrengthtofloatmarketablebonds
werenowableto doso. Thetypesofdebtinstrumentstheynowissueare kindlyknownas
“highyieldbonds”(and unkindlyknownas “junkbonds.”)1
In thispaperweexploretheinformationcontentthatthespread between thehighyield
bond rate and the corresponding safe interest rate has for business cycle activity. Our
motives are two-fold. First, as we discuss later, this spread may be a potentially good
measureofoverallfinancialconditions. Inthisrespect,itmayofferawaytodetectevidence
oftheroleofcreditmarketfrictionsintheamplificationandpropagationofbusinesscycles,
alongthelinessuggestedbytherecent theoretical workon thefinancial accelerator2.
Second, from bothaforecasting and policystandpoint,thereis on-goinginterestinex-
ploringtheinformationcontentoffinancialindicators.3 Thesevariablesarewellmeasured
and available in real time. Some standard indicators which have performed well through
themiddle1980s,particularly thecommercial paper/T-billspread andtheterm spread, ap-
pear to have lost considerable forecasting power in recent years.4 The same has been true
for simpleindicatorsof monetary policy,such as the Federal Funds rate. In this context, it
is interesting to explore the forecasting performance of the high yield spread as compared
to these other indicators. To be sure, as we discuss below, we are skeptical of the value
of heavy reliance on any single indicator. On the other hand, if the caveats are clearly
understood, a financial indicator can have a potentially useful role in a policy-maker’s in-
formationset. Ataminimum,further, thekindsofforecastingexercisesweundertakehere
can yield insights into the nature of the business cycle and (as we discuss) the role that
monetarypolicyhasplayed.
To help interpret the empirical work that follows, Section 2 outlines the theory of the
financial accelerator. We argue that the relevant measure of financial conditions that the
theory suggests is the premium for external funds, i.e., the spread between the cost of
obtaining external finance and the opportunitycost of internal finance. We then argue that
thehighyieldbondspread mayprovideareasonablemeasureofthispremium.
Section 3 explores the marginal explanatory power of the high yield bond spread for
cyclical activity. The measure of the cycle we use is the log difference between real gross
domestic output and the Congressional Budget Office’s measure of potential output. We
show that since the middle 1980s the high yield bond spread has had significant marginal
explanatory power for the output gap, both statistically and quantitatively. We next show
in section 4 that over this period, the explanatory power of the high yield bond spread
1FordescriptionsofthehighyieldbondmarketseeHelwegeandKleiman(1997)andMilken(1999).
2BernankeandGertler(1989)describethefinancialaccelerator. Forarecentsurveyoftheliterature,see
Bernanke,GertlerandGilchrist(1998.)
3See,forexample,EstrellaandMishkin(1998).
4See Dotsey (1999)on the recentperformanceof the term spread and FriedmanandKuttner (1998)on
therecentperformanceofthepaper-billspread.
1

dominatesthatofthetwocurrentlypopularindicators,thetermspreadandthecommercial
paper/ T-bill spread. We base our conclusions on both an analysis of in-sample fit and of
out-of-sampleforecasts. Weconcludethattheresultsaresuggestiveofboththestrongrole
that financial factors have played in recent times and also of the change in the role that
monetarypolicyplayedin themostrecent recession, as comparedto previousdownturns.
Section 5 examines the explanatory power of the high yield bond spread relative to
some leading candidate driving forces of the economy, including oil shocks and monetary
policy shocks. Again, the high yield bond spread appears to have superior explanatory
power, both from a statistical and quantitative standpoint. One interesting side result is
that, beginning in the early 1980s, the impact of monetary policy shocks on real GDP
seems to vanish. We interpret this finding as corroborative of our argument in Section 3
that the traditional financial indicators (the term spread and the commercial paper/T-bill
spread) may have suffered a reduction in explanatory power due to a recent change in the
role that monetary policy plays in the business cycle. Section 6 contains some concluding
remarks abouthowtointerpret ouroverallfindings.
2 The Financial Accelerator and the Premium for Ex-
ternal Funds: A Guide for Interpreting Cyclical Move-
ments in the High Yield Bond Spread
The banking and corporate debt crises experienced by a number of industrialized coun-
tries from the late 1980s to the early 1990s along with the more severe versions that have
occurred in Japan and many emerging market economies have reawakened economists to
the idea that financial market conditions may play an important role in shaping aggre-
gateeconomicactivity. At thesametime, overthelast decade, theoretical macroeconomic
frameworkshaveevolvedthatcharacterizeexplicitlyhowfinancialfactorsmayamplifyand
propagate business cycles. This mechanism is known as the “financial accelerator.” More
recently,modelsthatfeatureafinancialacceleratorhavedevelopedtothepointwherethey
arenowusefulforprovidingaquantitativeassessmentofhowmuchthismechanismmight
contributetoexplainingaggregatefluctuations.5
While macroeconomics models that emphasize a financial accelerator often differ in
details, they also contain several common elements6: First, there is some friction present
inthefinancialmarket(e.g.,asymmetricinformationorcostsofcontractenforcement)that
introduces a wedge between the cost of external funds and the opportunitycost of internal
funds, termed “the premium for external funds.” Second, this premium is an endogenous
5SeeBernanke,GertlerandGilchrist(1998)andthereferencestherein.
6SeeBernankeandGertler(1989)andBernanke,GertlerandGilchrist(forthcoming)foraformalderiva-
tionofthefinancialaccelerator. ThelatteruseadynamicNewKeynesianmodelasthebaselinemacroeco-
nomicframework.Onecouldalsoobtainqualitativelysimilarresultsusingthelargerscalemodeldeveloped
byMuellbauer(1996).
2