NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MONETARY POLICY AND ASSET PRICE VOLATILITY
Ben Bernanke
Mark Gertler
Working Paper 7559
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7559
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2000
Presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City conference on “New Challenges for Monetary Policy”,
Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 26-28, 1999. The authors acknowledge research support from the National
Science Foundation. Refet Gurkaynak, Matthew Moore, Pau Rabenal, and Federico Ravenna provided
excellent research assistance. We thank Rudiger Dornbusch for useful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2000 by Ben Bernanke and Mark Gertler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Monetary Policy and Asset Price Volatility
Ben Bernanke and Mark Gertler
NBER Working Paper No. 7559
February 2000
JEL No. E5, E44
ABSTRACT
We explore the implications of asset price volatility for the management of monetary policy.
We show that it is desirable for central banks to focus on underlying inflationary pressures. Asset
prices become relevant only to the extent they may signal potential inflationary or deflationary
forces. Rules that directly target asset prices appear to have undesirable side effects. We base our
conclusions on (i) simulation of different policy rules in a small scale macro model and (ii) a
comparative analysis of recent U.S. and Japanese monetary policy.
Ben Bernanke Mark Gertler
Woodrow Wilson School of Public and Department of Economics
International Affairs New York University
Princeton University 269 Mercer Street, 7th Floor
Princeton, NJ 08544 New York, NY 10003
and NBER and NBER
bernanke@princeton.edu gertlerm@fasecon.econ.nyu.edu

Presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City conference on “New
Challenges for Monetary Policy”, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 26-28,
1999. The authors acknowledge research support from the National
Science Foundation. Refet Gurkaynak, Matthew Moore, Pau Rabanal, and
Federico Ravenna provided excellent research assistance. We thank
Rudiger Dornbusch for useful comments.
Introduction
Over the past twenty years the world’s major central banks have
been largely successful at bringing inflation under control. While it
is premature to suggest that inflation is no longer an issue of great
concern, it is quite conceivable that the next battles facing central
bankers will lie on a different front. One development that has already
concentrated the minds of policy-makers is an apparent increase in
financial instability, of which one important dimension is increased
volatility of asset prices. Borio, Kennedy, and Prowse (1994), among
others, document the emergence of major boom-bust cycles in the prices
of equity and real estate in a number of industrialized countries during
the 1980s. Notable examples include the United States, Japan, the
United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Sweden, and Finland.
Associated with the “bust” part of the asset price cycle in many
of these cases were significant contractions in real economic activity.
For example, many economists attribute at least some part of the 1990
recession (and the slow recovery) in the United States to the preceding
decline in commercial real estate prices, which weakened the capital
positions of banks and the balance sheets of corporate borrowers
(Bernanke and Lown, 1991). More recently, of course, we have seen asset
price crashes in East Asia and Latin America, along with continued
stagnation of stock and land prices in Japan, all of which have been
associated with poor economic performance. With these experiences in
2

mind, some observers have viewed the remarkable rise of the past few
years in U.S. stock prices, and to a lesser extent in real estate
prices, as an ominous development. Of course, as of this writing,
whether the U.S. stock market boom will be sustained or will end in
tears is anybody’s guess.
In this paper we address the question of how central bankers ought
to respond to asset price volatility, in the context of an overall
strategy for monetary policy. To be clear, we agree that monetary
policy is not by itself a sufficient tool to contain the potentially
damaging effects of booms and busts in asset prices. Well-designed and
transparent legal and accounting systems, a sound regulatory structure
that helps to limit the risk exposure of banks and corporations, and
prudent fiscal policies that help instill public confidence in economic
fundamentals, are all vital components of an overall strategy to
insulate the economy from financial disturbances. However, our reading
of history is that asset price crashes have done sustained damage to the
economy only in cases when monetary policy remained unresponsive or
actively reinforced deflationary pressures. This observation is our
justification for focusing on monetary policy here.
The principal argument of the paper is easily stated. Our view is
that, in the context of short-term monetary policy management, central
banks should view price stability and financial stability as highly
complementary and mutually consistent objectives, to be pursued within a
unified policy framework. In particular, we believe that the best
policy framework for attaining both objectives is a regime of flexible
inflation targeting, either of the implicit form now practiced in the
United States or of the more explicit and transparent type that has been
3