NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ON THE FUNDAMENTALS OF SELF-FULFILLING
SPECULATIVE ATTACKS
Craig Burnside
Martin Eichenbaum
Sergio Rebelo
Working Paper 7554
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7554
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2000
We are grateful to Kellogg's Banking Research Center for financial support. This project was started while
Burnside was a National Fellow at the Hoover Institution which he thanks for its support. The opinions in this
paper are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, the World
Bank or the National Bureau of Economic Research. We are thankful to Larry Christiano and Olivier Jeanne
for their comments.
2000 by Craig Burnside, Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
notice, is given to the source.

On the Fundamentals of Self-Fulfilling Speculative Attacks
Craig Burnside, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo
NBER Working Paper No. 7554
2000
February
JELNo.
F31, F41, G15, G21
ABSTRACT
This of twin banking-currency crises in which both fundamentals arid
paper proposes a theory
self-fulfilling beliefs play crucial roles. Fundamentals determine whether crises will occur. Self-
fulfilling beliefs determine when they occur. The fundamental that causes 'twin crises' is government
guarantees to domestic banks' foreign creditors. When these guarantees are in place twin crises
inevitably occur, but their timing is a multiple equilibrium phenomenon that depends on agents'
beliefs. So while self-fulfilling beliefs have an important role to play, twin crises do not happenjust
anywhere. They happen in countries where there are fundamental problems - problems such as
guarantees to the financial sector.
Craig Burnside Martin Eichenbaum
The World Bank Department of Economics
1818 H. Street, N.W. Northwestern University
Washington, D.C. 20433 2003 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
andNBER
eich@nwu.edu
Sergio T. Rebelo
Kellogg Graduate School of Management
J.L.
Northwestern University
Leverone Hall
Evanston, IL 60208-200 1
and NBER
s-rebelo@nwu.edu

1. Introduction
The past decade has witnessed dramatic collapses of fixed exchange rate regimes
in countries as diverse as Sweden, Mexico, Thailand and Korea. This has led to a
resurgence of interest in the causes of currency crises. While there is disagreement
about the source of these crises, there is widespread agreement that banking
crises have become increasingly linked to currency crises. This is the 'twin crises'
phenomenon emphasized by Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999).
This paper proposes a theory of such crises in which both fundamentals and
self-fulfilling beliefs play crucial roles.' Fundamentals determine whether crises
will occur. Self-fulfilling beliefs determine when they occur.2 The fundamen-
tal that causes 'twin crises' is government guarantees to domestic banks' foreign
creditors. When these guarantees are in place twin crises inevitably occur. But
their timing is a multiple equilibrium phenomenon that depends on agents' beliefs.
So while self-fulfilling beliefs have an important role to play, twin crises do not
happen just anywhere. They happen in countries where there are fundamental
problems, countries such as Sweden, Mexico, Thailand, and Korea.
In our model the government guarantees the repayment of bank's foreign loans
in the event of a devaluation. These guarantees lead banks to expose themselves
to exchange rate risk and to declare bankruptcy when a devaluation occurs. Con-
sequently, a devaluation transforms potential government liabilities into act'aal
liabilities. This transformation is the key mechanism by which government guar-
'The recent literature emphasizes the distinction between fundamental and multiple equi-
librium explanations of twin crises.' For examples of papers that emphasize fundamentals see
Corsetti, Pesenti and Roubini (1997), Bordo and Schwartz (1998), and Burnside, Eichenbaum
and Rebelo (1998). For papers that stress the importance of multiple equilibrium considera-
tions see, for example, Chang and Velasco (1997), Aghion, Bacchetta, and Banerjee (1999) and
Krugman (1999).
2See Cole and Kehoe (1996) for a theory of debt crises in which both fundamentals and
self-fulfilling beliefs play an important role.
1

antees create the possibility of self-fulfilling currency crises. To understand our
basic argument, assume that there is a limit on the amount of reserves that the
government is willing to lose in defense of its currency. Now suppose that mar-
ket participants believe that a devaluation is imminent and that the government
will finance bank bailouts, at least in part, via seignorage revenues. Then private
agents will exchange domestic money for foreign reserves to the point where the
fixed exchange rate regime is abandoned. The resulting devaluation leads banks
to declare bankruptcy and activates the government's obligations to foreign cred-
itors. As a consequence, the government will validate agents' expectations by
partially financing the bailout with seignorage revenues. Thus government guar-
antees trigger a self-fulfilling, rational run on the domestic currency, a devaluation
and a banking crisis. Paradoxically, government guarantees make banks and the
economy less stable, not more stable.
How can the government prevent these self-fulfilling twin crises? The two
moSt obvious routes are: eliminate government guarantees or (somehow) credibly
commit to financing post-devaluation bank bailouts without recourse to seignorage
revenues. Our analysis suggests a third route related to a recent proposal by
Feldstein (1999): the government must obtain and be willing to use a 'sufficient'
amount of reserves to fend off a speculative attack. But what does 'sufficient'
mean? In our model it means a fraction of the money supply that is an increasing
function of the inflation rate that would result if a speculative attack succeeded.
Finally, we analyze a fourth possibility: imposing a state contingent Tobin tax on
exchange rate transactions.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a model
of a small open economy which is populated by four different sets of agents: banks,
firms, households, and a government. The banking sector is a simplified version
of the one in Burnside, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (1999). Banks borrow dollars
2