NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EXPECTATIONS HYPOTHESES TESTS
Geert Bekaert
Robert J. Hodrick
Working Paper 7609
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7609
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2000
We are grateful to David Ng and Paul Sengmueller of Columbia University and especially Joe Chen of
Stanford University for research assistance. Geert Bekaert gratefully acknowledges financial support from
the National Science Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2000 by Geert Bekaert and Robert J. Hodrick. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Expectations Hypotheses Tests
Geert Bekaert and Robert J. Hodrick
NBER Working Paper No. 7609
March 2000
JEL No. E4, F3, C5
ABSTRACT
We investigate the Expectations Hypotheses of the term structure of interest rates and of the
foreign exchange market using vector autoregressive methods for the U.S. dollar, Deutsche mark,
and British pound interest rates and exchange rates. In addition to standard Wald tests, we formulate
Lagrange Multiplier and Distance Metric tests which require estimation under the non-linear
constraints of the null hypotheses. Estimation under the null is achieved by iterating on approximate
solutions that require only matrix inversions. We use a bias-corrected, constrained vector
autoregression as a data generating process and construct extensive Monte Carlo simulations of the
various test statistics under the null hypotheses. Wald tests suffer from severe size distortions and
use of the asymptotic critical values results in gross over-rejection of the null. The Lagrange
Multiplier tests slightly under-reject the null, and the Distance Metric tests over-reject. Use of the
small sample distributions of the different tests leads to a common interpretation of the validity of
the Expectations Hypotheses. The evidence against the Expectations Hypotheses for these interest
rates and exchange rates is much less strong than under asymptotic inference.
Geert Bekaert Robert J. Hodrick
Columbia Business School Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway 3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027 New York, NY 10027
NBER and Stanford University NBER
gb241@columbia.edu rh169@columbia.edu

According to the Expectations Hypothesis, information in current interest rates provides the
conditional expectation of future asset prices. The Expectations Hypothesis of the term structure
of interest rates (EH-TS) states that the current term spread between a long-term interest rate
and a short-term interest rate is the expected value of a weighted average of the expected future
changes in the short-term interest rate. This theory, popularized in the writings of Fisher (1930),
Keynes (1930), and Hicks (1953), continues to be a way that many economists think about the
determination of long-term interest rates. The Expectations Hypothesis in the foreign exchange
market (EH-FX) states that the interest-rate differential between two currencies is the conditional
expected value of the rate of depreciation of the high interest-rate currency relative to the low
interest-rate currency. Again, Fisher (1930) and Keynes (1930) discussed this hypothesis. Because
of covered interest arbitrage, the interest differential equals the forward premium, which is the
percentage difference between the forward exchange rate and the spot rate. Hence, the EH-FX
is equivalent to the Unbiasedness Hypothesis, which is the proposition that the logarithm of the
forward exchange rate is an unbiased predictor of the logarithm of the future spot rate. Many
economists also currently view the EH-FX as the way that forward exchange rates are determined.
These Expectations Hypotheses (EHs) continue to have adherents because most modern asset
pricing theories imply either that expected future interest rates and exchange rates are related to
current interest rates directly through the EHs or with the addition to the EHs of risk premiums.
If these risk premiums are constant, the EHs can be said to hold because the temporal variation
in expected future asset prices drives the variability in current interest rates. If the risk premiums
are variable, the EHs will not hold, but the literature has had surprisingly little success generating
risk premiums that explain the empirical evidence.
Empirical tests of the EHs are too numerous to enumerate. For the EH-FX, the statistical
evidence surveyed by Hodrick (1987), Bekaert and Hodrick (1993), and Engel (1996) strongly
rejects the hypothesis. In particular, high interest rate currencies do not depreciate as much as is
predicted by the theory. For the EH-TS, the evidence is more mixed. The EH-TS is often strongly
rejectedwithU.S.dollar(USD)interestrates, butforthecurrenciesofanumberofothercountries,
standard tests often fail to reject.2
2Campbell and Shiller (1991) and Bekaert, Hodrick, and Marshall (1997) examine the USD evidence. For other
currencies see Hardouvelis (1994), Gerlach and Smets (1997), Dahlquist and Jonsson (1995), and Bekaert, Hodrick,
and Marshall (1999).
3

There are three mainpotential reasons forthe rejectionofthe EHs. First, the EHsare basedon
theassumptionofrationalexpectationsandunlimitedarbitrage. Itmaybethatirrationalinvestors
make systematic forecast errors, and the ability of rational investors to profit from this situation
is limited by their risk aversion. Second, the presence of time-varying risk premiums means that
standard tests of the EHs omit the variables capturing the risk premium. If these variables are
correlated with interest rates, the estimated coefficients would be pulled away from those implied
bytheEHs. Third,theteststhemselvesmayleadtofalserejectionsbecauseoftheirpoorproperties
in finite samples, which can be caused by highly persistent variables, peso problems, or learning.3
Recently, Bekaert, Hodrick and Marshall (1997, 1999) and Valkanov (1998) have analyzed the poor
finite sample behavior of EH-TS tests, and Baillie and Bollerslev (1998), Maynard and Phillips
(1998), and Roll and Yan (1998) have argued that poor small-sample behavior may explain the
results of EH-FX tests. These papers note that if standard tests are poorly behaved in small
samples, inference based on standard asymptotic distribution theory is distorted, and alternative
methods of inference are necessary.
In this paper, we re-consider the EHs in a vector autoregressive (VAR) framework. Apart from
standardWaldtests, we alsoinvestigate Lagrange Multiplier(LM)andDistance Metric(DM)tests
that require imposition of the null hypothesis in the estimation. Because the restrictions of the
EH-TS are highly non-linear, estimating under these restrictions is generally a non-trivial exercise.
We develop an easy-to-implement procedure that extends the suggested estimator of Newey and
McFadden (1994) and that works quite well. Once we have estimated the VAR subject to the
constraints of the EHs, we can use this system as a data generating mechanism to investigate the
small-sample properties of the various tests. We find that the Wald test, the test predominantly
used in the literature, has by far the worst small-sample properties. Conducting inference with
Wald tests would therefore often be very mis-leading, since the sizes of the tests are quite poor.
The DM tests also overreject, but less strongly than the Wald tests. The LM tests, on the other
hand, are slightly conservative. Overall, the LM tests perform the best. When reconsidering the
evidence on the EHs for the USD, the Deutsche mark (DEM), and the British pound (GBP), we
find that inference with the small-sample distributions considerably weakens the case against the
EHs.
3An early reference to the small-sample problem is Mankiw and Shapiro (1986). Evans (1996) surveys the peso-
problem literature, and Lewis (1989) is an early example of the role of learning.
4