NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO CEOs SET THEIR OWN PAY?
THE ONES WITHOUT PRINCIPALS DO
Marianne Bertrand
Sendhil Mullainathan
Working Paper 7604
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7604
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2000
An earlier version of this paper was circulated under the title "Are CEOs Rewarded for Luck?" We are extremely
grateful to Daron Acemoglu, Rajesh Aggarwal, George Baker, Patrick Bolton, Peter Diamond, Robert Gibbons, Efi
Gildor, Denis Gromb, Brian Hall, Bengt Holmstrom, Caroline I-Ioxby, Glenn Hubbard, Lawrence Katz, Steve Kaplan,
Steve Pischke, Nancy Rose, David Scharfstein, Robert Shimer, Andrei Shleifer, Richard Thaler, and seminar
participants at Berkeley, Columbia, Chicago, Harvard, MIT, Princeton, and the NBER Corporate Finance Summer
Institute 1999 for very helpful comments. We thank Ken Ayotte and Michael Mitton for excellent research assistance,
Michael Haid for giving us access to his data set of oil companies, and David Yermack for giving us access to his data
on executive compensation. Financial support was provided by the Russell Sage Foundation, the Princeton Industrial
Relations Section and the Princeton Center for Economic Policy Studies. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
2000 by Marianne Bertrand and Sendhil Mullainathan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including notice, is given to
the source.

Do CEOs Set Their Own Pay? The Ones Without Principals Do
Marianne Bertrand and Sendhil Mullainathan
NBER Working Paper No. 7604
March 2000
JEL No. G3, J3, J4, L2
ABSTRACT
We empirically examine two competing views of CEO pay. In the contracting view, pay is
used to solve an agency problem: the compensation committee optimally chooses pay contracts which
give the CEO incentives to maximize shareholder wealth. In the skimming view, pay is the result of
an agency problem: CEOs have managed to capture the pay process so that they set their own pay,
constrained somewhat by the availability of cash or by a fear of drawing shareholders' attention. To
distinguish these views, we first examine how CEO pay responds to luck, observable shocks to
performance beyond the CEO's control. Using several measures of luck, such as changes in oil price
for the oil industry, we find substantial pay for luck. Pay responds about as much to a "lucky" dollar
as to a general dollar. Most importantly, we find that better governed firms pay their CEOs less for
luck. Our second test examines how much CEOs are charged for the options they are granted. Since
options never appear on balance sheets, they might offer an appealing way to skim. Here again we
find a crucial role for governance: CEOs in better governed firms are charged more for the options
they are given. These results suggest that both views of CEO pay matter. In poorly governed firms,
the skimming view fits better (pay for luck and little charge for options) while in well governed firms,
the contracting view fits better (filtering out of luck and charging for options).
Marianne Bertrand Sendhil Mullainathan
Department of Economics Department of Economics
Princeton University MIT
Industrial Relations Section 50 Memorial Drive, E52-380
Firestone Library Cambridge, MA 02173
Princeton, NJ 08544-2098 and NBER
and NIBER mullain@mit.edu
mbertran @princeton.edu

1 Introduction
There are two predominant ways to think about CEO pay. The first one, which we refer to as the
contracting view, relies on principal-agent models. Because CEOs often own very little of the firm
they control, shareholders face a classic moral hazard problem: CEOs may not always maximize
firm value in making their decisions. Under the contracting view, shareholders (acting through
the board or the compensation committee) use CEO pay to reduce moral hazard. Explicit pay
for performance, such as long term contracts or options, and implicit pay for performance, such
as a bonus payment, are all used by boards to increase CEOs' incentives to maximize shareholder
wealth.'
The second view, which we refer to as the skimming view, has been championed by practitioners
such as Crystal (1991). It also begins with the separation of ownership and control, but it argues
that this separation allows CEOs to gain control of the pay setting process itself. By packing the
board with their friends, or any other mean of entrenchment, many CEOs de facto set their own
pay. They skim what they can from shareholders, constrained perhaps by the amount of funds in
the firm, by an unwillingness to draw the attention of shareholder activist groups or by a fear of
becoming a takeover target. Within these constraints, however, they pay themselves as much as
possible. Whereas pay in the contracting view is an attempt to solve moral hazard, pay in the
skimming view is the result of moral hazard.
We propose two tests to differentiate these models. In the first test, we examine whether CEOs
'Murphy (1985, 1986) is a forerunner of the vast literature that has empirically analyzed CEO compensation
in the context of the principal-agent model. The resulting literature is summarized in Murphy (1999). The major
econometric work has been to test for value-optimizing incentive scheme by studying the correlation between pay
and perfbrmance. Jensen and Murphy (1990) use this framework to argue that political considerations constrain pay
so that incentives are too low. Joskow, Rose and Shepard (1993) empirically examine this argument in regulated
industries. Other tests of the agency framework can be found in Gibbons and Murphy (1990), who test for relative
performance evaluation and career concerns, Garen (1994) and Aggarwal and Samwick (1999a), who test for risk-
return tradeoffs, and Hubbard and Palia (1994) and Bertrand and Mullainathan (1998), who test whether pay
incentives substitute for other disciplining devices (competition and talceovers respectively).
3

are rewarded for observable luck. By luck, we mean changes in firm performance that are beyond
CEOs' control. In simple agency models, pay should not respond to luck since by definition the
CEO cannot influence luck. Tying pay to luck will not provide better incentives; it will only add
risk to the contract (Hohustrom, 1979).2 Under the skimming view, on the other hand, pay will
respond to luck since the CEO can divert those "lucky" dollars to pay herself as easily as she can
divert earned dollars.
To empirically examine the responsiveness of pay to luck, we use three different measures of
luck. First, we perform a case study of the oil industry where large movements in oil prices tend
to affect firm performance on a regular basis. Second, we use changes in industry-specific exchange
rate for firms in the traded goods sector. Third, we use year-to-year differences in mean industry
performance to proxy for the overall economic fortune of a sector. This last measure very much
resembles the approach followed in the relative performance evaluation literature. For all three
measures, we find that CEO pay responds to luck. In fact, we find that for all three luck measures
CEO pay is as sensitive to a "lucky dollar" as to a "general dollar."
This basic finding of pay for luck, however, can be explained by complicating the basic agency
model. For example, suppose boards wanted their CEOs to forecast or respond to luck shocks.
Tying pay to luck in this case may be necessary to provide better incentives. In. the oil industry,
rewarding the CEO after the fact for seeing an oil shock coming encourages him to keep his eyes
open before the fact. Alternatively, suppose the "value" of a CEO's human capital rises and falls
with industry fortunes. One would then find that pay correlates with luck because the CEO's
outside wage moves with luck.
While we will argue that these arguments may be incorrect, they motivate us to search for further
2Note our emphasis on observable luck. In any model, given the randomness of the world, CEOs (and almost
everybody else) will end up being rewarded for unobservable luck. Note also our emphasis on the fact that this
prediction holds in simple agency models. As we will discuss shortly, complications to the agency model can in
principle alter this result.
4