NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INFLATION TARGETING IN
EMERGING MARKET COUNTRIES
Frederic S. Mishkin
Working Paper 7618
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7618
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2000
Prepared for AEA Papers and Proceedings, May 2000 at the session “Inflation Targeting” held at the ASSA
meetings, Boston Mass., January 7, 2000, 2:30 p.m. I thank Miguel Savastano for his helpful comments.
The views expressed in this paper are exclusively those of the author and not those of Columbia University
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2000 by Frederic S. Mishkin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Inflation Targeting in Emerging Market Countries
Frederic S. Mishkin
NBER Working Paper No. 7618
March 2000
JEL No. E5
ABSTRACT
This paper outlines what inflation targeting involves for emerging market/transition countries
and discusses the advantages and disadvantages of this monetary policy strategy. The discussion
suggests that although inflation targeting is not a panacea and may not be appropriate for many
emerging market countries, it can be a highly useful monetary policy strategy in a number of them.
Frederic S. Mishkin
Graduate School of Business
Uris Hall 619
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
fsm3@columbia.edu

The unhappy experience of Latin American and East Asian countries with pegged
exchange rate regimes who subsequently found themselves in deep financial crises in the 1990s
has led emerging market economies to search for alternative nominal anchors. (I am including
transition countries in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union in the emerging market
category.) Targeting inflation, a monetary policy strategy which has been successfully used by
a number of industrialized countries, has thus become an increasingly attractive alternative that
has been adopted by a growing number of emerging market countries, including Chile, Brazil,
the Czech Republic, Poland and South Africa. In this paper, I outline what inflation targeting
involves for these countries and discuss the advantages and disadvantages of this monetary
policy strategy. The bottom line is that although inflation targeting is not a panacea and may
not be appropriate for many emerging market countries, it can be a highly useful monetary
policy in a number of them
I.
What Is Inflation Targeting?
Inflation targeting is a monetary policy strategy that encompasses five main elements: 1)
the public announcement of medium-term numerical targets for inflation; 2) an institutional
commitment to price stability as the primary goal of monetary policy, to which other goals are
subordinated; 3) an information inclusive strategy in which many variables, and not just monetary
aggregates or the exchange rate, are used for deciding the setting of policy instruments; 4)
increased transparency of the monetary policy strategy through communication with the public and
the markets about the plans, objectives, and decisions of the monetary authorities; and 5) increased
1

accountability of the central bank for attaining its inflation objectives. The list should clarify one
crucial point about inflation targeting: it entails much more than a public announcement of
numerical targets for inflation for the year ahead. This is important in the context of emerging
markets’ countries because many of them routinely reported numerical inflation targets or
objectives as part of the government's economic plan for the coming year, and yet their monetary
policy strategy should not be characterized as inflation targeting, which requires the other four
elements for it to be sustainable over the medium term.
II.
Advantages of Inflation Targeting
Inflation targeting has several advantages as a medium-term strategy for monetary
policy. In contrast to an exchange rate peg, inflation targeting enables monetary policy to focus
on domestic considerations and to respond to shocks to the domestic economy. In contrast to
monetary targeting, another possible monetary policy strategy, inflation targeting has the
advantage that a stable relationship between money and inflation is not critical to its success:
the strategy does not depend on such a relationship, but instead uses all available information
to determine the best settings for the instruments of monetary policy. Inflation targeting also
has the key advantage that it is easily understood by the public and is thus highly transparent.
Because an explicit numerical target for inflation increases the accountability of the
central bank, inflation targeting also has the potential to reduce the likelihood that the central
bank will fall into the time-inconsistency trap. Moreover, since the source of time-
inconsistency is often found in (covert or open) political pressures on the central bank to
undertake overly expansionary monetary policy, inflation targeting has the advantage of
2