NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DIMENSIONS OF CREDIT RISK AND THEIR
RELATIONSHIP TO ECONOMIC CAPITAL REQUIREMENTS
Mark Carey
Working Paper 7629
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7629
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2000
This paper was prepared as part of the NBER Project on Prudential Supervision of Financial Institutions and
presented at the NBER conference in January 2000. The views expressed herein are not necessarily those
of the Board of Governors, other members of its staff, the National Bureau of Economic Research, or the
Federal Reserve System. Thanks to Paul Calem, Ed Ettin, Mark Flannery, Michael Gordy, Mark Hrycay,
Patricia Jackson, David Jones, John Mingo, and Bill Treacy for useful conversations.
© 2000 by Mark Carey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Dimensions of Credit Risk and Their Relationship to Economic
Capital Requirements
Mark Carey
NBER Working Paper No. 7629
March 2000
ABSTRACT
Now in prospect is a major revision of international bank capital regulations that would
embody recent advances in credit risk measurement and management. Previous regulations have
been simpler in structure, with a primary goal of getting capital requirements right on average, and
thus have largely ignored the difference between average and marginal. This paper presents evidence
that explicit treatment in new regulations of several important dimensions of credit risk is necessary.
If such dimensions are compressed or ignored, capital arbitrage activities by banks are likely to
continue, leading to an increase in bank failure rates over time.
Mark Carey
Mail Stop 153,
Federal Reserve Board
Washington, DC 20551
and NBER
(202) 452-2784 (voice)
(202) 452-5295 (fax)
mcarey@frb.gov

1
A major revision of commercial bank capital adequacy regulations is now being
developed. Regulators are likely to change the treatment of a variety of types of risk, but a
primary focus of their effort is improvement of the manner in which the 1988 Basel Accord
handles credit risk. Currently, assets making vastly different contributions to portfolio credit risk
often receive similar regulatory capital treatment. Because equity is an expensive source of
finance, the resulting wedges between regulatory and economic capital allocations have created
strong incentives for banks to restructure their activities and balance sheets. For example, many
bank-sponsored securitizations are directed at removing from the balance sheet those assets with
relatively high marginal regulatory capital requirements but which contribute relatively little to
portfolio credit risk, such as credit card loans and loans to low-risk corporate borrowers (such
activity is often called “capital arbitrage”). In contrast, assets for which regulatory capital
requirements are too low tend to remain on the balance sheet. By boosting capital ratios, the
1988 Accord reduced bank insolvency risk in the years immediately after its adoption, but if
current trends continue to their logical conclusion, an unmodified Accord could in the end have
the perverse effect of greatly increasing banks’ portfolio risk postures and bank failure rates.
Moreover, any revision of the Accord that preserves first-order differences between regulatory
and economic capital requirements probably will be unsustainable in the long run.1
In a recent paper (Basel 1999), the Basel Supervisors Committee briefly outlined three
approaches to capital regulation: 1) a revised “standardized” approach architecturally similar to
the current Accord that would leave in place many distortions; 2) a “full models” approach,
similar to that now available for market risk, in which a bank’s internal models would compute
required regulatory capital for credit risk; and 3) an “internal ratings” approach in which credit
risk capital would be computed using formulas involving various relevant portfolio characteristics,
like the fraction of loans assigned each internal rating. The latter two approaches both would
attempt to make regulatory capital approximate economic capital, but in the internal ratings
1 “Economic capital requirements” for credit risk means the capital needed for a portfolio
such that the chance that credit losses exceed capital is no more than a specified small probability.
In many circumstances, economic capital would be the same as that needed to finance an asset or
portfolio in a free-market transaction with informed counterparties.

2
approach the parameters and architecture of the system would be set by regulators whereas in the
full models approach they would be set by banks and reviewed by regulators.2
A principal barrier to adoption of the full models and internal rating approaches is
technical uncertainty about the portfolio characteristics that drive credit risk. At least initially,
simpler formulas and models are preferred for their lower cost of implementation. However, to
avoid a continuation of serious distortions, regulations must take into account all first-order-
important determinants of portfolio credit risk. The main body of portfolio theory, which was
developed largely for equity portfolios and which suggests that correlations of individual loan
credit losses with systematic factors are the only relevant influence on portfolio risk, is of limited
use in identifying such determinants. The floating-rate loan portfolios typical of banks have a
large credit downside but only modest upside potential, which causes the credit loss distributions
for such portfolios to be skewed and to have very long bad tails (Figure 1). Though loss
correlations are important, factors like individual asset risk, portfolio size, and the behavior of
defaulted assets may also be important determinants of debt portfolio bad-tail loss rates.
Empirical uncertainty about the dimensions of credit risk exists among policymakers
because relatively few publicly available studies exist and because most such studies have used
one of the extant credit risk models to produce evidence. Models like CreditMetrics (Gupton,
Finger and Bhatia 1997) and the Oliver Wyman-like approach described in Ong (1999) estimate
loss rates at different percentiles of the bad tail conditional on portfolio composition. However,
model results are quite sensitive to assumptions about values of parameters that are extremely
difficult to observe, test, or even develop intuition about (Gordy 2000a). It is difficult to know
the reliability of evidence such models produce about the influence of a given portfolio
characteristic on bad tail loss rates and thus on economic capital requirements.
This paper uses the Monte Carlo resampling method of Carey (1998) to provide
nonparametric empirical evidence about the practical importance to portfolio bad tail loss rates of
2 All three approaches must specify required capital for risks other than credit, like interest
rate risk or operational risk. Although the full models approach has many desirable properties,
practical barriers to its implementation are such that the Basel Supervisors Committee is focusing
its attention on the standardized and internal rating approaches for possible near-term
implementation.