NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
GOVERNMENT OWNERSHIP OF BANKS
Rafael La Porta
Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes
Andrei Shleifer
Working Paper 7620
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7620
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2000
We are grateful to Thorsten Beck, Simeon Djankov, Edward Glaeser, Simon Johnson, Ross Levine, and Dani
Rodrik for helpful comments, to Karine Del Paso, Magdalena Lopez-Morton, Dmitry Rozhkov and Ekaterina
Trizlova for research assistance, and to the National Science Foundation and the Dean’s Research Fund at
the Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University for financial support of this research. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2000 by Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Government Ownership of Banks
Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 7620
March 2000
JEL No.G21, L32, O4
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we investigate a neglected aspect of financial systems of many countries around
the world: government ownership of banks. We assemble data which establish four findings. First,
government ownership of banks is large and pervasive around the world. Second, such ownership
is particularly significant in countries with low levels of per capita income, underdeveloped financial
systems, interventionist and inefficient governments, and poor protection of property rights. Third,
government ownership of banks is associated with slower subsequent financial development. Finally,
government ownership of banks is associated with lower subsequent growth of per capita income,
and in particular with lower growth of productivity rather than slower factor accumulation. This
evidence is inconsistent with the optimistic “development” theories of government ownership of
banks common in the 1960s, but supports the more recent “political” theories of the effects of
government ownership of firms.
Rafael La Porta Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes
Department of Economics Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University Harvard University
Littauer M7 79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138 Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER and NBER
rafael_laporta@harvard.edu f_lopezdesilanes@harvard.edu
Andrei Shleifer
Department of Economics
Littauer M9
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ashleifer@harvard.edu

I. Introduction.
This paper discusses a neglected aspect of financial systems of many countries:
government ownership of banks. It shows that such ownership is pervasive around the world,
especially in countries with poor institutions, and that it has significant consequences for resource
allocation and economic development.
There are two broad views of the government’s participation in financial markets. The
first, basically optimistic, “development” view is associated with Alexander Gerschenkron (1962),
who focuses on the necessity of financial development for economic growth. Gerschenkron
argues that privately owned commercial banks have been the crucial vehicle of channeling savings
to industry in several industrializing countries in the second half of the 19th century, especially
Germany. However, in some countries -- most conspicuously Russia -- economic institutions
were not sufficiently developed for private banks to play the crucial development role. “The
scarcity of capital in Russia was such that no banking system could conceivably succeed in
attracting sufficient funds to finance a large scale industrialization; the standards of honesty in
business were so disastrously low, the general distrust of the public so great, that no bank could
have hoped to attract even such small capital funds as were available, and no bank could have
successfully engaged in long term credit policies in an economy where fraudulent bankruptcy had
been almost elevated to the rank of a general business practice” (p. 19). In such countries, the
government could step in and through its financial institutions jump start both financial and
economic development. Thus in Russia in the 1890s, “it was the government that generally
fulfilled the function of industrial banks” (p.22), with salutary effects.
Gerschenkron’s view was part of a broader sentiment in development economics which
3

advocated government ownership of firms in the strategic economic sectors (see Shleifer 1998 for
a summary). W. Arthur Lewis (1950), for example, explicitly advocates government ownership
of banks, as part of the “commanding heights” approach whereby the government would develop
certain strategic industries through both direct ownership and control over finance. Myrdal
(1968) is sympathetic toward government ownership of banks in India and other Asian countries.
A few days before the October Revolution, Lenin laid out his own perspective on banking:
“Without big banks, socialism would be impossible. The big banks are the ‘state apparatus’ which
we need to bring about socialism, and which we take ready-made from capitalism...” (Lenin 1917,
quoted in Garvy 1977, p. 21). These ideas were widely adopted around the world, particularly in
the 1960s and the 1970s, with governments nationalizing the existing commercial banks and
starting new ones in Africa, Asia, and Latin America.
In contrast, a more recent “political” view of government ownership holds that
government control of finance, through its banks or otherwise, politicizes resource allocation for
the sake of getting votes or bribes for office holders, softens budget constraints, and lowers
economic efficiency (see, e.g., Kornai 1979, Shleifer and Vishny 1994). This view is buttressed
by considerable evidence documenting the inefficiency of government enterprises, the political
motives behind public provision of services, and the benefits of privatization (e.g, Megginson et
al. 1994, Barberis et al. 1996, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny 1997, Frydman et al. 1999,
La Porta and Lopez-de-Silanes 1999). Gerschenkron has some sympathy for this view: “There is
no doubt that the government as an agens movens of industrialization discharged its role in a far
less than perfectly efficient manner. Incompetence and corruption of bureaucracy were great.
The amount of waste that accompanied the process were formidable.” (p. 20). Still,
4