NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CONTROLS ON CAPITAL INFLOWS: DO THEY WORK?
José De Gregorio
Sebastian Edwards
Rodrigo O. Valdés
Working Paper 7645
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7645
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2000
This is a revised version of a paper presented at the 1998 IASE-NBER Conference. De Gregorio thanks
FONDECYT (Chile) research grant 1990063 for financial support. We thank Carlos dos Reis Carvalho,
Leonardo Hernández, Anne Krueger, Francisco Nadal-De-Simone, a referee, and conference participants for
helpful comments, María Inés Urbina for helpful conversations and the Balance of Payments Department of
the Central Bank of Chile for kindly preparing some data. We also thank Claudio Bravo, Francisco Gallego
and especially Cristóbal Huneeus for very excellent assistance. This paper presents the views of the authors
and does not represent in any way positions or views of the Central Bank of Chile or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
© 2000 by José De Gregorio, Sebastian Edwards, and Rodrigo O. Valdés. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Controls on Capital Inflows: Do they Work?
José De Gregorio, Sebastian Edwards, and Rodrigo O. Valdés
NBER Working Paper No. 7645
April 2000
JEL No. F21, F30, F32, F41
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes the effectiveness of capital controls, in particular the Chilean experience
with the use of the unremunerated reserve requirement. We examine the effects on interest rates,
real exchange rate, and the volume and composition of capital inflows. The effects are elusive and
it is difficult to pin down long-run effects. Although after the unremunerated reserve requirement
was introduced there was an increase in the interest rate differential, the econometric evidence does
not show it has a significant long-run effect on interest rate differentials. There are also no effects
on the real exchange rate. However, the more persistent and significant effect is on the composition
of capital inflows, tilting composition toward longer maturity.
José De Gregorio Sebastian Edwards
Universidad de Chile Anderson Graduate School of Business
UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C508
Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
sebastian.edwards@anderson.ucla.edu
Rodrigo O. Valdés
Banco Central de Chile
Agustinas 1180
Santiago, Chile
rvaldesx@condor.bcentral.cl

1 Introduction
In the aftermath of the East Asian, Russian and Brazilian currency crises, a number
of authors have argued that capital mobility can be highly destabilizing in emerging
markets. As a consequence, an increasing number of analysts - including senior World
Bank and IMF officials - have argued that, in order to prevent future crises, emerging
marketsshouldrestrictcapitalmobility. Inthisdiscussionadistinctionhasbeenmade
between controls on inflows and outflows, as well as on market-based-restrictions and
quantitative controls (Edwards 1999a,b). Most supporters of imposing some form of
market-based controls on capital inflows have argued that emerging countries should
implementasystemsimilartothatadoptedbyChileduringmostofthe1990s(Stiglitz
1999). In spite of the increasing popularity of controls on inflows, there has been very
limited empirical work on the subject. More specifically, to date there has been no
comprehensive attempt at evaluating the different aspects of Chile’s recent experience
with capital account restrictions.1
The purpose of this paper is to provide a detailed quantitative evaluation of the of
the Chile’s controls on capital inflows. Our goal is to cover as many angles as possible,
and we concentrate on the effects of the controls on the level and composition of
capital flows, and on real exchange rates. In an attempt to produce robust results we
examine the data, we use traditional econometrics, estimating reduced forms for the
actual flows, and we estimate a series of vector autoregressions (VARs).
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents an overview of the Chilean
macroeconomic experience during the last ten years and reviews some institutional
details related to the Chile’s unremunerated reserve requirements (URR) on capital
inflows. Section 3 discusses and quantifies the interest rate-equivalent cost of the
URR. Section 4 analyzes the impact of the URR on capital flows, its level and com-
position. Section 5 presents evidence on the effect of the URR on interest rates and
real exchnage rates using a semi-structural VAR approach. Finally, section 6 presents
some concluding remarks.
1However,therehavebeenseveralstudiesexaminingtheeffectsoftheURRusingavarietyofmethods. Apartial
list includes Vald´es-Prieto and Soto (1996, 1998), Budnevich and Le Fort (1997), Le Fort and Sanhueza (1997),
Laurens and Cardoso (1998), Soto (1998). Some of this work is reviewed in detail in Nadal-De-Simone and Sorsa
(1999), and more recently Gallego, Hern´andez and Schmidt-Hebbel (1999) revisit some of the issues we examine in
thispaper.
1

2 Overview
Between 1987 and 1997 the Chilean economy experienced a stellar performance, with
GDP growing in excess of 7.5% per year. This was the result of a combination of
a high rate of capital accumulation and fast productivity growth. Fixed investment
reached levels above 30% in 1995,and labor productivity grew at an average of 4.5%
per year during that period. These figures have no precedent in Chile’s economic
performance in the postwar period.
One of the major achievements during this period has been the reduction of infla-
tion to one-digit levels, quite a success in a country historically prone to very high
inflationary inertia. This result has been the combination of both monetary and fiscal
policies. On the money side the Central Bank – which has been independent since
1989 – has implemented tight monetary policy, via high interest rates, whenever sig-
nals of inflationary pressures appear. On the public finance side there has been a
permanent surplus in the budget between 1987 and 1998.
Since (at least) the mid 1980s Chile’s growth strategy has relied on a rapid expan-
sion of exports. This, in turn, has been the result of both Chile’s trade liberalization
strategy and the authorities’ efforts to maintain a depreciated real exchange rate (see
figure 1). During the early 1990s, however, Chile’s currency began to strengthened
in real terms. This was the result of a combination of factors, including the surge of
capital inflows into emerging markets in general, and Chile in particular; a positive
international environment; and the rapid growth in producticity (the Ricardo-Balassa
effect). The real exchange rate appreciated at average rates between 4 and 5% per
year between 1990 and 1997. Despite this appreciation, during this period exports
continued to grow strongly.
The massive capital inflows of the early 1990s also affected monetary policy. Since
the mid 1980s Chile’s Central Bank had pursued a disinflation policy based on real
interest rate targeting. However, after Chile regained access to international capital
markets, high domestic interest rates attracted foreign funds, putting pressure on
money creation. The URR allowed a differential in interest, but was certainly limited
by the magnitude of the URR. Figure 2 shows the difference between the forward dis-
count and the interest rate differential in Chile between 1994 and 1997. The forward
discount corresponds to UF/dollar 90-day forwards contracts while the interest rate
differential uses UF-indexed 90-day central bank notes and 90-day Libor in dollars.
2