NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CAPITAL GAINS TAXES AND STOCK REACTIONS TO
QUARTERLY EARNINGS ANNOUNCEMENTS
Jennifer L. Blouin
Jana Smith Raedy
Douglas A. Shackelford
Working Paper 7644
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7644
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2000
We appreciate the helpful comments from two anonymous referees, Jeff Abarbanell, Linda Bamber (editor),
Mary Barth, Merle Erickson, Robert Lipe, Sylvia Madeo (associate editor), Ed Maydew, Kevin Raedy, and
workshop participants at the 1999 Duke/North Carolina Accounting Research Fall Camp and the Duke/North
Carolina public finance workshop. We also acknowledge the contribution of I/B/E/S International Inc. for
providing earnings per share forecast data available through the Institutional Brokers Estimate System.
These data have been provided as part of a broad academic program to encourage earnings expectations.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the position of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2000 by Jennifer L. Blouin, Jana Smith Raedy, and Douglas A. Shackelford. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Capital Gains Taxes and Stock Reactions to Quarterly Earnings Announcements
Jennifer L. Blouin, Jana Smith Raedy, and Douglas A. Shackelford
NBER Working Paper No. 7644
April 2000
JEL No. H24, G12, G14
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the impact of capital gains taxes on equity pricing. Examining three-day
cumulative abnormal returns for quarterly earning announcements from 1983-1997, we present
evidence consistent with shareholders’ capital gains taxes affecting stock price responses. To our
knowledge, this is the first study to link shareholder taxes and share price responses to earnings
releases. The results imply that shares trade at higher (lower) prices when individual investors face
incremental taxes (tax savings) created by selling appreciated (depreciated) shares before they qualify
for long-term treatment. Unlike prior studies that have focused on price reactions in settings where
shareholder taxes are unusually salient (e.g., tax law changes, turn-of-the-year trading, or tax-
sensitive transactions), this study finds the imprint of capital gains taxes in a more general setting.
Jennifer L. Blouin Jana Smith Raedy
Kenan-Flagler Business School Kenan-Flagler Business School
Campus Box 3490, McColl Building Campus Box 3490, McColl Building
University of North Carolina University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3490 Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3490
Douglas A. Shackelford
Kenan-Flagler Business School
Campus Box 3490, McColl Building
University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3490
and NBER
doug_shack@unc.edu

Capital Gains Taxes and Stock Reactions to Quarterly Earnings Announcements
I. INTRODUCTION
No issue is more fundamental to accounting, finance, and economics than price
formation. Many accounting studies investigate whether taxes are a determinant of prices.
Settings include merger and acquisition premiums (e.g., Hayn 1989; Erickson 1998; Erickson
and Wang 1999; Maydew, Schipper and Vincent 1999; Henning, Shaw and Stock 2000; Henning
and Shaw 2000; Ayers, Lefanowicz and Robinson 2000), non-equity securities (e.g., Shackelford
1991; Guenther, 1994; Engel, Erickson and Maydew 1999), leases (e.g., Stickney, Weil and
Wolfson, 1983), research and development (e.g., Berger 1993), and insurance (e.g., Ke, Petroni
and Shackelford, 2000). A particularly active area in accounting is the impact of investor-level
taxes (dividends and capital gains) on share prices (Dhaliwal and Trezevant 1993; Landsman and
Shackelford 1995; Erickson 1998; Erickson and Maydew 1998; Blouin, Raedy, and Shackelford
1999; Guenther 1999; Guenther and Willenborg 1999; Harris and Kemsley 1999; Collins, Hand
and Shackelford 2000; Collins and Kemsley 2000; Gentry, Kemsley and Mayer 2000; Harris,
Hubbard, and Kemsley 2000; Lang and Shackelford 2000; among others).
This paper extends this literature to analyze the impact of shareholders’ capital gains
taxes on stock price responses to quarterly earnings announcements. This enables us to assess
whether price movements associated with capital gains tax incentives exist in a generalized
setting. Focusing on a public disclosure of primary interest to accountants, quarterly earnings
announcements, we predict that the price-earnings relation varies with measures involving the
spread between long-term and short-term capital gains tax rates, whether the news is good or
bad, and the stock performance during the preceding holding period (currently one year). The

wider the spread, the better the news, and the greater the past price appreciation, the more likely
individual capital gains tax incentives apply upward price pressure around the earnings release.
The intuition behind these relations is straightforward. Suppose a public disclosure, such
as an earnings announcement, induces investors to rebalance their portfolio. If sellers are
individuals who have held the stock for less than one year, any gains will be taxed at the federal
short-term capital gains tax rate (currently capped at 39.6 percent). If the individual investors
had intended to hold the stock until it qualified for long-term capital gains tax rates (currently
capped at 20 percent), then investors must trade-off the benefits of rebalancing with the tax costs
of selling (i.e., taxes under short-term treatment versus taxes under long-term treatment).
Under such conditions, good (bad) news disclosures can constrict (expand) the supply of
equity, creating upward (downward) price pressure (see Shackelford and Verrecchia 2000).
Thus, for good news, it may be necessary for buyers to compensate sellers through higher prices
for incremental taxes associated with short-term capital gains taxes. For bad news disclosures,
sellers may accept less compensation to garner favorable short-term capital losses.
Unrealized gains and losses associated with past stock performance further complicate
the sales decision. If the stock has appreciated during the long-term capital gains holding period,
sellers can face incremental short-term capital gains taxes, whether the news is good or bad.
Thus, sellers may demand compensation through higher prices for incremental taxes. Likewise,
if the stock has depreciated, sellers may enjoy favorable short-term capital loss treatment,
whether the news is good or bad.1 Therefore, sellers may accept lower prices to ensure favorable
1 Another potential price determinant is the “lock-in” effect of the capital gains tax. Similar to the tax incentives to
defer selling until shares qualify for long-term treatment, which this study investigates, the lock-in effect is the
incentive to defer selling appreciated property, thus postponing taxation indefinitely. Unlike the individual short-
term/long-term tradeoffs that are the focus of this study, the lock-in effect applies to all taxable taxpayers, individual
and other, and applies regardless of the holding period. The empirical tests in this study include an explanatory
variable to control for any possible lock-in effects.
2