NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
OHLIN VERSUS STOLPER-SAMUELSON?
Douglas A. Irwin
Working Paper 7641
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7641
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2000
This paper was prepared for the Centennial Celebration of Bertil Ohiln, Stockholm, Sweden, October 14-16,
1999. I wish to thank Don Davis, Carl Hamilton, Ron Jones, and Robert Margo for helpful comment,
William Congdon for research assistance, and the NSF for financial support. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the position of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2000 by Douglas A. Irwin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Ohlin Versus Stolper-Samuelson?
Douglas A. Irwin
NBER Working Paper No. 7641
April 2000
JEL No. F13, F16, N71
ABSTRACT
This paper examines Bertil Ohlin’s analysis of trade policy and factor rewards in the context
of the late nineteenth and early twentieth century United States. A leading question of the day was
whether labor could benefit from protection. Ohlin suspected that labor could benefit from
protection and his writings helped spawn the Stolper-Samuelson theorem, which was different from
but consistent with Ohlin’s approach. This paper seeks to find evidence on whether U.S. tariffs on
imported labor-intensive manufactures helped enhance the income of labor at the expense of capital
and land. The answer is unclear: vastly different conclusions arise from a calibrated general
equilibrium Ohlin-style model and a factor content of trade calculation, and indirect evidence from
lobbying and voting patterns over the tariff are also ambiguous.
Douglas A. Irwin
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
douglas.irwin@dartmouth.edu

1. Introduction
Anyone who has dipped into Interregional and International Trade (1933) knows that Bertil
Ohlin’s theoretical vision was much broader than the standard two-factor, two-good model that has
been handed down to us as the textbook Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson model of international trade.
Ohlin not only set out a theory of trade based on factor proportions, but also investigated trade in
relation to increasing returns to scale, economic geography, international factor movements, and a host
of other topics that continue to be active areas of economic research.
While Ohlin’s principal contribution will always be the sharp focus on relative factor abundance
as a force driving international trade, his broad and eclectic approach is evident even here. An example
of this is his treatment of the effects of product price changes, including those induced by trade policy
interventions, on relative factor prices and factor incomes. At the time Ohlin wrote, the prevailing view
of Frank Taussig (1927) and others was that while specific factors may be harmed as a result of free
trade, mobile factors (such as labor) would be insulated from any potential losses precisely because of
their mobility across sectors. In his analysis, Ohlin advanced the contrary notion that the scarce factor
of production might benefit from protection, regardless of its ability to move between sectors. This
conflict between the then prevailing view and Ohlin’s novel approach, which he did not fully spell out,
spawned the classic paper by Wolfgang Stolper and Paul Samuelson (1941), who used a two-factor,
two-good model to develop what we now know as the “Stolper-Samuelson” theorem.1
1 Samuelson (1994, p. 343) relates that Stolper asked him, “How can Haberler and Taussig be
right about the necessary harm to a versatile factor like labor from America’s tariff, when the Ohlin
theory entails that free trade must hurt the factor of production that is scarce relative to land?” Precisely

-2-
Yet it is not clear that Ohlin would have endorsed the Stolper-Samuelson framework as the
most appropriate one in which to analyze the question of trade policy and factor returns. Ohlin himself
analyzed the effects of trade policy on factor prices in a broader three-factor framework that included
land, labor, and capital. Samuelson (1971) also recognized the important differences between Ohlin’s
implicit model and that of the two-factor, two-good model, but more in the context of factor price
equalization rather than Stolper-Samuelson theorem.
The first question posed by this paper is whether Ohlin’s own theory of the factor price
response to tariff intervention is consistent with the Stolper-Samuelson theorem. This question is
addressed first by setting out Ohlin’s theory and then selecting among the multitude of extant three-
factor models the one that seems most congruent with his framework. That model turns out to be the
one described by Fred Gruen and Max Corden (1970), which blends elements of the specific-factor
model and the standard Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson model. This model was also the basis for Anne
Krueger’s (1977) analysis of trade and development and has been further explored by Alan Deardorff
(1984) and Edward Leamer (1987).
At the time when Ohlin was writing, the issue of whether labor could benefit from protection
was a burning controversy among international economists, particularly in the context of the United
States and Australia.2 This question is now a live one for economic historians. Therefore the second
question posed by this paper is whether in fact Ohlin’s theory was correct in predicting that labor could
that question prompted the fruitful collaboration.
2 Indeed, the “Australian” case for protection hinged on exactly this issue; see chapter 11 of
Irwin (1996).