NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THEORETICAL ANALYSIS REGARDING A ZERO LOWER
BOUND ON NOMINAL INTEREST RATES
Bennett T. McCallum
Working Paper 7677
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7677
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2000
This paper was prepared for the October 18-20, 1999, conference “Monetary Policy in a Low Inflation
Environment,” hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. The author is indebted to Miguel Casares,
Larry Christiano, Marvin Goodfriend, Dale Henderson, Allan Meltzer, Edward Nelson, Athanasios
Orphanides, Neil Wallace, Alex Wolman, and Michael Woodford for helpful comments and suggestions.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2000 by Bennett T. McCallum. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Theoretical Analysis Regarding a Zero Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates
Bennett T. McCallum
NBER Working Paper No. 7677
April 2000
JEL No. E40, E50, F41
ABSTRACT
This paper explores several issues concerning a possible zero lower bound (ZLB) including
its theoretical rationale; the magnitude of effects of low sustained inflation on real interest rates; the
validity of analyzing monetary policy in models with no monetary variables; and the dynamic
stabilizing properties of Taylor rules in a ZLB context. The most important argument, however, is
that if the short nominal rate is immobilized at zero, there nevertheless exists a route for monetary
stabilization policy to be effective--- via the foreign exchange market. Its quantitative importance
is examined in a calibrated, optimizing, open-economy model.
Bennett T. McCallum
Graduate School of Industrial Administration
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
Tel. (412) 268-2347 Fax (412) 268-7357
and NBER, and Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
bm05@andrew.cmu.edu

1. Introduction
The object of this paper is to explore theoretical issues relating to the idea that
there exists a zero lower bound on nominal interest rates and to the possibility that such a
bound might interfere with the conduct of monetary policy in an environment of low
inflation. The possibility of such an impediment has been mentioned over the years by
Vickrey (1954), Phelps (1972), Okun (1981), and Summers (1991); recently it has been
analyzed quantitatively by Fuhrer and Madigan (1997), Rotemberg and Woodford
(1997), Orphanides and Wieland (1998), Wolman (1998), Reifschneider and Williams
(1999), and possibly others. There has been little explicit theoretical analysis, however,
the main exception that I am aware of being some work in progress by Woodford (1999).
Interest in the subject of a zero lower bound—which will be abbreviated below as
ZLB—has been greatly enhanced in recent years by the success that central banks have
had in reducing average inflation rates to the range of 1-3 percent (per annum), and by
the failure of Japanese stabilization policy to prevent a prolonged macroeconomic slump
in which short-term nominal interest rates1 have fallen to figures approximating zero.
Many writers have suggested, especially in the journalistic literature, that such a situation
leaves a central bank helpless to provide macroeconomic stimulus. This point of view
has been contested by Goodfriend (1997), Krugman (1999), Meltzer (1999), and others.
The discussion below takes up a number of distinct issues and utilizes a variety of
analytical models. It begins in Section 2 with a simple but explicit analysis of the source
of a possible ZLB on interest rates. Next, Section 3 introduces an argument to the effect
1 Henceforth, the term “interest rate” should be understood to mean nominal interest, unless the modifier
“real” is included or very obviously implied.
1

that most formal analysis has overstated the restrictiveness of the ZLB by failing to
recognize forces that tend to raise steady-state real rates of interest when maintained (i.e.,
policy target) inflation rates are lowered. Section 4 returns to models with inflation-
invariant steady-state real rates and reconsiders the popular practice of analyzing
monetary policy in models with no monetary variables. It is argued that neglect of
monetary variables is theoretically inappropriate, but probably not quantitatively
important. The main analysis, concerning the effectiveness of monetary policy in a ZLB
situation, is put forth in Sections 5 and 6. The first of these argues that if the one-period
nominal interest rate is for some reason fixed at zero (or some other value), there is
nevertheless a route for monetary stabilization policy operating via the foreign exchange
market. Then in Section 6 the quantitative importance of this stabilization approach is
investigated by means of a structural macroeconomic model developed and utilized
previously. Section 7 takes up a somewhat esoteric topic concerning dynamic stability
analysis and expresses disagreement with some alarming views recently put forth.
Finally, Section 8 provides a concluding overview. Because of the variety of topics
considered, different models are used from section to section. Unfortunately, some
accompanying changes in notation are needed, to which the reader should be alert.
2. The Source of a Zero Lower Bound
Let us begin with an elementary but explicit analysis of the theoretical basis for
the common-sense belief that nominal interest rates cannot be negative. For this purpose
it will be useful to consider an extremely simple general equilibrium model that abstracts
from uncertainty and sticky prices, both of which will be introduced later in the paper.
Thus we imagine an economy populated by a large number of identical (but
2