NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FORECASTING CRASHES: TRADING VOLUME, PAST RETURNS
AND CONDITIONAL SKEWNESS IN STOCK PRICES
Joseph Chen
Harrison Hong
Jeremy C. Stein
Working Paper 7687
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7687
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2000
We are grateful to the National Science Foundation for research support, and to John Campbell, Kent Daniel,
Ken Froot, Ravi Jagannathan, Chris Lamoreaux, Ken Singleton, an anonymous referee and seminar
participants at Cornell, HBS, Northwestern, Stanford, Arizona, Maryland, Texas and the NBER for helpful
comments and suggestions. Thanks also to Jun Pan for generously sharing her option-pricing software with
us. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2000 by Joseph Chen, Harrison Hong and Jeremy C. Stein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Forecasting Crashes: Trading Volume, Past Returns
and Conditional Skewness in Stock Prices
Joseph Chen, Harrison Hong and Jeremy C. Stein
NBER Working Paper No. 7687
May 2000
JEL No. G12, G14
ABSTRACT
This paper is an investigation into the determinants of asymmetries in stock returns. We
develop a series of cross-sectional regression specifications which attempt to forecast skewness in
the daily returns of individual stocks. Negative skewness is most pronounced in stocks that have
experienced: 1) an increase in trading volume relative to trend over the prior six months; and 2)
positive returns over the prior thirty-six months. The first finding is consistent with the model of
Hong and Stein (1999), which predicts that negative asymmetries are more likely to occur when there
are large differences of opinion among investors. The latter finding fits with a number of theories,
most notably Blanchard and Watson’s (1982) rendition of stock-price bubbles. Analogous results
also obtain when we attempt to forecast the skewness of the aggregate stock market, though our
statistical power in this case is limited.
Joseph Chen Jeremy C. Stein
Stanford Business School Harvard Business School
Stanford University Morgan 361
Stanford, CA 94305 Boston, MA 02163
chenjs@leland.stanford.edu MIT Sloan School of Management
and NBER
jstein@hbs.edu
Harrison Hong
Stanford Business School
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
hghong@leland.stanford.edu

I. Introduction
Aggregate stock-market returns are asymmetrically distributed. This asymmetry can be
measured in several ways. First, and most simply, the very largest movements in the market are
usually decreases, rather than increases—that is, the stock market is more prone to melt down
than to melt up. For example, of the ten biggest one-day movements in the S&P 500 since 1947,
nine were declines.1 Second, a large literature documents that market returns exhibit negative
skewness, or a closely related property, “asymmetric volatility”—a tendency for volatility to go
up with negative returns.2 Finally, since the crash of October 1987, the prices of stock-index
options have been strongly indicative of a negative asymmetry in returns, with the implied
volatilities of out-of-the-money puts far exceeding those of out-of-the-money calls; this pattern
has come to be known as the “smirk” in index implied volatilities.3
While the existence of negative asymmetries in market returns is generally not disputed,
it is less clear what underlying economic mechanism these asymmetries reflect. Perhaps the
most venerable theory is based on leverage effects (Black (1976), Christie (1982)), whereby a
drop in prices raises operating and financial leverage, and hence the volatility of subsequent
returns. However, it appears that leverage effects are not of sufficient quantitative importance to
explain the data (Schwert (1989), Bekaert and Wu (1997)). This is especially true if one is
interested in asymmetries at a relatively high frequency, e.g., in daily data. To explain these, one
has to argue that intra-day changes in leverage have a large impact on volatility—that a drop in
1 Moreover, the one increase—of 9.10 percent on October 21, 1987—was right on the heels of the 20.47 percent
decline on October 19, and arguably represented a correction of the microstructural distortions that arose on that
chaotic day, rather than an independent price change.
2 If, in a discrete-time setting, a negative return in period t raises volatility in period t+1 and thereafter, returns
measured over multiple periods will be negatively skewed, even if single-period returns are not. The literature on
these phenomena includes Pindyck (1984), French, Schwert and Stambaugh (1987), Campbell and Hentschel
(1992), Nelson (1991), Engle and Ng (1993), Glosten, Jagannathan and Runkle (1993), Braun, Nelson and Sunier
(1995), Duffee (1995), Bekaert and Wu (1997) and Wu (1997).
1

prices on Monday morning leads to a large increase in leverage and hence in volatility by
Monday afternoon, so that overall, the return for the full day Monday is negatively skewed.
An alternative theory is based on a “volatility feedback” mechanism. As developed by
Pindyck (1984), French, Schwert and Stambaugh (1987), Campbell and Hentschel (1992) and
others, the idea is as follows: When a large piece of good news arrives, this signals that market
volatility has increased, so the direct positive effect of the good news is partially offset by an
increase in the risk premium. On the other hand, when a large piece of bad news arrives, the
direct effect and the risk-premium effect now go in the same direction, so the impact of the news
is amplified. While the volatility-feedback story is in some ways more attractive than the
leverage-effects story, there are again questions as to whether it has the quantitative kick that is
needed to explain the data. The thrust of the critique, first articulated by Poterba and Summers
(1986), is that shocks to market volatility are for the most part very short-lived, and hence cannot
be expected to have a large impact on risk premia.
A third explanation for asymmetries in stock-market returns comes from stochastic
bubble models of the sort pioneered by Blanchard and Watson (1982). The asymmetry here is
due to the popping of the bubble—a low-probability event that produces large negative returns.
What the leverage-effects, volatility-feedback and bubble theories all have in common is
that they can be cast in a representative-investor framework.4 In contrast, a more recent
explanation of return asymmetries, Hong and Stein (1999), argues that investor heterogeneity is
central to the phenomenon. The Hong-Stein model rests on two key assumptions: 1) there are
differences of opinion among investors as to fundamental value; and 2) some—though not all—
3 See, e.g., Bates (1997), Bakshi, Cao and Chen (1997), and Dumas, Fleming and Whaley (1998).
4 This is not to say that all bubble models adopt a representative-agent approach—only that their central prediction
of return asymmetries does not require investor heterogeneity. For a more recent bubble model that explicitly
2