NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DID U.S. BANK SUPERVISORS GET
TOUGHER DURING THE CREDIT CRUNCH?
DID THEY GET EASIER DURING THE BANKING BOOM?
DID IT MATTER TO BANK LENDING?
Allen N. Berger
Margaret K. Kyle
Joseph M. Scalise
Working Paper 7689
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7689
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2000
The opinions expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the Board of Governors, its staff or the NBER.
The authors thank our discussant, Steve Cecchetti, the conference organizer Rick Mishkin, and other
participants at the NBER Conference on “Prudential Supervision: What Works and What Doesn’t,” as well
as Bob Avery, Kevin Bertsch, Mark Carey, Sally Davies, Al Gilbert, and Diana Hancock for helpful
comments and Kelly Bryant for outstanding research assistance.
© 2000 by Allen N. Berger, Margaret K. Kyle, and Joseph M. Scalise. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Did U.S. Bank Supervisors Get Tougher During the Credit Crunch? Did They Get Easier
During the Banking Boom? Did It Matter to Bank Lending?
Allen N. Berger, Margaret K. Kyle, and Joseph M. Scalise
NBER Working Paper No. 7689
May 2000
JEL No. G21, G28, G38, E44, E58
ABSTRACT
We test three hypotheses regarding changes in supervisory “toughness” and their effects on bank
lending. The data provide modest support for all three hypotheses — that there was an increase in toughness
during the credit crunch period (1989-1992), that there was a decline in toughness during the boom period
(1993-1998), and that changes in toughness, if they occurred, affected bank lending. However, all of the
measured effects are small, with 1% or less of loans receiving harsher or easier classification, about 3% of
banks receiving better or worse CAMEL ratings, and bank lending being changed by 1% or less of assets.
Allen N. Berger Margaret K. Kyle
Mail Stop 153 MIT
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 50 Memorial Drive
20th and C Streets, NW Cambridge, MA 02142
Washington, DC 20551
and Wharton Financial Institutions Center
aberger@frb.gov
Joseph M. Scalise
Bain & Company
Boston, MA 02116

1. Introduction
The main goals of bank supervision are generally to act as a delegated monitor on behalf of insured
depositors or other stakeholders, to protect the safety and soundness of the financial system, and to counteract the
moral hazard incentives created by the government safety net. However, changes in supervisory policy also may
have significant effects on macroeconomic or regional economic health if banks respond by altering their lending
behavior. These additional effects may be intended or unintended. For example, supervisors may intend that
some risky institutions reduce their lending. However, if too many institutions reduce their supplies of credit
simultaneously, this may create an unintended credit crunch or recession. Supervisors alternatively may try to
stimulate lending through supervisory easing. We discuss below some reasons to suspect that supervisory changes
over the last decade or so may have had significant effects on the overall lending of the U.S. banking industry.
The purpose of this research is to investigate this possibility by testing three hypotheses about whether
supervisors changed their policies and whether these policy changes affected bank lending behavior:
H1: U.S. bank supervisors got “tougher” on banks during the “credit crunch period” of 1989-1992, treating banks
of a given financial condition more harshly than in previous years.
H2: U.S. bank supervisors got “easier” on banks during the “boom period” of 1993-1998, treating banks of a
given financial condition less harshly than in prior periods.
H3: Changes in supervisory toughness, if they did occur, changed bank lending behavior in the predicted
directions.
If these hypotheses are true, they may help explain part of the observed wide swings in aggregate bank lending to
business during the 1990s, and may imply a larger role for financial supervision in the performance of the
economy than was previously thought. We test these hypotheses using information on the supervisory process,
confidential data on classified assets and CAMEL ratings from bank examinations, bank balance sheet and income
data, and other variables for the condition of the bank, its state, and its region over the period 1986-1998.
Although we test these hypotheses separately, they are all intertwined in the overall question of the effects
of changes in supervision. Hypotheses H1 (increase in toughness during the credit crunch) and H3 (it mattered to
bank lending) are both necessary conditions for changes in bank supervision to have played a major role in causing
the decline in lending and recession during credit crunch period. Similarly, H2 (decline in toughness during the
boom) and H3 (it mattered to bank lending) are necessary for changes in bank supervision to have played a major
role in causing the increase in lending and economic expansion during the boom period. Finally, if all three

2
hypotheses are true, this may imply that supervisory actions have greater effects on the macroeconomy than is
generally recognized.
To put these issues into context, we note that the period around 1989-1992 is often referred to as a “credit
crunch” in the U.S., in which commercial banks substantially reduced their lending to business customers,
although some researchers choose slightly different dates for the credit crunch period. From 1989 to 1992,
domestic commercial and industrial (C&I) loans held by U.S. banks fell by about 23% in real terms. This decline
may have been particularly difficult for bank-dependent small and medium-sized businesses, which often have few
alternatives for external finance. Rough estimates based on a sample of banks responding to the Federal Reserve’s
Survey of Terms of Bank Lending are consistent with this presumption, suggesting declines in business loans to
borrowers with bank credit less than $1 million on the order of 38% (Berger, Kashyap, and Scalise 1995).
Surveys of small business owners also suggest that it was more difficult for these firms to obtain credit during the
credit crunch period (e.g., Dunkelberg and Dennis 1992, Avery, Bostic, and Samolyk 1998).
A number of hypotheses for the decline in bank credit during the credit crunch period have been tested —
including changes in bank capital requirements and other regulations - and the results are reviewed below. Here
we test one theory that has been suggested by the popular press, supervisory agencies, and academic researchers
— that a combination of Hypotheses H1 (increase in supervisory toughness) and H3 (this toughness mattered to
lending) may be at least partly responsible for the reduced lending (e.g., Bacon and Bleakley 1991, Syron 1991,
Bizer 1993, Peek and Rosengren 1995a).
An increase in supervisory toughness could explain a reduction in lending as follows. An unfavorable
examination rating may be burdensome to a bank because supervisors often require poorly rated institutions to take
costly actions to improve their condition (e.g., raising additional equity capital), or because poorly rated banks may
be prohibited from engaging in some profitable activities by prompt corrective action rules or supervisory
discretion. Banks may try to reverse the supervisory burdens of an unfavorable rating by reducing their perceived
risk, and one way to do so is to reduce lending.
This explanation may be broader than it first appears because it incorporates the changes in capital
requirements and other regulatory changes during the credit crunch period to the extent that they were enforced
through the supervisory process. That is, to the extent that risk-based capital requirements, leverage capital