NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DOES DISTANCE STILL MATTER? THE INFORMATION
REVOLUTION IN SMALL BUSINESS LENDING
Mitchell A. Petersen
Raghuram G. Rajan
Working Paper 7685
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7685
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2000
Petersen thanks the Banking Research Center at Northwestern University’s Kellogg School while Rajan
thanks the Center for Research in Security Prices and the Center for the Study of the State and the Economy
at the University of Chicago, as well as the National Science Foundation for support. The research assistance
of Spencer Chen is greatly appreciated. The views expressed here are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2000 by Mitchell A. Petersen and Raghuram G. Rajan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Does Distance Still Matter? The Information Revolution in Small Business Lending
Mitchell A. Petersen and Raghuram G. Rajan
NBER Working Paper No. 7685
May 2000
JEL No. G20, G21, E50, E58
ABSTRACT
The distance between small firms and their lenders in the United States is increasing. Not
only are firms choosing more distant lenders, they are also communicating with them in more
impersonal ways. After documenting these systematic changes, we demonstrate that they do not stem
from small firms locating differently, from simple consolidation in the banking industry, or from
biases in the sample. Instead, they seem correlated with improvements in bank productivity. We
conjecture that greater, and more timely, availability of borrower credit records, as well as the greater
ease of processing these may explain the increased lending at a distance. Consistent with such an
explanation, distant firms no longer have to be observably the highest quality credits, suggesting that
a wider cross-section of firms can now obtain funding from a particular lender. These findings, we
believe, are direct evidence that there has been substantial development of the financial sector in the
United States, even in areas such as small business lending that have not been directly influenced
by the growth in public markets. From a policy perspective, that small firms now obtain wider access
to financing suggests the consolidation of banking services may not raise as strong anti-trust
concerns as in the past.
Mitchell A. Petersen Raghuram G. Rajan
Kellogg Graduate School of Management The University of Chicago
Northwestern University Graduate School of Business
2001 Sheridan Road 1101 E 58th Street
Evanston, Illinois 60208-0814 Chicago, Illinois 60637
and NBER
raghuram.rajan@gsb.uchicago.edu

Small business lending has historically been very costly, because of the paucity of information
about small firms and the high costs of the personnel required to obtain even that information. There
has, however, been a strong trend in small business lending; small businesses have been growing
steadily more distant from their lenders. This demonstrates itself in two ways.
First, borrowers are becoming physically more distant from lenders. The distance between
small firms and their lenders has grown from an average of 51 miles for lending relationships that
began in the seventies to 161 miles for relationships that began in the nineties. A similar pattern can
be seen in the medians and seventy-fifth percentiles and across different kinds of lenders (see Table
I). While banks are indeed closer to their clients than other lenders – reflecting the greater
transactions and information intensive nature of bank lending – even banks have been moving away;
from an average of 16 miles for lending relationships that began in the seventies to 68 miles for
relationships that began in the nineties.
A second trend is that the method of transacting business has moved increasingly from
personal contact to using the phone or the mail. This trend is partly a result of the first one, but even
correcting for physical distance, there seems to be a change in the manner of doing business.
What accounts for this trend? We show that changes in the location of small businesses,
consolidation in the banking industry, and sample selection biases, are unlikely explanations. One
possible explanation of the trend, however, is that a variety of infomediaries such as credit bureaus
now exist. They collect information on payment history and defaults that hitherto used to be available
to a lender only after a long relationship. Advances in storage technology and computing allow these
data to be easily retrieved, processed, and communicated quickly. As a result, even distant lenders
have timely information that hitherto used to be soft and unavailable at arm’s length. Not only does
1

this reduce information asymmetries between lender and borrower, but also timely information
enables lenders to react quickly to unanticipated contingencies, minimizing the loss from borrower
malfeasance or incompetence. Consistent with this conjecture, we show that the increase in distance
is strongly positively correlated with measures of bank productivity, suggesting that reductions in the
cost of gathering and analyzing information may indeed explain the results.
If greater, and timely, availability of information about credit history is indeed part of the
explanation for why loans can now be made at a distance, we should find that distance is no longer
such a strong predictor of credit quality as in the past. Intuitively, in the past only unimpeachable
borrowers would have obtained credit at a distance because the costs of detecting potential borrower
distress or malfeasance, and resolving it, would have been prohibitively high for a distant lender. But
if these costs have fallen, then riskier credits should now be obtaining finance at a distance.
We do find that even though lender distance is a good indicator of creditworthiness, it is less
important a measure now than in the past. This suggests weaker credits are obtaining loans at a
distance. Consistent with our argument that lenders are better able to monitor and control these
credits, we do not find a commensurate increase in lender loan losses over our sample period. We
therefore conclude the evidence is consistent with greater information availability being responsible
for the increasing distance between lender and borrower.
Small business lending is indeed the final frontier in financial development. That even this
frontier is being breached is suggestive of the dramatic effects of technology. The implications of the
breach can be large indeed. Small businesses are important, in part because most businesses start this
way, in part because they have traditionally been associated with innovation, and in part because,
increasingly, more of the employment in the United States is concentrated in this sector (see Davis
2