NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MERIT MOTIVES AND GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION:
PUBLIC FINANCE IN REVERSE
Casey B. Mulligan
Tomas J. Philipson
Working Paper 7698
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7698
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2000
We appreciate the comments of Gary Becker, Ralph Chami, Don Coursey, Tom DeLeire, Will Dow, Matt
Kahn, Bob Michael, Derek Neal, Charmaine Picard, Eric Posner, Sherwin Rosen, Xavier Sala-i-Martin,
seminar participants at Clemson University, Northwestern University, Rice University, The University of
Chicago, The University of Quebec at Hull, and the Health-, Aging-, and Productivity Groups of The NBER.
Research assistance of Peter Ho, Lars Lefgren, Rob McMillan, and Allison Schrager is also greatly
appreciated. Mulligan’s work is generously supported by a grant from the Smith-Richardson Foundation to
the Stigler Center for the Study of the Economy and the State. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2000 by Casey B. Mulligan and Tomas J. Philipson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Merit Motives and Government Intervention: Public Finance in Reverse
Casey B. Mulligan and Tomas J. Philipson
NBER Working Paper No. 7698
May 2000
JEL No. H11, H22, H23, L51
ABSTRACT
A common view in public finance is that there is an efficiency-redistribution tradeoff in
which distortions are tolerated in order to redistribute income. However, the fact that so much
public- and private redistributive activity involves in-kind transfers rather than cash may be
indicative of merit motives on the part of the payers rather than a preference for the well-being of
the recipients. Efficiency-enhancing public policy in a merit good economy has the primary purpose
of creating distortions and may only redistribute income from rich to poor in order to create those
distortions – the reverse of the conventional efficiency-redistribution tradeoff. We discuss why the
largest programs on the federal and local level in the US – including Social Security, Medicare and
Medicaid, and Public Schooling – seem consistent with the reverse tradeoff rather than the classic
one. Transfers are not lump sum in a merit good economy, and explicitly accounting for this when
calculating tax incidence reduces the estimated progressivity of government policy. As one example,
we calibrate the conventional life-cycle model to show how the amount of over-saving induced on
the poor by Social Security hurts them at least as much as the “progressive” benefits help them.
When the distortions outweigh fiscal transfers in this manner, the classic efficiency-redistribution
tradeoff cannot justify the program and the program is far less progressive than conventional analysis
suggests.
Casey B. Mulligan Tomas J. Philipson
Department of Economics The Harris School of Public Policy Studies, The
University of Chicago Department of Economics, and The Law School
1126 East 59th Street University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637 1155 East 60th Street
and NBER Chicago, IL 60637
c-mulligan@uchicago.edu and NBER
t-philipson@uchicago.edu

11 IInnttrroodduuccttiioonn
Scholars and citizens alike often believe that governments ought to, and do, help the poor and
less fortunate through redistributive tax and spending programs. Many view this as the main
purpose of government activity and therefore argue that economic efficiency can be sacrificed for
redistributive purposes. This classic efficiency-redistribution tradeoff in public finance has guided
much of incidence analysis to establish the degree to which separate policies do indeed help the poor
at the expense of the rich, even though it is understood that such policies may distort behavior. For
example, although universal public health insurance is fully understood to be distorting by
economists, it is suggested that this “inefficiency” should be traded off with the gain in equity its
redistribution may create. As the argument goes, inefficiency is the price paid for redistributive
concerns of a society.1
However, in undertaking redistribution governments rarely go as far as make unconditional
transfers to be spent by the beneficiaries on whatever they choose. Rather, the desire to take care
of the poor is translated into providing “necessities” such as health care, savings, food, and housing
or other goods or services. The rich seem to feel that they are willing to give up part of their income
to help out the poor, but only for specific purposes. Indeed, such merit good motives for transferring
income seem evidenced by the large amount of voluntary in-kind redistribution taking place in the
private non-profit sector, e.g. through churches or other organizations, which many times
complement or substitute for the mandatory provisions made through the public sector. What are
the distinct implications of merit good motives versus pure redistributive motives for the form and
quantity of government policy, for the extent by which policy helps the poor at the expense of the
rich; and are these differences quantitatively important?
We argue that merit motives may induce the reverse tradeoff between redistribution and
efficiency than dictated by classic public finance. As opposed to the classic trade-off, the majority
of US government activity is many times more easily interpreted the exact opposite way under merit
motives; redistribution is the price paid for achieving distortions. By explicitly modeling merit
goods, we show how policy is likely to appear progressive in a study that treats most or all taxes and
transfers as lump sum – as do many of the empirical studies of tax incidence – even while taxes and
transfers are (optimally) not lump sum and policy does not enhance the welfare of the poor.
To illustrate how these new implications of merit motives differ from classic public finance,
1See e.g. Musgrave (1955), Mirrlees (1971), Rosen (1992), Atkesson and Stiglitz (1988).

Policy Design and Incidence - 2
consider current government activity in the US: the two largest spending items on the federal level
are health care and retirement income, and the largest spending item on the local level is education.
First of all, all citizens are (sometime during their lives) eligible for these three programs regardless
of their economic status, and opting out of the program is either impossible or quite
disadvantageous. Second, rich individuals typically consume in excess of the publicly provided level,
and hence do not have their consumption distorted as much as do the poor for whom the mandatory
nature of the programs makes them consume more than they would in absence of the program. This
is an important implication of merit good motives, and its accordance with fact can be seen in Figure
1 below.
Figure 1: In-Kind Program Distortions by Family Income Decile
100.00%
90.00%
80.00%
70.00%
Percentage of 16, 17, and 18 year
olds that did not complete high
60.00%
school and is not currently enrolled
Percentage of All Annuity Income
50.00% from Social Security
40.00% Percentage of Individuals with only
Medicare and/or Medicaid Coverage
30.00%
20.00%
10.00%
0.00%
0 2 4 6 8 10
Family Income Decile
Source: March, 1998 Current Population Survey (CPS). For Schooling, the dropout series includes
all individuals between the ages of 16 and 18 and income refers to parental income. For Social
Security, we included all individuals 65 years of age and older who knew the source of their income