NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ESTIMATION RISK, MARKET EFFICIENCY,
AND THE PREDICTABILITY OF RETURNS
Jonathan Lewellen
Jay Shanken
Working Paper 7699
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7699
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2000
We are grateful to Greg Bauer, John Campbell, John Cochrane, Kent Daniel, Gur Huberman, John Long, Bill
Schwert, Robert Stambaugh, René Stulz, Jiang Wang, an anonymous referee, and seminar participants at
Columbia University, Emory University, National Bureau of Economic Research, University of Michigan,
University of Rochester, Washington University, Yale School of Management, and the American, European,
and Northern Finance Association meetings for their helpful comments and suggestions. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2000 by Jonathan Lewellen and Jay Shanken. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Estimation Risk, Market Efficiency, and the Predictability of Returns
Jonathan Lewellen and Jay Shanken
NBER Working Paper No. 7699
May 2000
JEL No. C11, D83, G12, G14
ABSTRACT
In asset pricing, estimation risk refers to investor uncertainty about the parameters of the
return or cashflow process. We show that with estimation risk the observable properties of prices and
returns can differ significantly from the properties perceived by rational investors. In particular,
parameter uncertainty will tend to induce return predictability in ways that resemble irrational
mispricing, and prices can violate familiar volatility bounds when investors are rational. Cross-
sectionally, expected returns deviate from the CAPM even if investors attempt to hold mean-variance
efficient portfolios, and these deviations can be predictable based on past dividends and prices. In
short, estimation risk can be important for characterizing and testing market efficiency.
Jonathan Lewellen Jay Shanken
Sloan School of Management William E. Simon Graduate School of
MIT Business Administration
50 Memorial Drive, E52-436 University of Rochester
Cambridge, MA 02142 Rochester, NY 14627
(617) 258-8408 and NBER
lewellen@mit.edu (716) 275-4896
shanken@ssb.rochester.edu

Estimation risk, market efficiency, and the predictability of returns
1. Introduction
There is now much evidence that stock returns are predictable. At the aggregate level, Fama and
Schwert (1977), Keim and Stambaugh (1986), Fama and French (1989), and Kothari and Shanken (1997)
find that interest rates, dividend yield, aggregate book-to-market, and the default premium forecast time-
variation in expected returns. Further, LeRoy and Porter (1981) and Shiller (1981) argue that the
volatility of stock prices is too high to be explained by a model with constant discount rates, providing
indirect evidence that expected returns change over time. At the firm level, Fama and French (1992)
conclude that size and book-to-market together explain much of the cross-sectional variation in average
returns. Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) show that past returns also contain information about expected
returns. In sum, there seems little doubt that expected returns vary both cross-sectionally and over time.1
The interpretation of predictability, however, is more contentious. The empirical results are
potentially consistent with either market efficiency or irrational mispricing. In general terms, market
efficiency implies that prices ‘fully reflect all available information.’ To formalize this idea for empirical
testing, Fama (1976) distinguishes between the probability distribution of returns perceived by ‘the
market,’ based on whatever information investors view as relevant, and the true distribution of returns
conditional on all information. The market is said to be informationally efficient if these distributions are
the same. As an obvious consequence, market efficiency implies that investors correctly anticipate any
cross-sectional or time-variation in true expected returns. While Fama’s definition ignores potentially
important issues like heterogeneous beliefs, it provides a useful framework for thinking about a broad set
of asset-pricing questions.
Market efficiency is closely related to the ‘rational expectations’ property analyzed by Muth (1961)
and Lucas (1978). In Lucas’s model, asset prices are a function of the current level of output, whose
behavior over time is known by investors. Consumers make investment decisions based, in part, on their
1 Clearly, this list of empirical papers and predictive variables is not meant to be exhaustive, and a considerable
amount of subsequent research extends, confirms, and critiques these findings. See Fama (1991) for a more
complete survey of the evidence.

expectations of future prices. Rational expectations requires that the pricing function implied by
consumer behavior (the true pricing function) is the same as the pricing function on which decisions are
based (the perceived pricing function). Lucas shows that rational expectations can, and generally will,
give rise to predictable variation in expected returns (see also LeRoy, 1973). Intuitively, changes in
economic conditions will lead to changes in the discount rate and, consequently, predictable returns.
Thus, researchers must judge whether the empirical patterns in returns are consistent with credible models
of rational behavior or can be better explained by irrational mispricing.
In this paper, we argue that there is a third potential source of return predictability: estimation risk.
In the asset-pricing literature, estimation risk refers to investor uncertainty about the parameters of the
return- or cashflow-generating process. Because investors do not know the true distribution, they must
estimate the parameters using whatever information is available, which can be formally modeled using
Bayesian analysis. The parameter uncertainty increases the perceived risk in the economy and necessarily
influences portfolio decisions. As a consequence, estimation risk affects equilibrium prices and expected
returns, and further, we show that it can be a source of predictability in a way that differs from other
models with rational investors.
The theoretical literature on estimation risk typically focuses on the subjective distribution perceived
by investors. The subjective distribution combines investors’ prior beliefs with the information contained
in observed data. This distribution represents investors’ best guess about future returns or cash flows, and
is therefore relevant for investment decisions.2 Our paper emphasizes instead the true distributions of
prices and returns which arise endogenously in equilibrium. The true distribution simply refers to the
actual, or observable, distribution from which prices or returns are drawn. Under the standard definition
of market efficiency, the true and subjective distributions are the same. However, that definition goes
well beyond the intuitive notion that prices fully reflect available information, and implicitly assumes that
investors know the parameters of the cashflow process. In the presence of estimation risk, the two
2 See Zellner (1971) and Berger (1985) for a general introduction to Bayesian analysis and Bawa, Brown, and
Klein (1979) for an application to portfolio theory. Jobson, Korkie, and Ratti (1979), Jorion (1985), Kandel and
Stambaugh (1996), Stambaugh (1998), and Barberis (1999) also discuss portfolio choice when investors must
2