NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MEASURING REAL ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF BAILOUTS:
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVES ON HOW COUNTRIES IN FINANCIAL
DISTRESS HAVE FARED WITH AND WITHOUT BAILOUTS
Michael Bordo
Anna J. Schwartz
Working Paper 7701
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7701
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2000
Paper prepared for the Carnegie Rochester Conference on Public Policy November 19-20, 1999. For
extremely valuable research assistance and econometric advice we thank Debajyoti Chakrabarty and
Elena Goldman. For providing us with data we thank Jim Boughton and Tam Bayoumi of the IMF. For
useful comments, we thank Jim Boughton, Mohsin Khan, Bennett McCallum, and Bob Rasche. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of then National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2000 by Michael D. Bordo and Anna J. Schwartz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Measuring Real Economic Effects of Bailouts: Historical Perspectives on How
Countries in Financial Distress Have Fared With and Without Bailouts
Michael D. Bordo and Anna J. Schwartz
NBER Working Paper No. 7701
May 2000
JEL No. F3, G2
ABSTRACT
In this paper we first trace the changing nature of banking, currency and debt crises from
the last century to the present. Each type of crisis has transmogrified in the presence of official
intervention and the creation of a safety net. A similar pattern is observed for international rescue
loans. We then present evidence suggesting that the incidence has increased and the severity of
financial crises has changed little in emerging markets from the pre-1914 era to the present.
Finally we assess the impact of IMP loans on the macro performance of the recipients. A simple
with-without comparison of countries receiving IMF assistance during crises in the period
1973-98 with countries in the same region not receiving assistance suggests that the real
performance of the former group was possibly worse than the latter. Similar results obtain
adjusting for self-selection bias and counterfactual policies.
Michael D. Bordo Anna J. Schwartz
Department of Economics National Bureau of Economic Research
Rutgers University 365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor
New Brunswick, New Jersey 08901-1284 New York, New York 10016-4309
(732) 932-7416 (212) 817-7957
and NBER aschwartz@gc.cuny.edu
bordo@fas-econ.rutgers.edu

1 Introduction
Bailouts of countries in financial distress have been a phenomenon of the 1990s. Unlike bailouts,
rescue loans of countries in financial distress have had a long history. Recent research compares
various dimensions of bailouts and rescues: who were the agents of these international loans, and
what were the conditions under which they offered aid. In this paper we propose to study
evidence of the post-loan experience of the borrowers.
One question of interest to us is the effect of loans, whether bailouts or rescues, on the
borrowers’ per capita real incomes, interest rates, inflation rates and other macro aggregates. The
IMF and independent research workers have also explored the post-loan experience of
borrowers. Our objective, however, is more ambitious. We want to address the question whether
it is possible to differentiate effects in countries in distress that obtained bailouts or rescue loans
from effects in the absence of loans in other countries also experiencing financial distress. We
examine a sample of countries that includes not only those that borrowed but also those that did
not.
There are many difficulties in assessing the effect of lending on the outcomes in the
economies under investigation. In order to isolate a link with loans, it is necessary to observe
ceteris paribus. The record of countries emerging from an episode of financial distress may
reflect not only the presence or absence of international lending but also other factors. Countries
may differ in respect of the competence of their governments, the stability of political
arrangements, the existence of safety net institutions, to name a few obvious things other than
international lending that can influence outcomes. So it is hard to tell if the outcomes are related
to lending or to some other factor. The paper attempts to deal with these complications.
In section 2, we define terms. We distinguish between a financial panic and a financial
crisis, and between a rescue loan and a bailout. Financial crises include banking, debt, and
1

currency crises. Banking crises were either banking panics or banking collapses. A debt crisis is
a type of historically recurrent financial crisis, in which sovereign nations or private sector
companies are unable to service borrowings from foreign lenders. Pre-1914, private workouts
renegotiated the terms of the loans. Since the 1980s, governments and international lending
agencies have intervened in micromanaging workouts. Currency crises occur when the pegged
foreign exchange value of a currency is subject to a speculative attack.
We review lending in a variety of financial crises. These include lender-of- last resort
lending in cases of domestic banking crises, initially conceived as administered on Bagehot’s
principles, modified in recent episodes to justify lending to large institutions regardless of
solvency, on the principle of too big to fail. We contrast lender-of-last-resort provision of
liquidity with current fiscal resolution of banking crises. We then define international lending,
beginning with currency crises that pre-1914 was extended by central banks on commercial
terms to a central bank facing a shortage of international reserves. This loan type evolved post-
World War II into official lending to monetary authorities by the IMF and other international
bodies, and in the 1990s to bailouts. The US Exchange Stabilization Fund played a crucial role in
the transition to the current style of package loans and bailouts.
In section 3, we review the stages by which banking, debt, and currency crises have
evolved from their past to present manifestations.
In section 4 we review the historical stages by which international lending in crises has
evolved into its present forms. These include rescue loans, bailouts, and guaranteed loans from
the pre-1914 era to today. For the interwar period, we cover subsidized stabilization loans to
European central banks, debt relief to Germany, and ESF loans to Latin-American and other
countries of political importance to the US. Post-World War II, we cover subsidized lending by
US agencies, like the Export-Import Bank; IMF stabilization packages; the arrangements to solve
2