NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TRADE IMPLIES LAW: THE POWER OF THE WEAK
James E. Anderson
Leslie Young
Working Paper 7702
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7702
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2000
This paper began while James Anderson visited the Chinese University of Hong Kong, whose support and
hospitality is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2000 by James E. Anderson and Leslie Young. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Trade Implies Law: The Power of the Weak
James E. Anderson and Leslie Young
NBER Working Paper No. 7702
May 2000
JEL No. F1, D2
ABSTRACT
Without the rule of law, traders who incur trading costs can be held up by counter-parties
who are stronger in anarchic bargaining. The favourable terms which the latter extract can
overcrowd that side of the market, dissipating the benefits. We establish plausible necessary and
sufficient conditions for a move from anarchy toward the rule of law to benefit all traders. The rule
of law might be delayed, not only by the difficulties of setting up legal institutions, but by
monopolistic traders that have meantime emerged to address the inefficiencies of anarchic trade.
These monopolistic traders must also guarantee atomistic traders against holdup.
James E. Anderson Leslie Young
Economics Department APIB
Boston College Chinese University of Hong Kong
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467 Shatin, Hong Kong
and NBER Tel: 852-2609-7421
Tel: 617-552-3691 leslie@baf.msmail.cuhk.edu.hk
james.anderson.1@bc.edu

1
Efficient trade requires reliable enforcement of the agreements governing the exchange. The
institutional underpinnings of trade have been addressed by game-theoretic analyses of the
motivation of individual traders to help enforce trade agreements.1 We complement this research
by comparing the implications of different institutional settings for the entire set of traders,
differentiated by their exposure to contract violations and their bargaining power when it occurs.
The extremes of institutional development are:
(a) anarchy, where prior agreements cannot be enforced and disputes are settled according to the
balance of coercive power, given the default options of the disputants;
(b) the rule of law, where prior agreements are enforced by an objective authority, insulated from
local power holders, whose procedures disputants acknowledge to be legitimate.
The side that fears that it would be weaker in anarchic bargaining would appear likely to support
the rule of law. We make this intuition precise and consider when the rule of law would be
supported by the stronger side, even if confident of their strength.
Sections 1-3 develop a model of trade under the rule of law and under anarchy. Our analysis
starts from the trading costs that a trader incurs to position himself to make an exchange, for
example, the maritime merchant’s costs of buying a ship and paying sailors. Agreements reached
before these trading costs were incurred would be upheld by the rule of law. In its absence,
trading costs that are sunk by the time the exchange takes place expose a trader to “holdup” by a
counter-party seeking to extract better terms. Suppose that a seller can extract very favourable
terms from a buyer in anarchic negotiations, e.g., because the seller has a better default option or
can better tolerate protracted bargaining. Then few buyers would incur trading costs to come to
any exchange meeting, so sellers who have incurred trading costs have only a low probability of
meeting a buyer, other sellers having meantime been attracted by the favourable terms that each
could extract in bilateral bargaining. By crowding into the market in pursuit of the benefits of
anarchic holdup, rival sellers dissipate these benefits by reducing each other's probability of
1 Milgrom, North and Weingast (1990), Grief (1992, 1993), Greif, Milgrom and Weingast (1994).

2
selling, i.e., they exert a negative externality on each other. In these circumstances, all sellers
might be better off if they jointly bind themselves from holding up individual buyers, thereby
eliminating the excess supply. This could be achieved by extending the protection of a legal
system impartially to buyers.
Section 4 develops a restriction on the distribution of trading costs across traders which is
necessary and sufficient to ensure that all traders prefer the rule of law to anarchy, whatever the
balance of bargaining power in anarchic trade. This restriction is not onerous, suggesting that in
broad historical circumstances, the gains from trade would motivate support for the rule of law,
even from the powerful. Indeed, the development of the rule of law within a jurisdiction might be
driven, in part, by its appeal to foreigners who offer novel gains from trade but have little access
to the local power structure. Thus, trade which is international has long been important for
Europe, given its diverse geography and political fragmentation. This could help explain the early
development within European jurisdictions of the rule of law. By contrast, trade with foreigners
was of little importance to classical China, which comprised an equally diverse area, but usually
enjoyed a unified jurisdiction. Facing few of the imperatives of international trade, China’s high
level of order was achieved via an efficient, all-encompassing bureaucracy rather than via the
application of rules by a judicial system independent of the power structure. Only in the last two
decades have there been significant attempts to institute the rule of law within China — as it
seeks to foster international commerce and investment.
Even given the economic pre-conditions for broad support for the rule of law, the requisite
public institutions and social attitudes could take a long time to develop. This leaves room for
private institutions to emerge more quickly to garner the gains from trade. European history
records an array of monopolistic trading institutions, such as guilds and coalitions of merchant
adventurers. As noted in Sections 5 and 6 respectively, a monopolistic middleman or a trading
coalition can facilitate trade by (i) internalizing the negative externalities that its atomistic
counterparts would have exerted on each other by crowding into the market in pursuit of the
benefits of anarchic holdup; (ii) having a long-term corporate identity and interests, so that it can