NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHO IS SELLING THE IVORY TOWER?
SOURCES OF GROWTH IN UNIVERSITY LICENSING
Jerry G. Thursby
Marie C. Thursby
Working Paper 7718
http://www.nber.org/papers/w77 18
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2000
This research has been supported by the Alan and Mildred Peterson Foundation, Purdue University, and the
Sloan Foundation and the National Bureau of Economic Research under the NBER Project on Industrial
Technology and Productivity. We would like to express our appreciation to the Licensing Executive Society,
Inc. (U.S.A. and Canada) and particularly Mark Peterson and Tom Small for their support in conducting the
industry survey. We are indebted to James Adams, Wesley Cohen, Shawna Grosskopf, Dan Kovenock,
Richard Nelson, Barbara Newman, Jennifer Parsons, Scott Shane, Don Siegel, and John Walsh for their
suggestions and comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research..
2000 by Jerry G. Thursby and Marie C. Thursby. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including notice, is
given to the source.

Who is Selling the Ivory Tower? Sources of Growth in University Licensing
Jerry G. Thursby and Marie C. Thursby
NBER Working Paper No. 7718
May 2000
JELNo. D24, L31, 031,032
ABSTRACT
Historically, commercial use of university research has been viewed in terms of spillovers.
Recently, there has been a dramatic increase in technology transfer through licensing as universities
aftempt to appropriate the returns from faculty research. This change has prompted concerns
regarding the source of this growth - whether it suggests a change in the nature of
specifically,
university research. We develop an intermediate input model to examine the extent to which the
growth in licensing is due to the productivity observable inputs or driven by a change in the
propensity of faculty and administrators to engage in commercializing university research. We
model licensing as a three stage process, each involving multiple inputs. Nonparametric
programming techniques are applied to survey data from 65universitiesto calculate total factor
productivity (TFP) growth in each state. To examine the sources of TFP growth, the productivity
analysis is augmented by survey evidence from business who license-in university inventions.
Results suggest that increased licensing is due primarily to an increased willingness of faculty and
administrators to license and increased business reliance on external R&D rather than a shift in
faculty research.
Jerry G. Thursby Marie C. Thursby
Department of Economics Department of Economics
Purdue University Krannert Graduate School of Management
West Lafayette, IN 47907 Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
and NBER
mct@mgmt.purdue.edu

1
1. Introduction
According to the Association of University Technology Managers (AUTM) surveys, li-
censing activity in U.S. research universities has increased dramatically in the 1990s. For
the 65 universities responding to the survey in each of the years 1994-97, yearly invention
disclosures increased 8% per year. Over the same period, new patent applications and li-
censes and options executed annually grew by 20.4% and 9.6%, respectively. In 1997 alone
the 132 universities responding to the survey reported a total of 9051 disclosures, 3644 new
patent applications and 2707 licenses and options executed.
This growth in the so-called "commercial outputs" of academic research has received
considerable attention both from technology managers and university administrators who
cite it as evidence of the increasing contribution of universities to the economy (e.g., AUTM
press release, 1998) and policy makers who, in contrast, question the impact of commercial
activity on the conduct and industrial impact of faculty research (Congressional Record,
1999). Unfortunately, there is little evidence to evaluate the arguments since these growth
rates alone tell nothing about the productivity of university resources devoted to technology
transfer, nor do they provide evidence on the sources of increased licensing.
In this paper, we explore the source(s) of this growth in university licensing. We focus on
the role of inputs, including intermediate inputs, in the process, and we examine the extent
to which the explosion in licensing is being driven by faculty and university administrators
becoming more entrepreneurial. In particular, is the primary source of growth simply an
increased propensity for university administrators to patent and attempt to license faculty
inventions? To what extent is growth due to an increased propensity of businesses to license
university inventions? Has the propensity of faculty to disclose inventions increased either
because they are more willing to license as well as publish their research or because their
research has shifted toward topics of more interest to industry? It is the latter element of
faculty propensity that has been the focus of policy discussions.
We model technology transfer as a three stage production process involving multiple
inputs in each stage. The three stages follow the sequence of steps typically involved in
licensing university inventions. First stage outputs are invention disclosures, which are filed
by faculty when they believe their research results have commercial potential. In addition
to faculty, first stage inputs include federal and industry research support as well as TTO
personnel.1 Disclosures are intermediate inputs to a second stage in which the TTO applies
for patents on those disclosures they believe can be patented and licensed. Inputs for this
stage also include a measure of faculty quality to capture patent potential. In turn, patent
applications and disclosures are used along with other licensing inputs in a third stage to
produce license and option agreements.
'TTO personnel are university employees responsible for encouraging and aiding faculty in disclosing
and for executing licenses agreeements with industry.

2
We provide two types of evidence on the sources of growth. The first is a productivity
analysis using AUTM survey data for 65 U.s. universities for 1994-1997 which provides
evidence on the extent to which growth in each stage is a direct result of increases in inputs
devoted to technology transfer. The second is based on a survey of businesses who licensed
university inventions over the period 1993-97. These survey data, in conjunction with our
productivity results, allow us to consider the extent to which licensing has grown because
of changes in the propensity of faculty and administrators to engage in commercial activity
and/or changes in business behavior toward universities.
In the productivity analysis, we use nonparametric programming techniques developed
by Fare et al (1994) to examine productivity growth. For each of the three stages, we
construct a best practice frontier that represents the maximum feasible stage output given
available inputs and existing attitudes or knowledge. This approach allows us to identify
both frontier performance and operation within the frontier. Thus, total factor productivity
(TFP) growth can be decomposed into two components: one reflecting a frontier shift and
another showing movement toward (catching up) or away from the frontier. Given the
dramatic growth of licensing activity and reorganization of a number of TTOs during the
early nineties, both components of growth are likely to be important.2
For the 65 universities in our sample, we find TFP growth rates for disclosures and patent
applications that are roughly 6% lower than the nominal growth rates noted above, and,
for licenses executed, TFP growth is negative. While this implies that much of the growth
in university commercial activity stems from input growth, it also suggests that changed
propensities are an important element of growth. Of particular note is the negative TFP
growth in licenses which, coupled with increased disclosures and patent applications, can
be interpreted as evidence of universities delving more "deeply" into the available pool of
commercializable inventions. To the extent that universities are attempting to increase
the number of inventions licensed, without a concurrent shift in the underlying distribu-
tion of discoveries with commercial potential, we would expect the marginal inventions to
have less commercial appeal. Our productivity analysis therefore suggests that universities
are licensing less important inventions. This result is particularly interesting in light of
Henderson, Jaffe, Trajtenberg's (1998) evidence from an earlier period (1965-1988) that
as university patenting increased, the importance (as measured by citations) of university
patents declined.
To examine why propensities to engage in university/firm licensing have changed —that
is, to examine the possible sources of TFP growth— we draw on the results of our business
survey as well as the productivity analysis. For the first stage, our interest is in whether the
growth in disclosures (net of inputs) is due to a reorientation of faculty research towards
2Thfrty five percent of the TTOs responding to our earlier university survey were reorganized during
the nineties (Jensen, Thursby, and Thursby 2000).