NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CAN EMERGING MARKET BANK REGULATORS
ESTABLISH CREDIBLE DISCIPLINE?
THE CASE OF ARGENTINA, 1992-1999
Charles W. Calomiris
Andrew Powell
Working Paper 7715
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7715
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2000
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the
Central Bank of Argentina, the National Bureau of Economic Research, or any other institution. We wish
to thank Tamara Burdiso and Laura D'Amato for excellent assistance with the econometric analyses
presented in this research. We thank our discussant Douglas Diamond, other conference participants, and
Charles Himmelberg and Alejandra Anastasi for helpful comments and discussions. All mistakes naturally
remain our own.
© 2000 by Charles W. Calomiris and Andrew Powell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Can Emerging Market Bank Regulators Establish Credible Discipline?
The Case of Argentina, 1992-1999
Charles W. Calomiris and Andrew Powell
NBER Working Paper No. 7715
May 2000
ABSTRACT
In the early 1990s, after decades of high inflation and financial repression, Argentina
embarked on a course of macroeconomic and bank regulatory reform. Bank regulatory policy
promoted privatization, financial liberalization, and free entry, limited safety net support, and
established a novel mix of regulatory and market discipline to ensure stable growth of the banking
system during the liberalization process. Argentina suffered some fallout from the Mexican
tequila crisis of 1995, but its response to that crisis (allowing weak banks to close) and the
redoubling of regulatory efforts to promote market discipline after the crisis made Argentina’s
banking system quite resilient during the Asian, Russian, and Brazilian crises. Argentina’s bank
regulatory system now is widely regarded as one of the two or three most successful among
emerging market economies. This paper traces the evolution of the regulatory policy changes of
the 1990s and shows that the reliance on market discipline has played an important role in
prudential regulation by encouraging proper risk management by banks. There is substantial
heterogeneity among banks in the interest rates they pay for debt and the rate of growth of their
deposits, and that heterogeneity is traceable to fundamental attributes of banks that affect the
riskiness of deposits (i.e. asset risk and leverage). Moreover, market perceptions of default risk
are mean-reverting, indicating that market discipline encourages banks to respond to increases in
default risk by limiting asset risk or lowering leverage.
Charles W. Calomiris Andrew Powell
Graduate School of Business Central Bank of Argentina
Columbia University Reconquista 266
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall (1003) Capital Federal
New York, NY 10027 Argentina
and NBER
cc374@columbia.edu

I. Introduction
In common with many other emerging market countries, Argentina’s banking sector was
liberalized in the 1990s. That liberalization followed decades of severe “financial repression.”
The return to deposits placed in banks previously was substantially negative; if $100 worth of
deposits had been placed in an Argentine bank in 1944, it would today be worth roughly 3 cents
in real terms today (and 1 cent in 1990).1 As recently as 1990, bank deposits were frozen as part
of an emergency fiscal adjustment. As elsewhere, liberalization involved lifting controls on
interest rates, deregulation of the banking sector, allowing the entry of foreign capital,
privatization and adopting international regulatory standards.
Nevertheless, the experience of the Argentine banking sector over the past decade has
been unique in several respects. Many observers view Argentina’s reforms as among the most
radical attempts to overhaul a banking system. Traditionally in Argentina, credit was allocated
either to the public sector or through public intervention to specific sectors or projects in the
private sector. Moreover, the banking sector suffered from ineffective regulation and
supervision and repeated, forced government rescues contributed significantly to Argentina’s
past fiscal and inflationary problems. In contrast, many have argued that today there is a
credible, restrictive safety net and high regulatory and supervisory standards. For example, as
shown in Table 1, one World Bank study rated Argentina’s regulatory regime on par with Hong
Kong, second only to Singapore, and higher than the longer-lived and much-admired regime in
Chile2. In particular, the Argentine system is praised for its attempt to introduce elements of
private market discipline as a central component of its regulatory regime.
Table 1. World Bank Comparison of Bank Regulatory Quality in
Developing Economies
Total Capital Loan Foreign Liquidity Operating Transparency
Country Score Position Classification Ownership Environment
(management)
Singapore 16 1 6 2 5 1 1
Argentina 21 1 4 3 4 7 2
Hong Kong 21 3 9 1 2 2 4
Chile 25 5 1 4 8 5 2
Brazil 30 7 3 4 3 8 5
Peru 35 5 2 6 1 11 10
Malaysia 41 5 9 8 8 3 8
Colombia 44 3 4 11 6 10 10
Korea 45 7 9 10 11 3 5
Philippines 47 4 6 7 7 11 12
Thailand 52 7 12 12 8 6 7
Indonesia 52 7 8 9 12 8 8
Source: World Bank (1998), p. 54. Numbers indicate rankings, where low numbers mean high ranking.
The total score is a simple average of the six categories.
1 Central Bank estimates.
2 We note, however, that Chile has since revised and strengthened its capital requirements on banks.

Private market discipline is enhanced by the following policies: (a) A strictly limited
safety net (comprised of a privately funded, limited deposit insurance scheme and restrictions on
the Central Bank's potential lender of last resort powers) exposes bank depositors to the
possibility of loss. (b) High and credible minimum risk-based capital requirements further ensure
that stockholders (rather than taxpayers) bear the risk of bank default. (c) National government
programs encourage the privatization of provincial government-owned banks. (d) A credit rating
scheme has been introduced whereby each bank must solicit a credit rating from an
internationally active rating agency. (e) A subordinated debt requirement mandates that banks
must issue a subordinated liability for some 2% of deposits each year. (f) Banks must satisfy a
“liquidity requirement” in addition to the capital requirement. This not only reduces portfolio
risk, ensures systemic liquidity, and further reduces the potential for taxpayer loss from failed
banks, but (because of the structure of the requirement) rewards banks with lower regulatory cost
when the market perceives that their risk of failure is low. (g) The Central Bank publishes basic
information about bank loans to individuals and firms that borrow from banks (which enhances
transparency of credit risk). (h) The quality of accounting data is enhanced by mandatory private
audits conducted according to Central Bank guidelines, and auditors must post a forfeitable
bond. (i) Argentina permits free entry and competition among foreign and domestic banks,
which not only encourages the efficient management of banks, but also enhances the ability of
bank depositors to punish weak banks by moving their funds to stronger institutions.
The Argentine system’s high marks from the World Bank also reflect the fact that the
regulatory reforms put in place in the early and mid-1990s have been tested by external
shocks.The reactions of the banking authorities to those shocks have been encouraging to
advocates of market discipline. Rather than retreating from the reform process in the face of the
“tequila” crisis of 1994-1995, the Argentine authorities redoubled their efforts to ensure that
market discipline prevailed in the banking system. Indeed, many of the features of the current
regulatory system listed above were enacted or strengthened after the tequila crisis, as part of a
new plan for bank oversight developed at the central bank, which is known as the B.A.S.I.C.
system of bank regulation.
We define the key elements of that system, and explain its evolution, in Section II below.
These included the new liquidity requirement system (replacing a more traditional reserve
requirement approach), capital requirements that reflect banks' trading risks and banking book
interest rate risks, an expansion of the publicly available database on the condition of bank
borrowers, as well as the minimum mandatory subordinated debt and credit rating requirement.
The authorities have also negotiated a contingent liquidity facility with international banks in
order to be able to inject emergency liquidity on the basis of Argentine collateral in the case of a
sharp, systemic, liquidity shock (this facility currently stands at some $6.45bn excluding a $1bn
World Bank/IDB enhancement). Also over this period there was significant entry of foreign
capital to the banking system such that, at the time of this writing, some 60% of private sector
deposits are now in banks under foreign control, accounting for some 40% of the whole system.
There remains only one large (top 8) private retail bank that does not have a foreign controlling
interest.
The only policy reaction to the 1995 crisis that could be construed as a weakening of the
commitment to market discipline was the reestablishment of deposit insurance. But the
significance of this change for market discipline should not be exaggerated. In November 1992,
2