NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LANGUAGE-SKILL COMPLEMENTARITY:
RETURNS TO IMMIGRANT LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
Eli Berman
Kevin Lang
Erez Siniver
Working Paper 7737
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7737
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2000
Lang acknowledges the support of NSF grant SBR-9515052. We thank the Falk Institute for editorial support. We
benefited from the comments of Dan Ackerberg, Michael Beenstock, Peter Doeringer, Maggie Eisenstaedt and
participants in seminars at the Institute for Race and Social Division and a labor lunch at Boston University. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2000 by Eli Berman, Kevin Lang, and Erez Siniver. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Language-Skill Complementarity: Returns to Immigrant Language Acquisition
Eli Berman, Kevin Lang, and Erez Siniver
NBER Working Paper No. 7737
June 2000
JEL No. C81, F22, J15, J31, N35
ABSTRACT
We examine the effect of language acquisition on the growth of immigrants’ earnings. We
gathered data on recent Soviet immigrants to Israel that include retrospective questions on earnings
and language ability on entry into their current job. Language acquisition is found to interact
positively with occupation level. Immigrant programmers and computer technicians have a return
to tenure about three percentage points higher than that of natives; improved Hebrew language skills
account for between 2/3 and 3/4 of that differential wage growth. In contrast, construction workers
and gas station attendants have no convergence of wages to those of natives and language acquisition
has no discernible effect on their wages. For these less skilled workers the estimated “return” to
Hebrew proficiency in the cross-section is entirely due to ability bias. This finding may invite a
reinterpretation of other studies on the returns to language acquisition for low wage immigrants.
Eli Berman Kevin Lang
Department of Economics Department of Ecnomics
Boston University Boston University
270 Bay State Road 270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215 Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
eli@bu.edu
Erez Siniver
Management Institute
Tel Aviv

LANGUAGE-SKILL COMPLEMENTARITY:
RETURNS TO IMMIGRANT LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
1. Introduction
There is general agreement that immigrants experience faster wage growth than do native
workers. One explanation for this finding is that over time immigrants learn the host country
language and thereby become more productive in the labor market. Considerable research
supports the view that in a cross-section regression language fluency can account for a
significant portion of the rate of wage convergence.
However, the cross-sectional evidence is subject to several problems. On the one hand, both
the correlation between fluency and earnings and the correlation between time in the host
country and fluency may be partly or totally spurious, thereby generating upwards-biased
estimates of the importance of fluency for wage convergence. On the other hand, measures of
fluency are very noisy, biasing estimated coefficients downwards.
The major alternative explanation for convergence is that recent immigrants, like young
natives, engage in considerable job shopping. Immigrants exhibit considerable job mobility
(Lalonde and Topel, 1991; Eckstein and Weiss, 1998). (They may be engaged in Burdett–
Jovanovic job-matching, which is productive, or simply pursuing rents.) Except for recent labor
market entrants, native workers will have had more time to shop for jobs than otherwise
comparable immigrants and will therefore have a smaller marginal return to job search. Of
course, job shopping and language may be complementary — knowledge of the native
language may facilitate job search; similarly, the type of/selection of jobs with which workers
are best matched may change rapidly as they acquire fluency in the language of the host
country.

2
It is important to measure accurately the effect of language acquisition on wages. If growing
fluency accounts for a significant portion of wage, receiving countries can speed up such
convergence by supporting effective language programs. On the other hand, if language is
relatively unimportant, language programs may be economically wasteful or merely a disguised
form of welfare.
In this paper we use a unique data set collected by one of the authors to cast light on the role
of language acquisition in wage convergence within jobs. The data set contains measures of
fluency and wages, both currently and when the individual started the job, thereby allowing us
to measure the effect of changing fluency on the change in wage. Moreover, since we follow
workers within jobs, we can distinguish wage growth within jobs from wage growth due to job
changes.
We study immigrants from the former Soviet Union (henceforth referred to as Russians) to
Israel, who were employed in one of four occupations in Israel (gas station attendant,
construction worker, computer technician, programmer). We find that Hebrew fluency had
almost no effect on wage growth in the low-skill occupations (gas station attendant,
construction worker). Moreover, these occupations show no evidence of wage convergence. In
contrast, computer technicians and programmers show evidence of considerable wage
convergence, much of which can be accounted for by their increasing Hebrew fluency.
We interpret our findings as strong evidence for an effect of language on earnings, as it is
free of a heterogeneity bias in levels. The contrast between the lack of estimated returns to
language for low-skill workers and high returns for high-skill workers is interesting for two
reasons. First, it provides some evidence against a heterogeneity bias in ability to learn quickly.
More importantly, it establishes evidence for an intuitively plausible result: that language
complements occupational skills.
Section 2 reviews the literature. Section 3 provides an overview of immigration to Israel