NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EVALUATING AND INVESTING IN EQUITY MUTUAL FUNDS
Lubos Pastor
Robert F. Stambaugh
Working Paper 7779
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7779
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July2000
Research support from the Center for Research in Security Prices and Dimensional Fund Advisors is
gratefully acknowledged (Pastor). We are grateful to Andrew Metrick, Toby Moskowitz, and seminar
participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Northwestern University, Ohio State University,
University of Chicago, University of Peimsylvania, and Vanderbilt University for helpful comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
2000 by Lubos Pastor and Robert F. Stambaugh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including notice, is
given to the source.

Evaluating and Investing in Equity Mutual Funds
Lubos Pastor and Robert F. Stambaugh
NBER Working Paper No. 7779
July2000
JELNo. Gil, G12, Cli
ABSTRACT
Our framework for evaluating and investing in mutual fttnds combines observed returns on
funds and passive assets with prior beliefs that distinguish pricing-model inaccuracy from managerial
skill. A fund's "alpha" is defined using passive benchmarks. We show that returns on non-
benchmark passive assets help estimate that alpha more precisely for most funds. The resulting
estimates generally vary less than standard estimates across alternative benchmark specifications.
Optimal portfolios constructed from a large universe of equity fttnds can include actively managed
funds even when managerial skill is precluded. The fund universe offers no close substitutes for the
Fama-French and momentum benchmarks.
Lubos Pastor Robert F. Stambaugh
Graduate School of Business Finance Department
University of Chicago The Wharton School
Chicago, IL 60637 University of Pennsylvania
lubos.pastor@gsb.uchicago.edu Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
stambaughwharton.upenn.edu

1. Introduction
Evaluating mutual fund performance combines data and judgment. The data typically con-
sist of returns on the funds and one or more benchmarks, and the judgment typically involves
specifying the benchmarks and their role in defining performance. Investing in mutual funds
also combines data and judgment. Rather than accept the standard performance measures
at face value, investors can allow their decisions to reflect doubts about either the adequacy
of the benchmarks or the stock-picking ability of fund managers.
In this study, we develop and implement a framework in which views about the ade-
quacy of the benchmarks—their ability to price other passive assets—can be incorporated
formally into both performance evaluation and the investment decision. The framework also
allows separate beliefs about potential managerial skill to enter the investment decision. To
accomplish these tasks, we introduce passive "non-benchmark" assets that are not used in
previous approaches. These assets provide information that can be used to estimate a fund's
performance more precisely. They also allow beliefs that distinguish benchmark inadequacy
from managerial skill, and they help account for common variation in returns across funds
that is not captured by the benchmarks.
A mutual fund's performance is often measured by alpha, the intercept in a regression of
the fund's return on one or more passive benchmark returns.' The choice of benchmarks is
often guided by a pricing model, as in Jensen's (1969) pioneering use of the Capital Asset
Pricing Model (CAPM) of Sharpe (1964) and Lintner (1965) to investigate mutual fund
alphas relative to a single market-index benchmark. Other studies, beginning with Lehmann
and Modest (1987), examine fund alphas with respect to a set of multiple benchmarks viewed
as the relevant factors for pricing in a multifactor model, such as the Arbitrage Pricing Theory
of Ross (1976).
Alpha is typically computed by ordinary-least-squares (OLS) estimation of the regression
=A
+ /3ArB,t + €A,t, (1)
where rA,1 is the fund's return in month t, is a k x 1 vector containing the benchmark
returns, and 0A denotes the fund's alpha. This standard approach ignores information about
alpha provided by returns on other non-benchmark passive assets. Even though such assets
play no role in the definitionofalpha in (1), they can play a useful role in its estimation.
'Throughout our discussion, "returns" are rates of return in excess of a riskiess interest rate, or they are
payoffs on zero-investment spread positions.
1

To take one example, asswne that the benchmark assets do indeed price other passive
assets. Consider the regression of a non-benchmark return onthe benchmark returns,
= a + I3rB,,+ en,,, (2)
where the correlation between and E is positive. If the benchmarks price other passive
assets, then c, =0. Now suppose that over the same sample period used to obtain the OLS
estimate of aA, the OLS estimate of a is less than its true value of zero. Given this outcome
and the positive correlation between A,L and e, the OLS estimate of aA is expected to be
less than its true value as well, and this information can be used in estimating aA.
Pricing models often motivate the choice of benchmarks, but non-benchmark assets can
provide additional information about a mutual fund's alpha even with no assumption about
the benchmarks' pricing ability. The explosive growth of the mutual fund industry in recent
years presents investors with many funds that have relatively short histories. Consider a
fund whose available return history is shorter than the histories of and rB,t. Suppose
that the OLS estimate of a computed for the sample period of the fund's available history
is less than the OLS estimate of c computed for a longer sample period. Since the latter
estimate is more precise, the first estimate is more likely to be less than the true (unknown)
value of a. Given the positive correlation between EA, and e, the same can be said of the
OLS estimate of aA relative to its true value, and this information can be used in estimating
cEA. The additional information comes not through a pricing model, as in the first example,
but through the longer histories of the passive asset returns.
In the two examples described above, c is assumed to be either zero or completely
unknown. One may well prefer an intermediate version in which the benchmarks are believed
to be relevant for pricing other passive assets, but not without error. In such a case, which we
handle in a Bayesian framework, non-benchmark assets can play a role that combines aspects
of both examples. Additional information about cEA is provided by the extent to which the
short-history estimate of a differs from zero as well as from its long-history estimate.
Our study does not recommend a particular set of benchmarks for defining alpha. Recent
academic studies compute mutual fund alphas with respect to a single market benchmark
(e.g., Malkiel (1995)) as well as sets of multiple benchmarks (e.g., Carhart (1997) and Elton,
Gruber, and Blake (1996)). We compute alphas in both single-benchmark and multiple-
benchmark settings. Alphas defined with respect to a single market benchmark may be of
interest whether or not one believes in the CAPM. We offer just two of many examples of
their use in practice: Morningstar, the leading provider of mutual fund information, reports
alphas computed with respect to one of several broad market indexes; Capital Resource
2