NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CURRENCY UNIONS
Alberto Alesina
RobertJ. Barro
Working Paper 7927
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7927
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2000
We thank for useful suggestions Guiseppe Bertola, Jean Tmbs, Robert Hall, Richard Portes, Helene Rey,
Keimeth Rogoff, Enrico Spolaore, and participants in seminars at Harvard and NYU and in conferences at
the Hoover Institution and Pompeu Fabra. Silvana Tenreyro provided excellent research assistance. NSF
support through the NBER is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
2000 by Alberto Alesina and Robert J. Barro. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including notice, is
given to the source.

Currency Unions
Alberto Alesina and Robert J. Barro
NBER Working Paper No. 7927
September 2000
ABSTRACT
What is the optimal number of currencies in the world? Common currencies affect trading
costs and, thereby, the amounts of trade, output, and consumption. From the perspective of monetary
policy, the adoption of another country's currency trades off the benefits of commitment to price
stability against the loss of an independent stabilization policy. The nature of the tradeoff depends on co-
movements of disturbances, on distance, trading costs, and on institutional arrangements such as the
willingness of anchor countries to accommodate to the interests of clients.
Alberto Alesina Robert J. Barro
Department of Economics Department of Economics
Harvard University Littauer Center 218
Cambridge, MA 02138 Harvard University
and NBER Cambridge, MA 02138
aalesina@harvard.edu and NBER
rbarro@harvard.edu

1 Introduction
Taditiona1ly, each country had its own currency, and only one currency
circulated in each country. Monetary unions were rare, and, therefore, the
surge in the number of countries in the post-war period generated a large
increase in the number of currencies circulating in the world. In 1947 there
were 76 countries in the world, today there are 193, and, with few exceptions,
each country has its own currency.' Unless one believes that a country is, by
definition, an "optimal currency area," either there were too few currencies
in 1947 or there are too many today. In fact, the increasing integration of
international markets implies that the optimal number of currencies would
tend to decrease, rather than almost triple as it has.
Only recently, however, and perhaps as a result of this proliferation of
currencies, the sanctity of "one country one money" has come into question.
Eleven countries in Europe have adopted the same currency, dollarization
is under active consideration in many countries in Latin America and is
currently being implemented in Ecuador, and a currency union is being dis-
cussed in Central America. Countries in Eastern Europe and the former
Soviet Union are considering adopting unilaterally the euro. In addition,
several countries have adopted currency boards, including Hong Kong and
Argentina with the dollar and Estonia and Bulgaria first with the German
mark and later with the euro.
'See Rose (2000) for a list of countries that use currencies other than their own. Two
examples of currency unions are the French Franc Zone in Africa and the Caribbean
currency union. Some other countries that use another nation's currency are Panama,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, and San Marino.
2

Two factors have contributed to these trends. One is the increase in
international trade in goods and services, expanded cross-border financial
transactions, and heightened cross-country flows of technology, in one word,
"globalization." The second is the increased emphasis on price stability,
as opposed to active macroeconomic stabilization, as a goal for monetary
policy. This switch followed two decades (the seventies and eighties) with
exceptionally high inflation rates in many developing countries and double-
digit inflation in several industrial ones.
Mundell (1961) pioneered the analysis of monetary union. The benefit
of a common-currency area was its role in minimizing transaction costs and
facilitating the flow of information about re'ative prices.2 The offsetting
force was that fixed exchange rates entailed the loss of independent monetary
policies. Mundell stressed factor mobility and price flexibility as key elements
in this tradeoff.
In this paper, we begin by investigating the role of monetary union in
reducing the transaction costs for foreign trade. This benefit is greater the
larger the size of the union, because money, like language, is more useful
the greater the number of persons who share the same type. We then add
monetary issues, emphasizing the distinctionS between rules and discretion
as in Barro and Gordon (1983). Flexible exchange rates allow monetary
2Several papers have investigated the effects of exchange rate stability on trade flows,
reaching mixed results. See, in particular, Hooper and Kohihagen (1978), Kenen and
Rodrik (1986), and International Monetary Fund (1984). Rose (2000) argues that the
effect of currency union on the volume of trade is large.
3There is now a large literature on the rules-versus-discretion trade off. An application
of that framework that is especially related to the present paper is in Alesina and Grilli
3