NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO R&D SUBSIDIES STIMULATE OR DISPLACE
PRIVATE R&D? EVIDENCE FROM ISRAEL
Saul Lach
Working Paper 7943
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7943
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2000
In memory of Zvi Griliches, the driving force behind this project. I would like to thank Mark Schankerman
and Karnit Flug for their valuable comments and suggestions that greatly improved the quality of the paper.
I would like to extend my appreciation and thanks to Haim Regev for compiling the data set and to the
Central Bureau of Statistics for making them available for academic research. Comments by Isabel Busom
and by seminar participants at the Research Department of the Bank of Israel and at the Hebrew University
are gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed are those of the author and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
2000 by Saul Lach. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including notice, is given to the source.

Do R&D Subsidies Stimulate or Displace Private R&D? Evidence from Israel
Saul Lach
NBER Working Paper No. 7943
October2000
JEL No. 032, 038
ABSTRACT
In evaluating the effect of an R&D subsidy we need to know what the subsidized firm would
have spent on R&D had it not received the subsidy. Using data on Israeli manufacturing firms in
the 1 990s we find evidence suggesting that the R&D subsidies granted by the Ministry of Industry and Trade
stimulated long-run company-financed R&D expenditures: their long-run elasticity with respect to R&D
subsidies is 0.22. Atthe means of the data, an extra dollar of R&D subsidies increases long-run company-
financed R&D expenditures by 41 cents (total R&D expenditures increase by 1.41 dollars). Although the
magnitude of this effect is large enough to justify the existence of the subsidy program, it is lower than
expected given the dollar-by-dollar matching upon which most subsidized projects are based. This "less than
full" effect reflects two forces: first, subsidies are sometimes granted to projects that would have been
undertaken even in the absence of the subsidy and, second, firms adjust their portfolio of R&D projects-
closing or slowing down non-subsidized projects-after the subsidy is received.
Saul Lach
Department of Economics
The Hebrew University
Jerusalem, 91905
ISRAEL
and NBER
mslach@mscc.huji.ac.il

Do RSD Subsidies Stimulate or Displace Private RSD?
Evidence Lfm [Israel
Saul Lach
1 Introduction
Does government policy play a role in influencing the rate and direction of technological change?
Most governments appear to believe so. A wide variety of instruments are used by governments
to foster technological change: tax cuts, subsidies to R&D, the formation of R&D consortia and
national R&D laboratories are but a few examples. In this paper we focus on the relationship
between government subsidies to R&D and company-financed R&D in Israel.
The Israeli experience is of interest because its high-tech sector boomed in the course of
the last decade, both by national and international standards. Government R&D and innova-
tion policies are perceived as crucial elements of this success story (Trajtenberg ,2000). Yet,
1

there is no quantitative assessment of the effectiveness of these policies. This paper attempts
to close this gap by focusing on the question: Are R&D subsidies stimulating or displacing
company-financed R&D in Israeli manufacturing firms? The lessons learned from the Israeli
case should be of interest to countries implementing or contemplating the use of subsidy schemes
to promote R&D.1
An R&D subsidy can have a direct and an indirect effect on firm performance. The
direct effect comes about through the increase in total R&D expenditures, holding company-
financed R&D constant. Griliches and Regev (1998) estimate the separate effects of subsidized
and company-financed R&D expenditures on output and productivity of Israeli manufacturing
firms. Their findings point to significant and, in some cases, very large effects of subsidized
R&D on output. The indirect effect operates through the response of company-financed R&D
expenditures to the subsidy. If the R&D subsidy displaces own R&D expenditures, the total
effect on productivity may be lower than what the Griliches and Regev estimates suggest. On
the other hand, if it stimulates own R&D expenditures then the effects of the subsidy are
magnified. Thus, an understanding of the relationship between R&D subsidies and company-
financed R&D is necessary for a correct assessment of the role of R&D subsidies in boostering
productivity.
The precise way in which R&D subsidies are administered is likely to make a difference.
In Israel, the largest R&D subsidy program is the one implemented by the Office of the Chief
Scientist (OCS) at the Ministry of Industry and Trade. Firms apply for an R&D grant on
a project by project basis. All firms intending to export part of the outcome of the R&D
project qualify for participation in the program. The vast majority of the subsidies granted
represent 50 percent of the agreed-upon R&D budget. Thus, upon approval of the project the
firm commits to match, dollar-by-dollar, the subsidy received by the OCS. If the project is
commercially successful, the firm pays the subsidy back in the form of royalties. Thus, the
grant becomes a loan conditional on the success of the project.
The R&D subsidy can be viewed as lowering the private cost of the project. Receiving
the subsidy may therefore turn an unprofitable project into a profitable one to be pursued by
the firm. Or it may speed-up the completion of a project already under way. If subsidized R&D
involves setting up or upgrading research facilities (labs) then the fixed costs of other current
and future R&D projects are lowered, increasing their probability of being undertaken. The
learning and know-how gained in the subsidized project can also spill-over to other current and
1For example, the R&D support given by the ATP in the U.S., by TEKES in Finland, by CDTI in Spain
and by the Norwegian government operate in a somewhat similar manner.
2