NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE, THE
LABOR MARKET AND THE STOCK MARKET
Rodolfo E. Manuelli
Working Paper 8022
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8022
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA02138
November 2000
I would like to thank Daron Acemoglu, Peter Norman, Jim Walker and Ken West for his comments, Dale
Mortensen for stimulating discussions of some issues, Hiro Kasahara for excellent research assistance, and
NSF for financial support. The views expressed in this paper are those of the author and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2000 by Rodolfo E. Manuelli. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Technological Change, the Labor Market and the Stock Market
Rodolfo E. Manuelli
NBER Working Paper No. 8022
November 2000
JEL No. E24, J64, 033
ABSTRACT
This paper presents a model in which a partially anticipated technological shock results, in the
short-run, in lower investment and higher unemployment. Because of the expectation of future lower
profits, the market value of existing firms --and the wages they pay-- decrease before the technology
becomes available. When the new technology arrives, the market value of new firms rises, investment
and average wages increase, but endogenous gradual adoption results in temporary wage dispersion
among identical workers. The model shows that the factors that affect the rate of adoption of a new
technology also influence the cross sectional dispersion of labor earnings among identical workers, and
firms' market values. The predictions of the model seem to be broadly consistent with the U.S.
experience of the last thirty years.
Rodolfo E. Manuelli
University ofWisconsin
Department ofEconomics
1180 Observatory Drive
7470 Social Science
Madison, WI 53706
andNBER
manuelli@ssc.wisc.edu

Technological Change, the Labor Market and the Stock Market
1. Introduction
One view of the impressive increases in productivity during the late 80's and especially the 90s is
that they are the result of the gradual adoption of a number of technologies sometimes referred
to as the "informational technology" (IT) revolution. Even though widespread adoption did not
start until the 80s, the nature of the technology could be anticipated at least a decade earlier. The
70s, however, were characterized by a lackluster performance of investment and productivity,
and by a sluggish labor market (slow growth in total compensation and high unemployment). In
addition, the stock market declined at the same time that the earnings price ratio increased
significantly.
This paper explores the impact upon the labor and the stock markets of a lag between the
time at which a major invention or discovery is identified, and the time at which it is used in
production. Thus, in this view, the process of incorporating a new major technology consists of
two phases: Phase I corresponds to the period after the major discovery, but before it becomes
practical to adopt it (i.e. before the technology is mature). Phase II starts when the new
discoveries are "usable" as (more productive) mature technologies in production.
This paper argues that this lag, coupled with a model of employment and investment
frictions, can account for:
• High unemployment, low real wages, low investment, and a low market value of
existing firms, during phase I.
• Increases in average wages, investment, and the market value of firms, and decreases
in unemployment during phase II.
• Increased cross sectional dispersion in labor income among identical workers, and in
the market value of firms in the adoption phase.
To a first approximation, these features agree with some of the U.S. evidence of the last
-2-

Technological Change, the Labor Market and the Stock Market
thirty years.
2
I consider a model with two basic frictions: First, as in Mortensen and Pissarides (1994),
there are matching frictions between workers and firms or technologies. Thus, it is not costless
to reallocate workers to different firms. Second, more productive technologies are embedded in
machines produced after the technology matures. Thus, the model is essentially of the vintage-
capital variety.
The basic idea is simple. Suppose that, att = 0, all agents learn that, at some random time
in the future, a new, more productive, technology (embedded in new capital goods) will become
available. Consider first what happens during the adoption phase (phase II). If firms using the
old technology are to compete with firms using the new technology after the new technology
becomes available, they will have to pay higher wages because of competition in the labor
market. However, given the costs of reallocating workers across firms, wages paid by the old
technology firms need not equal wages paid by the firms that adopt the new technology. Thus,
the arrival of the new technology increases --temporarily-- wage inequality.
What happens during the period before the new technology becomes available? Firms'
market values will drop --because of anticipated lower profits due to future higher wages-- and,
with them, the wages they are currently willing to pay. Moreover, firms entering the industry
during phase I have to adopt the old technology, as the new technology is not yet available. Thus,
these firms knowingly choose technologies that they know will be obsolete. Since their future
profits will be low, there are few entrants. This results in low investment andjob creation, which
contributes to an increase in unemployment. These effects are stronger the more productive the
technology or the sooner it is expected to arrive.
Thus, an anticipated technological innovation causes, in the short run, weak labor (low
wages and high unemployment) and stock markets (low market value of firms and high earnings
2 Relatively sluggish behavior of productivity before a period of significant growth also characterizes the
early decades of the 20 Century. In this case, the "dynamo revolution" generated qualitative features that are similar
th
to those of the IT revolution. See, for example, David and Wright (1999).
-3-