



1 Introduction
Consumers play a central role in solving agency problems. For example, someone who receives
poor service in a restaurant or store can ask to “see the manager”. Similarly, a person incorrectly
denied unemployment benefit or unlawfully arrested has opportunities to appeal the decision to a
higher authority. Consumers feedback to firms comes in a variety of forms, such as customer sat-
isfaction surveys, appeals, suits, complaints machanisms, “focus groups”, market research surveys
etc., and is used for a host of reasons.1 One reason to solicit (or perhaps a byproduct of soliciting)
consumer feedback is to effectively monitor the actions of employees. The purpose of this paper is
to understand how well they do so.
Consumers are a relatively cheap way of getting information on the performance of employees.
Yet agency theory has largely ignored their role: instead, monitoring precision typically appears
as an exogenous parameter of the agency problem. (See Prendergast, 1999, for a review.) I
argue here that a careful focus on consumers can help understand the ability of firms to resolve
agency problems, where their role depends on the congruence in preferences between consumers
and principals.2
The idea can be easily explained by a pair of examples. First, consider a restaurant customer
who receives poor service. Both the customer and the owner of the restaurant likely wish that
the customer has good service, as the restaurant’s success depends on it. I show below that in
this situation, the agent can be effectively monitored by the consumer, as the consumer has the
“right” objectives. In effect, the incentives of the customer are aligned with those of the principal,
which both improves incentives and oversight to correct mistakes. By contrast, now consider an
applicant for unemployment benefits. Here, there is considerable divergence in the preferences of
theDepartmentofLaborandanapplicantforunemploymentbenefit: theapplicantalwayswantsto
beapprovedforbenefits,whiletheDepartmentwishestodenyunqualifiedcandidates. Ishowbelow
that in this latter case not only are customers less useful, but more surprisingly, using consumer
feedback can be harmful to efficiency.
The model below has the following features. First, a good has to be allocated to a consumer,
where the optimal allocation depends on some information available to the agent. Second, she can
exert effort to improve the quality of her information. Third, monitoring by the principal is costly,
so he would like some information that an error has occurred before intervening. This is where
1Such feedback is useful to identifying consumer preferences, pointing out defects in product design, correcting
inadvertant mistakes, and so on.
2See Aghion and Tirole, 1997, for other work stressing the importance of congruence in preferences, though in
their case they emphasize correlation in preferences between agents and principals.
1

consumers play a role: the firm can give consumers the opportunity to complain, which can help
to focus further investigation. The issue addressed here is whether an equilibrium outcome exists
where this opportunity to complain improves agent incentives.
Initially consider the case where consumers have preferences that correspond closely with those
of the principal. Not surprisingly, I show that an equilibrium outcome always exists where (i)
the ability to complaint increases agent effort, and (ii) complaints serve to focus the attention of
the principal. Thus, when consumers have a similar ranking of preferences to the principal, they
can effectively play “watchdog” on the agent in such a way that their interventions increase social
welfare.3 I also show that more informed consumers increase efficiency in this case, both through
more effort and better oversight of errors.
Now assume that consumers have different preferences to the principal, as in the unemployment
benefits case. In this instance, the consumer benefits from some allocations that the pricipal would
wish to change, in that the consumer does not complain when he inefficiently benefits from the
decision made by the agent.4 This causes three problems. First, when the consumer is given
benefits, he never complains, which makes oversight less effective as the principal no longer knows
when to intervene. Second, incentives to exert effort by the agent are lower, as her errors are less
likely to be pointed out by the consumer.
These first two reasons do not make consumer feedback harmful, merely less useful than in
the congruent case. However, a third problem is that it is no longer guaranteed that consumers
can be used to increase incentives. This is because the agent realises that her mistakes are more
likely to be observed if she denies the benefit to the consumer than if she simply gives him what he
wants.5 But if agents wish to avoid such investigations, as arises in this paper for career concerns
reasons, there is a temptation to simply capitulate to the consumer to avoid investigation. This
incentive gives rise to a truth-telling condition, which must be satisfied in order to induce the agent
to deny benefits to a consumer. Loosely, the agent has to feel that an investigation will not harm
her significantly: otherwise, she cannot be induced to allocate goods according to her information.
Instead, she always gives the benefit to the consumer, which is clearly inefficient. If the truth-
3There are two reasons for this. First, consumers (at least probabilistically) point out inefficient allocations, and
the principal can intervene better to correct these mistakes. Second, consumers can be used to heighten incentives
for agents to exert effort, by increasing (reducing) the likelihood of investigations when mistakes are (not) made.
4For example, not many suspects could be trusted to turn themselves in if the police err in not arresting them,
nordowelfarerecipientswhodonotqualifyoftensendbackthechecks. Finally,itisrareforastudentwhoreceives
a higher grade than they deserve to point this out.
5Forexample,anINSofficialcouldallowanunqualifiedcandidatetoenterthecountryratherthanavoidthetype
of case reported in the New York Times, 2000, where the officials were accused of racism. Similarly, consider the
effect of the recent increases in oversight of the IRS. This has resulted in “a sharp roll-off in tax investigations as
auditors, fearing for their bureaucratic lives, proceed timidly..[as]..tax collectors are too worried about their jobs to
be aggressive” (Star Tribune, 2000).
2