NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WILL UNIONISM PROSPER IN CYBER-SPACE?
THE PROMISE OF THE INTERNET FOR EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION
Wayne J. Diamond
Richard B. Freeman
Working Paper 8483
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8483
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2001
This paper has benefited from the November, LSE Centre for Economic Performance Internet and Economy
conference and the May 21-22 Trades Union Congress, LSE Centre for Economic Performance and Harvard Trade
Union Program sponsored “Unions and the Internet” conference, and from participation on the TUC’s Task Group
on Promoting Trade Unionism. Elaine Bernard and Nigel Stanley have provided valuable commentary. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2001 by Wayne J. Diamond and Richard B. Freeman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Will Unionism Prosper in Cyber-Space?
The Promise of the Internet for Employee Organization
Wayne J. Diamond and Richard B. Freeman
NBER Working Paper No. 8483
September 2001
ABSTRACT
This paper argues that the low cost of information, communication, and interaction on the Web
offers trade unions opportunities to improve services and attract members and thus reinvent themselves
for the 21st Century. Analyzing current use of the Internet by unions in the United Kingdom and United
States, we develop five hypothesis about the impact of the Internet on unions. 1) the Customized Services
hypothesis that unions will individualize services; 2) the Cyber-organizing hypothesis that the Web will
ease organization and produce virtual minority unions at many non-union firms; 3) the Cyber-democracy
hypothesis that the Web will enhance democracy in unions; 4) the Cyber-dispute hypothesis that the Web
will become an important space for industrial disputes; and 5) the New Internationalism hypothesis that
the Web will strengthen the international labor community. If unions fail to exploit the opportunities on
the Web to gain members, we expect other organizations, Internet recruitment sites, specialized advice
centers, and the like, to fill the e-union niche.
Wayne J. Diamond Richard B. Freeman
Centre for Economic Performance Harvard University,
London School of Economics NBER,
w.j.diamond@lse.ac.uk Centre for Economic Performance,
London School of Economics
a.freeman@lse.ac.uk

3
The Internet is the 21st Century’s mode of mass communication.1 In 2001 over 70% of
Americans and Scandinavians, 50% of the British, and over a third of persons in most other
advanced OECD countries used the Internet. The logistic growth curve for internet usage in the
US parallels that for television in the 1950s (Thierer, 2000, chart 3), making the Internet one of
most rapidly adopted innovations ever.
Some analysts believe that the Internet will render superfluous intermediate organizations like
unions since the Internet can link individuals directly to firms and governments (Grossman,
Corrado and Firestone; Agromonte; Castells). According to this view, “(T)he big losers (from
the Web) ... are the traditional institutions that have served as the main intermediaries between
government and its citizens – the political parties, labor unions, civic associations ... (Grossman,
p. 16”).2 By contrast, some analysts of unions and technology (Shostak, Lee, Darlington) argue
the opposite – that the Internet will be a transforming technology that will reinvigorate trade
unionism.
What is the impact of the Internet on employee organization and representation? How have
unions responded to the new technology? Can the Internet strengthen labor in the US and UK?
Will unionism prosper or wither in Cyberspace?
1 Internet refers to the infrastructure of interconnected computer networks. The World
Wide Web or Web refers to one of the protocols that transfers information on the Internet. But
these terms are increasingly used interchangeably and that is what we do in this essay.
2 Bimber offers a valuable critique of this view and a more nuanced analysis of how the
Internet will affect interest groups.

4
Since the Internet is a recent phenomena, answers to these questions must be based on logical
extrapolations of Internet capabilities and interpretation of emerging patterns of Web use rather
than detailed econometric or historical analysis. As far as possible, we ground our answers in
data: surveys of Web use by workers; a compendium of the Web presence of unions; examples of
leading edge union Web activities; and a review of worker-oriented Web-based services from
nonunion organizations. We present our conclusions in the form of hypotheses about how the
Internet affects unions with examples to illustrate those effects.
Our principal conclusion is that the Internet offers unions great opportunities to improve services
and attract members because it bridges the gap between an increasingly heterogeneous and
individualistic work force and the collective activity and solidarity that lies at the heart of trade
unionism. If, because of organizational rigidities, unions fail to exploit the opportunities of the
Web, we expect other organizations – Internet recruitment firms, occupational associations,
ethnic or gender-based groups – to do so.
Worker and union members use of the Web
To begin, it is important to recognize that union members and other workers are increasingly on
line in the UK and US.
The best evidence on union members’ use of the Web in the UK comes from the June/July 2001
British Workers Representation and Participation Survey, which contained information on