NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FIXED VERSUS FLEXIBLE: LESSONS FROM EMS ORDER FLOW
William P. Killeen
Richard K. Lyons
Michael J. Moore
Working Paper 8491
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8491
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2001
Killeen now works for Setanta Asset Management in Dublin. The original version of this paper was written while
Killeen worked at BNP Paribas Asset Management in London. We thank the following for valuable comments:
Kathryn Dominguez, Ken Froot, Carol Osler, Helene Rey, Andrew Rose, participants at the Fall 2000 NBER IFM
meeting, and the lunch- groups at Berkeley and Queens. Killeen also wishes to thank Mr. Loic Meinnel, Global
Head of Foreign Exchange, BNP Paribas for very useful discussions on FX markets during this project. Thanks
too to Tina Kane. Lyons thanks the National Science Foundation for financial assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research, BNP
Paribas or Setanta Asset Management.
© 2001 by William P. Killeen, Richard K. Lyons and Michael J. Moore. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Fixed versus Flexible: Lessons from EMS Order Flow
William P. Killeen, Richard K. Lyons and Michael J. Moore
NBER Working Paper No. 8491
September 2001
JEL No. F31, G12, G15
ABSTRACT
This paper addresses the puzzle of regime-dependent volatility in foreign exchange. We extend
the literature in two ways. First, our microstructural model provides a qualitatively new explanation for
the puzzle. Second, we test implications of our model using Europe’s recent shift to rigidly fixed rates
(EMS to EMU). In the model, shocks to order flow induce volatility under flexible rates because they
have portfolio-balance effects on price, whereas under fixed rates the same shocks do not have portfolio-
balance effects. These effects arise in one regime and not the other because the elasticity of speculative
demand for foreign exchange is (endogenously) regime-dependent: low elasticity under flexible rates
magnifies portfolio-balance effects; under credibly fixed rates, elasticity of speculative demand is infinite,
eliminating portfolio-balance effects. New data on FF/DM transactions show that order flow had
persistent effects on the exchange rate before EMU parities were announced. After announcement,
determination of the FF/DM rate was decoupled from order flow, as predicted by the model.
William P. Killeen Richard K. Lyons Michael J. Moore
Setanta Asset Management Haas School of Business, S545 School of Mgmt and Economics
College Park House U.C. Berkeley Queen’s University, Belfast
South Frederick Street Berkeley, CA 94720-1900 Belfast BT7 1NN
Dublin 2 Ireland and NBER Northern Ireland, UK
Tel: 510-642-1059
Fax: 510-642-4700
Email: lyons@haas.berkeley.edu

Fixed versus Flexible: Lessons from EMS Order Flow
1. Introduction
If there is a topic at the center of international macroeconomics, it is fixed versus
flexible exchange rates. Whether teaching Mundell-Fleming, speaking about the
Impossible Trinity, or writing about “excess” volatility, the fixed-versus-flexible debate
is deeply relevant. At the same time, many of the issues in this debate remain unresolved.
Important among them is the regime-volatility puzzle: similar macroeconomic
environments produce much more exchange-rate volatility under flexible-rate regimes
(e.g., Flood and Rose 1995).1 This finding has prompted many authors to conclude that
the critical determinants of flexible-rate volatility are not macroeconomic. It is unclear,
however, what these non-macro determinants might be.
This paper addresses the regime-volatility puzzle from a new perspective. Our
approach augments the traditional macro-asset approach with some price-determination
microeconomics. In particular, we focus our theoretical and empirical analysis on the role
of order flow. (Order flow is signed volume; seller-initiated trades are negative order
flow and buyer-initiated trades are positive order flow.) In microeconomic models of
asset-price determination, order flow plays an important causal role that arises because
order flow conveys information. The type of information that order flow conveys
includes any information that is relevant to the realization of uncertain demands, so long
as that information is not common knowledge. (If common knowledge—as is generally
assumed in macro exchange-rate models—then price adjusts without any need for an
order-flow role.) For example, order flow may convey information about dispersed shifts
in portfolio balance (e.g., shifts in hedging demands or risk tolerances), or about
differential interpretation of common news. In a non-common-knowledge setting, order
1 To some, lower volatility under fixed rates may seem obvious. But empirically, fixed rates do have a distribution over
time (due to parity changes). And in most models, keeping the variance of this distribution below that under flexible
rates requires keeping the variance of fundamentals below that under flexible rates. As an empirical matter, this has not
been the case, per Flood and Rose (1995). Our explanation provides a source of volatility that operates only under
flexible rates, but is not included among the fundamentals previously considered.
1

flow becomes the intermediate link between evolving information and price—a
proximate cause of price movements (Evans and Lyons 1999).
Order flow is potentially relevant for a high-level debate like fixed-versus-flexible
because its impact on exchange rates is persistent. Though our model makes this
persistence explicit, let us provide some perspective. Note that if order flow conveys
information, then its price impact should persist, at least under the identifying assumption
used regularly in empirical work that information effects on price are permanent (e.g.,
French and Roll 1986, Hasbrouck 1991). That is not to suggest that order flow cannot
also have transitory effects on price, e.g., from temporary indigestion effects (sometimes
called inventory effects). But insofar as order flow communicates information—along the
lines noted in the previous paragraph—then some portion of order flow’s effects on price
will persist.
Order flow may be key to resolving the regime-volatility puzzle. One reason it has
not been considered to date is because empirical work on this puzzle examines macro
determinants, whereas order flow is generally viewed as non-macro.2 If order flow is
indeed a determinant, then it might explain why flexible regimes produce more volatility
than macroeconomics predicts. There is now considerable evidence that the “if” part of
that last sentence is met: order flow is a determinant (Lyons 1995, Evans 1999, Payne
1999, Evans and Lyons 1999, Rime 2000). Whether the relation found by these authors
for flexible rates is affected by differences in exchange-rate regime is an open question,
however, one that we address in this paper (both theoretically and empirically).
The main lesson from the theoretical portion of the paper is the following: exchange
rates are more volatile under flexible rates because of order flow. Importantly, this is not
because order flow is more volatile under flexible rates (indeed, its volatility is
unchanged in our model across regimes). The intuition for order flow’s role is tied to the
2 Though generally viewed as non-macro, order flow need not be divorced from macro. Consider models in
microstructure finance, where order flow signals that some agents’ expectations about future fundamentals have
changed. For exchange rates, one can write the price of foreign exchange, P, as a function of current and expected
t
future macro fundamentals: Ptt =gt(,f fe +)1 . Order flow may be the way that price-setters learn about changes in ft e +1 .
Under this hypothesis, order flow is a proximate cause of price changes, but macro (macro expectations) remains the
underlying cause. Note too that this hypothesis offers a potential explanation for the empirical results of Meese and
Rogoff (1983): if the macro variables that order flow forecasts are largely beyond the one-year horizon, then the
empirical link between exchange rates and current macro variables will be loose. That Meese-Rogoff-style empirical
results are more positive at horizons beyond one year is consistent with this “anticipation” hypothesis.
2