NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SHORT SALE CONSTRAINTS AND STOCK RETURNS
Charles M. Jones
Owen A. Lamont
Working Paper 8494
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8494
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2001
We thank Gene Fama, Lisa Meulbroek, Mark Mitchell, Christopher Polk, Richard Thaler, Tuomo Vuolteenaho,
and participants at the University of Chicago and Columbia Business School lunch series for helpful comments.
We thank Tina Lam, Frank Fang Yu, and Rui Zhou for research assistance. We thank Gene Fama and Ken French
for providing data. Lamont gratefully acknowledges support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the Center for
Research in Securities Prices at the University of Chicago Graduate School of Business, and the National Science
Foundation. The most recent version of this paper is available at: http://gsbwww.uchicago.edu/fac/owen.lamont.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2001 by Charles M. Jones and Owen A. Lamont. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Short Sale Constraints and Stock Returns
Charles M. Jones and Owen A. Lamont
NBER Working Paper No. 8494
October 2001
JEL No. G14
ABSTRACT
Stocks can be overpriced when short sale constraints bind. We study the costs of short selling
equities, 1926-1933, using the publicly observable market for borrowing stock. Some stocks are
sometimes expensive to short, and it appears that stocks enter the borrowing market when shorting
demand is high. We find that stocks that are expensive to short or which enter the borrowing market have
high valuations and low subsequent returns, consistent with the overpricing hypothesis. Size-adjusted
returns are one to two percent lower per month for new entrants, and despite high costs it is profitable to
short them.
Charles M. Jones Owen A. Lamont
Columbia University Graduate School of Business
Graduate School of Business University of Chicago
Uris Hall, Room 806 1101 E. 58th St.
3022 Broadway Chicago, IL 60637
New York, NY 10027 and NBER
Tel: 773-702-6414
Fax: 773-702-0458
owen.lamont@gsb.uchicago.edu

1. Introduction
Selling short can be expensive. In order to sell short, one must borrow the stock from a
current owner, and this stock lender may charge a fee to the short seller. The fee is determined
by supply and demand for the stock in the stock loan market. In addition to these direct costs,
there are other costs and risks associated with shorting, such as the risk that the short position
will have to be involuntarily closed at a loss due to recall of the stock loan. Finally, legal and
institutional constraints inhibit or prevent investors from selling short. In financial economics,
these impediments and costs are collectively referred to as “short sale constraints”.
The presence of short sale constraints means that stocks may become overpriced.
Consider a stock whose fundamental value is $100 (i.e., $100 would be the share price in a
frictionless world). If it costs $1 to short the stock, then arbitrageurs cannot prevent the stock
from rising to $101. If the $1 is a holding cost that must be paid every day that the short position
is held, then selling the stock short becomes a gamble that the stock falls by at least $1 a day. In
such a market, a stock could be very overpriced, yet if there is no way for arbitrageurs to earn
excess returns, the market is still in some sense efficient. Fama (1991) describes an efficient
market as one in which “deviations from the extreme version of the efficiency hypothesis are
within information and trading costs.” If frictions are large, “efficient” prices may be far from
frictionless prices.
In this paper, we explore overpricing and market efficiency using new, direct evidence on
the cost of shorting. Specifically, we introduce a unique dataset that details shorting costs for
New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) stocks from 1926-1933. In this period, the cost of shorting
certain NYSE stocks was set in the “loan crowd”, a centralized stock loan market on the floor of
the NYSE. A list of loan crowd stocks and their associated loaning rates was printed daily in the
1

Wall Street Journal (WSJ).
From this public record, we have collected eight years of data on an average of 80
actively traded stocks, by far the most extensive panel dataset on the cost of shorting ever
assembled. There is substantial variation in the cost of shorting, both in the cross-section and
over time for individual stocks. Furthermore, new stocks periodically appear in the loan crowd,
and we are able to track the behavior of these stocks both before and after they first appear on the
list. A stock appears on the list when shorting demand cannot be met by normal channels, and
when stocks begin trading in the centralized borrowing market, they usually have high shorting
costs. Thus the list conveys important information about shorting demand.
This paper makes two contributions. First, we characterize the cost of borrowing
securities during this period, and are able to say which of the patterns observed circa 2000 are
repeated in our sample, thus broadening the facts presented in D’Avolio (2001) and Geczy et al
(2001). For example, as in current markets, most large-cap stocks can be shorted fairly
inexpensively, but sometimes even large-cap stocks become temporarily expensive to short.
Small stocks tend to be more expensive to short, but only during the first half of the sample. We
also quantify the extent to which the value effect is explainable by shorting costs.
Second, and most importantly, we show that stocks that are expensive to short have low
subsequent returns, consistent with the hypothesis that they are overpriced. Stocks that newly
enter the borrowing market exhibit especially substantial overpricing. Prices rise prior to
entering the loan list, peak immediately before a stock enters the loan list, and subsequently fall
as the apparent overpricing is corrected.
By itself, this return predictability is important because it shows that transactions costs
keep arbitrageurs from forcing down the prices of overvalued stocks. However, we also find that
2