NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE REALLY LONG-RUN PERFORMANCE OF INITIAL PUBLIC OFFERINGS:
THE PRE-NASDAQ EVIDENCE
Paul A. Gompers
Josh Lerner
Working Paper 8505
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8505
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2001
We thank Ken French for providing access to the historical size and book-to-market breakpoints, portfolio returns,
and factor returns. Malcolm Baker, Gene Fama, Ken French, Andrew Metrick, Jay Ritter, Andrei Shleifer, Jeff
Wurgler, and participants in the NBER Corporate Finance program meeting and the Harvard Business School
Entrepreneurship Conference provided helpful comments. Malcolm Baker, Matt Bluestone, Eugene DeAngelis,
Gene Divolio, Amit Doshi, Vedica Jain, Jason Jun, Nik Johnston, Darpan Kalra, Mbago Kaniki, Flora Kim, Tom
Knox, Neil Lawande, Ethan Lebowitz, and Eitan Levisohn provided excellent research assistance. Special thanks
go to Girts Graudins and Eric Nierenberg for their outstanding contributions to this project. Harvard Business
School’s Division of Research provided financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2001 by Paul A. Gompers and Josh Lerner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

The Really Long-Run Performance of Initial Public Offerings:
The Pre-NASDAQ Evidence
Paul A. Gompers and Josh Lerner
NBER Working Paper No. 8505
October 2001
JEL No. G24, G14
ABSTRACT
Financial economists in recent years have closely examined and intensely debated the
performance of initial public offerings using data after the formation of NASDAQ. The paper seeks to
shed light on this controversy by undertaking a large, out-of-sample study: we examine the performance
for up to five years after listing of nearly 3,661 initial public offerings in the United States from 1935 to
1972. The sample displays some evidence of underperformance when event-time buy-and-hold abnormal
returns are used. The underperformance disappears, however, when cumulative abnormal returns are
utilized. A calendar-time analysis also shows that over the entire sample period – i.e., from 1935 to 1976
– IPOs return as much as the market. Finally, the intercepts in CAPM and Fama-French three-factor
regressions are insignificantly different from zero, suggesting no abnormal performance.
Paul A. Gompers Josh Lerner
Harvard Business School Harvard Business School
Morgan 485 Morgan 395
Boston, MA 02163 Boston, MA 02163
and NBER and NBER
Tel: 617-495-6297 Tel: 617-495-6065
Fax: 617-496-8443 Fax: 617-496-7357
Email: pgompers@hbs.edu Email: jlerner@hbs.edu

I. Introduction
Ritter (1991) and Loughran and Ritter (1995) document severe underperformance of
initial public offerings (IPOs) during the past twenty years. In discussing these results, they
suggest that investors may systematically be too optimistic about the prospects of firms that are
issuing equity for the first time. Their results have inspired countless articles in the popular press
about the danger of investing in IPOs, as well as academic research that has shown that
underperformance extends to other countries as well as to seasoned equity offerings.
The results concerning IPO performance, however, are not uncontroversial. Brav and
Gompers (1997) show that firms that go public do not perform worse than benchmarks matched
on the basis of size and book-to-market ratios. In addition, they show that value weighting IPO
returns dramatically reduces the measured underperformance. Finally, they argue that weighting
returns in event time by the number of IPOs may overstate underperformance.
The debate about the underperformance of IPOs, however, may not easily be answered
without out-of-sample tests. Most studies on the underperformance of IPOs have examined the
same post-NASDAQ time period. Data from non-U.S. markets is not conclusive because of the
shorter time periods employed and the cross sectional correlation between returns of IPOs in the
U.S. and the return of IPOs in these other markets. Common economic shocks or common
movements in fads and sentiment potentially drive these correlations.
In this paper we undertake a large, out-of-sample investigation of IPO underperformance.
In particular, we gather information on the universe of firm-commitment IPOs in the United

States from 1935 to 1972 and measure their returns for up to five years after listing. In order to
compile this information, we hand-collected over one hundred and fifty thousand observations
from such publications as the Bank and Quotation Record, the S&P Dividend Guide, and the
various Moody’s manuals. This is the first large-scale examination of IPO returns prior to the
creation of the NASDAQ exchange, and more than doubles the period over which the
performance of U.S. IPOs can be observed. As such, it represents a potentially powerful sample
to examine the performance of equity issuers.
The results demonstrate that the performance of IPOs from 1935 to 1972 depends upon
the method of return measurement used. While the sample shows underperformance when
performance is measured using value-weighted event-time buy-and-hold abnormal returns, this
underperformance disappears when either equal-weighted buy-and-hold abnormal returns or
cumulative abnormal returns are utilized. The calendar-time analysis shows that over the entire
sample period—i.e., from 1935 to 1976—IPOs return as much as the market. Finally, in simple
Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) and Fama-French three-factor regressions, the intercepts
are insignificantly different from zero or even significantly positive. The difference between the
event-time and calendar-time results stems from the clustering of IPOs in periods immediately
preceding poor IPO performance: IPOs and similar size and book-to-market stocks have lower
returns after periods with heavy IPO issue volume, though the effects are not statistically
significant.
The results raise questions concerning the interpretation of the underpeformance of IPOs
seen in the NASDAQ era. The long-run performance of pre-NASDAQ IPOs depends
2