NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY OF REAL-TIME FINANCIAL RISK PROCESSING
Andrew W. Lo
Dmitry V. Repin
Working Paper 8508
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8508
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2001
Research support from the MIT Laboratory for Financial Engineering is gratefully acknowledged. We thank J.C.
Mercier for helpful comments and discussion. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2001 by Andrew W. Lo and Dmitry V. Repin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

The Psychophysiology of Real-Time Financial Risk Processing
Andrew W. Lo and Dmitry V. Repin
NBER Working Paper No. 8508
October 2001
JEL No. G10, G14, C91, C93
ABSTRACT
A longstanding controversy in economics and finance is whether financial markets are governed
by rational forces or by emotional responses. We study the importance of emotion in the decisionmaking
process of professional securities traders by measuring their physiological characteristics, e.g., skin
conductance, blood volume pulse, etc., during live trading sessions while simultaneously capturing
real-time prices from which market events can be defined. In a sample of 10 traders, we find significant
correlation between electrodermal responses and transient market events, and between changes in
cardiovascular variables and market volatility. We also observe differences in these correlations among
the 10 traders which may be systematically related to the traders' levels of experience.
Andrew W. Lo Dmitry V. Repin
MIT Sloan School of Management Boston University
50 Memorial Drive Department of Cognitive and Neural Systems
E52-432 677 Beacon Street
Cambridge, MA 02142 Boston, MA 02215
and NBER dmrepin@cns.bu.edu
alo@mit.edu

The spectacular rise of US stock-market prices in the technology sector over the past
few years and the even more spectacular crash last year has intensified the well-worn con-
troversy surrounding the rationality of investors. Most financial economists are advocates
of the “Efficient Markets Hypothesis” (Samuelson, 1965) in which prices are determined by
the competitive trading of many self-interested investors, and such trading eliminates any
informational advantages that might exist among any members of the investment commu-
nity. The result is a market in which prices “fully reflect all available information” and are
therefore unforecastable.
CriticsoftheEfficientMarketsHypothesisarguethatinvestorsareoften—ifnotalways—
irrational,exhibitingpredictableandfinanciallyruinousbiasessuchasoverconfidence(Fischoff
& Slovic, 1980; Barber & Odean, 2001; Gervais & Odean, 2001), overreaction (DeBondt &
Thaler, 1986), loss aversion (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979; Shefrin & Statman, 1985; Odean,
1998), herding (Huberman & Regev, 2001), psychological accounting (Tversky & Kahne-
man, 1981), mis-calibration of probabilities (Lichtenstein, Fischoff, & Phillips, 1982), and
regret (Bell, 1982; Clarke, Krase, & Statman, 1994). The sources of these irrationalities
are often attributed to psychological factors—fear, greed, and other emotional responses to
price fluctuations and dramatic changes in an investor’s wealth. Although no clear alterna-
tive to the Efficient Markets Hypothesis has yet emerged, a growing number of economists,
psychologists, and financial-industry professionals have begun to use the terms “behavioral
economics” and “behavioral finance” to differentiate themselves from the standard ortho-
doxy. The fact that the current value of the Nasdaq Composite Index, a bellwether indicator
of the technology sector, is 1687.70 (September 7, 2001)—only 33.4% of its historical high of
5048.62 (March 10, 2000) reached less than two years ago—lends credence to the critics of
market rationality. Such critics argue that either the earlier run-up in the technology sector
was driven by unbridled greed and optimism, or that the precipitous drop in value of such a
significant portion of US economy must be due to irrational fears and pessimism.
However, recent research in the cognitive sciences and financial economics suggest an
important link between rationality in decisionmaking and emotion (Grossberg & Gutowski,
1987; Damasio, 1994; Elster, 1998; Lo, 1999), implying that the two notions are not anti-
thetical, but in fact complementary.
In this study, we attempt to verify this link experimentally by measuring the real-
1

time psychophysiological characteristics—skin conductance, blood volume pulse, heart rate,
electromyographical signals, respiration, and body temperature—of professional securities
traders during live trading sessions. Using portable biofeedback equipment, we are able to
measurethesephysiologicalcharacteristicsinatrader’snaturalenvironmentwithoutdisrupt-
ing his workflow while simultaneously capturing real-time financial pricing data from which
market events can be defined. By correlating these events with the traders’ psychophysio-
logical responses, we are able to determine the relation between financial-risk measures and
emotional states and dynamics. In a pilot sample of 10 traders, we find significant correla-
tion between electrodermal responses and transient market events, and between changes in
cardiovascular variables and market volatility. We also observe differences in these correla-
tions among the 10 traders which may be systematically related to the amount of trading
experience.
In studying the link between emotion and rational decisionmaking in the face of uncer-
tainty, financial securities traders are ideal subjects for several reasons. Because the basic
functions of securities trading involve frequent decisions concerning risk/reward trade-offs,
traders are almost continuously engaged in the activity that we wish to study. This allows us
to conduct our study in vivo and with minimal interference to and, therefore, contamination
of the subjects’ natural motives and behavior. Traders are typically provided with signifi-
cant economic incentives to avoid many of the biases that are often associated with irrational
investment practices. Moreover, they are highly paid professionals that have undergone a
variety of training exercises, apprenticeships, and trial periods through which their skills
have been finely honed. Therefore, they are likely to be among the most rational decision-
makers in the general population, hence ideal subjects for examining the role of emotion in
rational decisionmaking processes. Finally, due to the real-time nature of most professional
trading operations, it is possible to construct accurate real-time records of the environment
in which traders make their decisions, i.e., the fluctuations of market prices of the securi-
ties they trade. With such real-time records, we are able to correlate market events such
as periods of high price-volatility with synchronous real-time measurements of physiological
characteristics.
To measure the emotional responses of our subjects during their trading activities, we fo-
cusonindirectmanifestationsthroughtheresponsesoftheautonomicnervoussystem(ANS)
2