NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CRONYISM AND CAPITAL CONTROLS: EVIDENCE FROM MALAYSIA
Simon Johnson
Todd Mitton
Working Paper 8521
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8521
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2001
Simon Johnson thanks the MIT Entrepreneurship Center for support. For helpful comments we thank Daron
Acemoglu, Olivier Blanchard, Jim Brau, Ricardo Caballero, Ray Fisman, Tarun Khanna, Grant McQueen,
Randall Morck, Sendhil Mullainathan, Raghuram Rajan, Dani Rodrik, David Scharfstein, Andrei Shleifer,
Jeremy Stein, Keith Vorkink, and participants at the MIT Macroeconomics lunch, the NBER conference on
the Malaysian Currency Crisis, the NBER corporate finance program spring 2001 meeting, and Brigham
Young University. We also thank several Malaysian colleagues for sharing their insights off the record. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2001 by Simon Johnson and Todd Mitton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Cronyism and Capital Controls: Evidence from Malaysia
Simon Johnson and Todd Mitton
NBER Working Paper No. 8521
October 2001
JEL No. E, G, O
ABSTRACT
The initial impact of the Asian financial crisis in Malaysia reduced the expected value of
government subsidies to politically favored firms. Of the estimated $60 billion loss in market value for
politically connected firms from July 1997 to August 1998, roughly 9% can be attributed to the fall in the
value of their connections. Firing the Deputy Prime Minister and imposing capital controls in September
1998 primarily benefited firms with strong ties to Prime Minister Mahathir. Of the estimated $5 billion
gain in market value for Mahathir-connected firms during September 1998, approximately 32% was due
to the increase in the value of their connections. The evidence suggests Malaysian capital controls
provided a screen behind which favored firms could be supported.
Simon Johnson Todd Mitton
Sloan School of Management Brigham Young University
E52-562 TNRB 660
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Marriott School of Management
50 Memorial Drive Provo, UT 84602
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347 todd.mitton@byu.edu
and NBER
sjohnson@mit.edu

1. Introduction
Until the late 1970s, capital controls were widely used to prevent the free flow of
finance. A cautious relaxation of such controls during the 1980s proved consistent with
greater economic integration in Europe and strengthened the case for capital market
opening more generally. By the time the IMF and World Bank encouraged a further
wave of liberalization for “emerging markets” in the early 1990s, capital controls
appeared to be finished as a serious policy tool for relatively open economies (Bhagwati
1998a). Today, however, capital controls are again being taken seriously. Malaysia
reimposed capital controls in September 1998, China and Chile maintain effective capital
account restrictions, and there is debate regarding the value of free capital flows in a
number of crisis-prone countries, including Korea, Russia, and Turkey. Capital controls
have also just begun to be mentioned as a possibility for Japan (Dornbusch 2001b).
There are two main views on the causes and effects of capital controls. The more
established view emphasizes macroeconomics. If a country faces a severe external crisis,
particularly one caused by pure panic, and if standard measures have failed, Krugman
(1998) argues that imposing capital controls may be an effective way to stabilize the
economy. More generally, Bhagwati (1998a and 1998b) and Rodrik (2000) oppose the
conventional wisdom that free capital flows help countries benefit from trade
liberalization, and argue instead that capital market liberalization invites speculative
attacks. The recent performance of Malaysia has been interpreted as demonstrating that
capital controls can have positive macroeconomic effects (Kaplan and Rodrik 2001),
although this claim is controversial (Dornbusch 2001a).
While not denying the importance of macroeconomic issues, the second view puts
greater emphasis on institutions (i.e., the rules, practices and organizations that govern an
economy). Rajan and Zingales (1998) argue that capital controls are an essential part of
the package of policies that allows “relationship-based” capitalism to function. In this
system, informal relationships between politicians and banks channel lending towards
approved firms, and this is easier to sustain when a country is relatively isolated from
international capital flows. If capital controls are relaxed, as in some parts of Asia in the
early 1990s, the result may be overborrowing and financial collapse (Rajan and Zingales
1

1998).1 In this context, Rajan and Zingales (2001) suggest that reimposing capital
controls may be attractive if it enables politicians to support the financing of particular
firms (sometimes known as “cronyism”). At the same time, directed lending behind
capital controls may store up problems in the form of bad loans and distorted incentives.2
Recent experience in Malaysia offers an opportunity to assess the extent to which
capital controls are linked with cronyism. There are two testable implications at the firm
level from the Rajan and Zingales view. Firms with stronger political connections should
(1) suffer more when a macroeconomic shock reduces the government’s ability to
provide privileges and subsidies and (2) benefit more when the imposition of capital
controls allows a higher level of subsidies.
Using data from Malaysia before and after the imposition of capital controls, this
paper reports strong support for both hypotheses. In the initial phase of the crisis, from
July 1997 to August 1998, of the estimated $60 billion loss in market value for politically
connected firms, roughly 9% can be attributed to the fall in the expected value of their
connections. With the imposition of capital controls in September 1998, of the estimated
$5 billion gain in market value for firms connected to Prime Minister Mahathir, about
32% can be attributed to the increase in the value of their connections. For connected
firms, the value of political connections was approximately 16% of their total market
value at the end of September 1998.
Malaysia is an appealing case for several reasons. Researchers identified
important relationships between politicians and firms before capital controls were
imposed (Gomez and Jomo 1997). Politically connected firms may generally differ in
unobservable ways relative to unconnected firms, but in the Malaysian data it is possible
also to examine variation in performance within the set of politically connected firms.
1 Theoretically, relaxing capital controls may lead to financial distress in at least three ways.
First, local financial institutions may respond by taking on more risk. Second, local firms may
borrow directly from international lenders who are either unable to assess risks appropriately or
believe that there is an implicit sovereign guarantee. Third, after they lose their monopolies, local
banks may be less willing to bail out firms that encounter problems, as in Petersen and Rajan
(1995).
2 Leading proponents of the macroeconomic perspective on capital controls are aware that
institutional issues may be important as well. For example, Kaplan and Rodrik (2001) clearly
state their concerns that capital controls may distort incentives and undermine future performance
in Malaysia. However, their emphasis is on macroeconomic effects (i.e., for all firms), rather
than the differential benefits for just some firms.
2