NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHY ARE FOREIGN FIRMS LISTED IN THE U.S. WORTH MORE?
Craig Doidge
G. Andrew Karolyi
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 8538
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8538
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2001
Respectively, Ph. D. candidate, Professor of Finance and Dean’s Distinguished Research Professor, and
Professor of Finance and Everett D. Reese Chair of Banking and Monetary Economics at the Fisher College
of Business of the Ohio State University. René Stulz is also a research associate of the National Bureau of
Economic Research. We thank David Brown, Steve Cosslett, Mark Flannery, David Hirshleifer, Dong Lee,
Andy Naranjo, James Shapiro (NYSE), Michael Weisbach, and seminar participants at the Ohio State
University and University of Florida for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2001 by Craig Doidge, G. Andrew Karolyi and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Why are Foreign Firms Listed in the U.S. Worth More?
Craig Doidge, G. Andrew Karolyi and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 8538
October 2001
JEL No. G15, G30, G32
ABSTRACT
At the end of 1997, the foreign companies listed in the U.S. have a Tobin’s q ratio that exceeds
by 16.5% the q ratio of firms from the same country that are not listed in the U.S. The valuation
difference is statistically significant and largest for exchange-listed firms, where it reaches 37%. The
difference persists even after controlling for a number of firm and country characteristics. We propose
a theory that explains this valuation difference. We hypothesize that controlling shareholders of firms
listed in the U.S. cannot extract as many private benefits from control compared to controlling
shareholders of firms not listed in the U.S., but that their firms are better able to take advantage of growth
opportunities. Consequently, the cross-listed firms should be those firms where the interests of the
controlling shareholder are better aligned with the interests of other shareholders. The growth
opportunities of cross-listed firms will be more highly valued than those of firms not listed in the U.S.
both because cross-listed firms are better able to take advantage of these opportunities and because a
smaller fraction of the cash flow of these firms is expropriated by controlling shareholders. We find that
our theory explains the greater valuation of cross-listed firms. In particular, we find expected sales growth
is valued more highly for firms listed in the U.S. and that this effect is greater for firms from countries
with poorer investor rights.
Craig Doidge G. Andrew Karolyi
The Ohio State University The Ohio State University
Department of Finance Department of Finance
Max M. Fisher College of Business Max M. Fisher College of Business
2100 Neil Avenue 2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210 Columbus, OH 43210
doidge.4@osu.edu karolyi@cob.osu.edu
René M. Stulz
The Ohio State University
Department of Finance
Max M. Fisher College of Business
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu

1. Introduction
Why is it that less than one in ten large companies from outside the U.S. choose to list their
shares on U.S. markets? Surveys of managers typically find that they perceive many benefits
from listing in the U.S. In particular, they mention that firms benefit from listing because it
lowers their cost of capital, gives them access to foreign capital markets, increases their ability to
raise equity, increases their shareholder base, makes their stock more liquid, and adds visibility,
exposure, and prestige (Mittoo, 1992, Fanto and Karmel, 1997). At the same time, the costs
associated with a listing that managers report seem small in comparison to the benefits. These
costs are SEC reporting and compliance requirements, as well as the direct legal costs and
investment-banking fees associated with the listing. In a number of cases, the direct initial costs
have even been picked up by the depository banks.1 Given this apparent imbalance between
benefits and costs, do firms that list in the U.S. benefit from listing? Are firms that list worth
more than firms that do not? Why is it that we do not see more companies listing in the U.S.? Is it
that the managers and controlling shareholders of firms that do not list would not benefit from
listing when other shareholders might benefit from it?
To address these questions, we first compare the value of foreign firms listed in the U.S. to
the value of foreign firms that are not listed in the U.S. Using the Worldscope database universe
of firms, we find that the firms listed in the U.S. have a Tobin’s q ratio that exceeds the q ratio of
firms from the same country that do not list in the U.S. by 16.5% on average. The valuation
differential of listed firms, which we call the cross-listing premium, increases as firms choose a
more selective and costly listing mechanism; specifically, the valuation difference is largest for
exchange-listed firms, where it reaches 37%. This valuation differential persists after controlling
for country and firm characteristics.
1 See “Concern arises over ADR payouts,” by Alison Beard, Financial Times, July 23, 2001.
1

We argue that earlier theories of the benefits of listing in the U.S. that focus on the reduction
in the cost of capital resulting from expanding the pool of shareholders by overcoming barriers to
international investment cannot explain the cross-listing premium.2 With these theories, one
should see fewer listings in the 1990s when there were fewer barriers to international investment
than in the 1980s. Yet, the 1990s saw a sharp increase in listings in the U.S.
Our theory explains why firms listed in the U.S. are worth more and why not all firms list in
the U.S. La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (1999) show that large foreign firms are
typically controlled by large shareholders, mostly families. We argue that cross-listed firms are
firms with low controlling shareholder agency costs. Firms where controlling shareholder agency
costs are high do not list in the U.S. because of the threat from a U.S. listing to the private
benefits from control of large shareholders. One would expect that agency costs of controlling
shareholders are lower in firms with valuable growth opportunities that cannot be financed
internally or with riskless debt.3 Controlling shareholders of firms where the agency costs of
controlling shareholders are low have the most to gain and the least to lose by listing in the U.S.
since they have lower private benefits from control to protect and greater growth opportunities to
take advantage of by accessing capital markets. La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny
(2001) show that equity is worth less in countries with lower investor protection because equity is
priced to reflect the large private benefits the controlling shareholder can extract from the firm in
such countries. For controlling shareholders from countries with lower investor protection to give
up part of their private benefits from control, they have to benefit more from the ability to access
public capital markets than controlling shareholders from countries with better investor
protection. This additional benefit compensates them for the higher cost they incur in taking
actions that limit agency costs. Hence, listed firms from countries with poorer investor protection
must have better growth opportunities than listed firms from other countries.
2 See Karolyi (1998) for a review of the literature on U.S. listings of foreign firms.
3 Stulz (1990) shows that agency costs of managerial discretion are negatively related to growth
opportunities. The arguments in that paper can be extended to controlling shareholders.
2