NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FINANCIAL MARKETS IN TIMES OF STRESS
Graciela L. Kaminsky
Carmen M. Reinhart
Working Paper 8569
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8569
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2001
The authors wish to thank Vincent Reinhart, Roberto Rigobon, and Holger Wolf for insightful comments and
suggestions and Sergio Kurlat, Amine Mati, and Rafael Romeu for excellent research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2001 by Graciela L. Kaminsky and Carmen M. Reinhart. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Financial Markets in Times of Stress
Graciela L. Kaminsky and Carmen M. Reinhart
NBER Working Paper No. 8569
October 2001
JEL No. F30, F31, F36
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we examine which markets are most synchronized internationally and exhibit the
greater extent of comovement. We focus on daily data for four asset markets: bonds, equities, foreign
exchange, and domestic money market. Our sample covers thirty-five developed and emerging market
countries during 1997-1999. The extent of comovement and responsiveness to external shocks is
examined in different ways. To measure the response of these markets to adverse external shocks, we date
the peaks in domestic interest rates and bond spreads and the largest daily declines in equity prices and
assess the extent of clustering around the same period. We also analyze which markets show evidence
of greatest comovement in general, irrespective of whether there are adverse shocks or not.
Graciela L. Kaminsky Carmen M. Reinhart
George Washington University University of Maryland
Washington, DC College Park, MD 20742
Tel: 202-994-6686 and NBER
Email: graciela@gwu.edu Tel: 310-405-7006
Fax: 301-403-8107
Email: reinhart@econ.umd.edu
Web: www.puaf.umd.edu/papers/reinhart.htm

I. Introduction
Much has been written about globalization and the greater degree of capital market
integration in the past decade. One strand in this vast literature has developed a variety of
approaches to test for the extent of capital mobility.1 Another rapidly-growing branch has
attempted to document the incidence of contagion, spillovers, or international propagation of
shocks. Often, these studies focussed on the cross-country correlations of asset returns.2
However, most of this literature has paid little attention to the probable case that not all
asset markets are likely to be equally affected by external shocks or equally integrated
internationally.3 4 Such differentiation in the sensitivity to external shocks or the extent of global
integration may arise for several reasons. For example, Reinhart and Reinhart (1999) provide a
simple model where investors have perfect access to the international bond market but bank
customers have less complete access. They show that if depositors have access to international
capital markets interest rates on deposits will co-move with international interest rates on bonds,
but if borrowers cannot borrow from abroad lending rates of interest need not covary with the
interational interest rates on bonds. 5 Similarly, if a government allows its bonds to be freely
traded internationally but has restrictions on the foreign ownership of equities, one would expect
1 See, for instance, Frankel (1992) and Obstfeld (1995).
2 See Dornbusch, Park, and Claessens (2000), for a recent survey.
3 External shocks may take the form of a rise in international interest rates, an oil shock,
or a financial crisis in another country.
4 An exception is Hausman and Rigobon (2000).
5 Obviously, the opposite is true if borrowers are the ones with access to international
capital markets, while depositors do not.
1

that bond yields would be more responsive to external shocks than equity returns. However,
market segmentation of these types will not be the only reason why some asset markets may be
more sensitive to external shocks than others. While a variety of narratives describing episodes
of contagion suggest that speculative attacks on currencies are bunched together across countries,
the heterogeneity in exchange rate arrangements and monetary policy across countries would
suggest that exchange rates and the “policy” domestic interest rate are likely to covary
internationally less than an internationally traded sovereign bond or equity.6 Similarly, equity
price indices may have a markedly different industry composition across countries, which may
act to dampen comovement with equity markets across the border. In other words, the domestic
idyosynchratic component in some asset markets is greater than in others.
In this paper, we examine which markets are most synchronized internationally and
exhibit the greater extent of comovement. We focus on daily data for four asset markets: bonds,
equities, foreign exchange, and domestic money market. Our sample covers thirty-five developed
and emerging market countries during 1997-1999. The extent of comovement and responsiveness
to external shocks is examined in three different ways. First, to measure the response of these
markets to adverse external shocks, we date the peaks in domestic interest rates and bond spreads
and the largest daily declines in equity prices and assess the extent of clustering around the same
period. Second, we conduct principal component anylisis over the entire sample to analyze
which markets show evidence of greatest comovement in general, irrespective of whether there
are adverse shocks or not. Lastly, we look for volatility spillovers, working with the simplest of
6 One example is Eichengreen, Rose, and Wyplosz (1995), which analyzes of Europe’s
Exchange Rate Mechanism crisis.
2