NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
COURTS AND RELATIONAL CONTRACTS
Simon Johnson
John McMillan
Christopher Woodruff
Working Paper 8572
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8572
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2001
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2001 by Simon Johnson, John McMillan and Christopher Woodruff. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Courts and Relational Contracts
Simon Johnson, John McMillan and Christopher Woodruff
NBER Working Paper No. 8572
October 2001
JEL No. D2, G0, K0, O1
ABSTRACT
Post-communist countries offer new evidence on the relative importance of courts and
relationships in enforcing contracts. Belief in the effectiveness of courts has a significant positive effect
on the level of trust shown in new relationships between firms and their customers. Well-functioning
courts also encourage entrepreneurs to try out new suppliers. Courts are particularly important when
specific investments are needed for a relationship to develop. While relationships can sustain existing
interactions, workable courts help new interactions to start and develop.
Simon Johnson John McMillan Christopher Woodruff
Sloan School of Management Graduate School of Business Graduate School of International
MIT Stanford University Business and Pacific Studies
and NBER mcmillan_john@gsb.stanford.edu UCSD
sjohnson@mit.edu cwoodruff@ucsd.edu

Johnson et al. 1
1. Introduction
Contracts are maintained both by invoking the law and through the incentives that come
with interfirm relationships. When firms have ongoing dealings, the relationship itself can
induce cooperation – the sanction for any deviation being the breaking off of the relationship and
the cessation of the gains from trade. Where legal institutions are weak, bilateral relationships
can substitute for the courts in supporting contracting. Relational contracting is strengthened if it
is embedded in a social system, with third parties both helping to match the trading partners
initially and joining in the sanctioning in the event of a breach of contract (Ellickson 1991, Greif
1993, Greif, Milgrom, and Weingast 1994). But where courts function, what is the role of
relational contracting? And when relational contracting is effective, what do courts add?
Anecdotal evidence from the United States, in Macaulay’s classic 1963 paper, shows that,
even under an effective legal system, contracting relies not just on the courts but also on interfirm
relationships (see also Galanter, 1981, Williamson, 1983, 1994). Relational contracts have an
advantage over the courts in that the participants may have better information than any third
party. A disadvantage of relational contracts, on the other hand, is that they might cause firms to
stick with established relationships rather than working with new, untried partners, thereby
creating barriers to entry. In this paper we quantify the relative role of the courts and
relationships in supporting contracting between firms, and measure the role of the courts in
lowering the entry barriers that relational contracting can give rise to.
An experiment in the interaction between the courts and relational contracting is offered
by the transition of formerly planned economies of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.
The governments in these countries have attempted to build market-oriented legal systems to
replace the bureaucratic controls of the old planned economy. At the same time, firms have been
entering and developing new relationships among themselves, replacing the networks that broke
down with the end of the planned economy (Blanchard and Kremer, 1997, Roland and Verdier,
1999). These countries have functioning but relatively weak court systems; cross-country
indicators suggest that their courts are worse than in most developed countries but better than
those in very poor countries. There is considerable variation both across and within our sample
countries—Russia, Ukraine, Poland, Slovakia, and Romania—in the extent to which
entrepreneurs believe the legal system can be used to enforce contracts. We use this variation to

Johnson et al. 2
examine how the courts affect contracting. We have three sets of results. First, relational
contracting is the main form of contractual assurance for the firms in our sample; we empirically
identify conditions under which relational contracting is effective. Second, entrepreneurs who
say the courts are effective have measurably more trust in their trading partners, but the effect is
mainly with new partners, not longstanding ones. Third, transaction costs are lower when courts
are effective than when firms must rely solely on relational contracts, and firms are more likely to
seek out new trading partners.
We distinguish two roles of the courts. A simple role is helping ensure bills are paid. A
more complex role arises where the quality of goods is hard to verify and specific investments
are needed. For such transactions, the courts can serve to clarify the parties’ responsibilities in
the event of a dispute, thus facilitating their day-to-day interactions and reducing the likelihood
that disputes will arise. We find clear evidence that the courts are providing the former service,
and some evidence that they are providing the latter.
Our bottom line, then, is that while informal relationships are the main basis for our
firms’ contracting, the formal institutions also foster contracting. Firms can have productive
interactions even when the courts cannot be used to enforce contracts; but workable courts
encourage firms to take on new partners. It is by making it easier for new firms to enter that
having workable courts improves on relational contracting and boosts overall productivity. The
courts are serving to foster efficient transacting even though, by comparison with those of
Western Europe or the United States, they are quite imperfect.
2. Summary of Results
Firms’ characteristics, and the actions they take, are difficult for other firms to observe
(Wilson, 1985). A customer might or might not be dependable in paying its bills. A supplier
might or might not be competent to produce goods of an acceptable quality and on time, and even
if competent might or might not have incentives to do so. A firm can learn about its potential
customers’ and suppliers’ reliability by making inquiries via a trade association, a social network,
or other firms in the same line of business. It also learns about its trading partners through its
experience in dealing with them. A firm can give a trading partner an incentive not to renege on a
deal either by a legally enforceable contract (provided the legal institutions exist and the actions