NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BIASES IN THE IPO PRICING PROCESS
Michelle Lowry
G. William Schwert
Working Paper 8586
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8586
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2001
The Bradley Policy Research Center, William E. Simon Graduate School of Business Administration,
University of Rochester, provided support for this research. We are indebted to Jay Ritter for the use of his
data. We received helpful suggestions from Harry DeAngelo, Craig Dunbar, B. Espen Eckbo, Jean Helwege,
Tim Loughran, Alexander Ljungqvist, Vojislav Maksimovic, Jay Ritter, Jerold Warner, Ivo Welch, Jerold
Zimmerman, and seminar participants at the University of Rochester. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2001 by Michelle Lowry and G. William Schwert. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Biases in the IPO Pricing Process
Michelle Lowry and G. William Schwert
NBER Working Paper No. 8586
November 2001
JEL No. G32, G24, G14
ABSTRACT
By investigating the entire IPO pricing process, beginning when the offering is filed, the paper
contributes to the existing literature along four dimensions. First, price updates during the registration
period are predictable based on firm and offer-specific characteristics known at the time the offer is filed.
Second, price updates reflect market movements prior to the initial filing date as well as during the
registration period. Third, positive and negative information learned during the registration period affect
the offer price asymmetrically. Finally, public and private information learned during the registration
period have different effects on the offer price. While a number of the biases that we uncover are
consistent with one or more theories regarding IPOs, many remain a puzzle.
Michelle Lowry G. William Schwert
Smeal College of Business Simon School of Business
Penn State University University of Rochester
University Park, PA 16802 Rochester, NY 14627
mlowry@psu.edu and NBER
schwert@schwert.ssb.rochester.edu

Lowry & Schwert, Biases in IPO Pricing
1. Introduction
The pricing of Initial Public Offerings (IPOs) is one of the more puzzling phenomena in
finance. Prior empirical evidence shows that underwriters do not fully incorporate all available
information into the IPO offer price in an unbiased way. The first day returns of IPOs average
approximately 15%, indicating that there is a systematic downward bias in the offer price
compared with the price in the secondary trading market. Further, the size of these initial returns
varies predictably across firms. Prior literature has found that initial returns are significantly
related to certain firm- and offer-specific characteristics, to the price update between the
expected offer price stated in the preliminary prospectus and the final offer price, and to market
returns before the IPO.
The process of pricing an IPO generally begins months before the offer price is set. Yet
the majority of the existing IPO pricing literature has only focused on price changes between the
offer price and the secondary market price. The objective of this paper is to examine the entire
IPO pricing process, beginning at the time the issue is filed. By including more of the
information that potentially contributes to the pricing of new issues, we hope to increase our
understanding of the apparent biases in IPO pricing.
Several theories have been advanced to explain the predictability in initial returns, and we
wish to see whether these theories can explain the dynamics of the entire IPO pricing process.
We focus on two of the more popular theories of IPO underpricing. First, Beatty and Ritter
(1986), Rock (1986), and Baron (1982) assert that underpricing results from information
asymmetry between the various parties involved in the IPO. Issues that are characterized by
greater uncertainty are more underpriced to compensate for the higher costs of learning about
1

Lowry & Schwert, Biases in IPO Pricing
these firms’ true values. Many papers, including Beatty and Ritter (1986), Megginson and Weiss
(1991), and Koh and Walter (1989), find empirical support for the importance of information
asymmetry as a determinant of underpricing. Second, Benveniste and Spindt (1989) posit that
underpricing is related to the information underwriters obtain from informed investors during the
registration period. Underwriters compensate these investors for the information they provide by
only partially incorporating it into the offer price, thus allowing the informed investors to earn
especially high returns on the first day the IPO firm trades. Consistent with this theory,
Lundqvist and Wilhelm (2001) find that institutions who reveal more valuable information
during the registration period are rewarded with higher allocations when such information is
positive. Also, Cornelli and Goldreich (2001) and Hanley (1993) show that this private
information learned during the registration period is only partially incorporated into the offer
price.
In examining the entire IPO pricing process, our empirical analysis builds on prior work
along four dimensions. While some of our findings are understandable based on existing
theories, others remain a puzzle.
We begin our analysis of the IPO pricing process at the time the offering is filed. To file
an IPO, the company must register with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) a
preliminary prospectus containing basic information on the company and the proposed offering.
Either in this preliminary prospectus or in an amended prospectus, the company provides a range
of prices within which it expects to price the issue. The percent difference between the midpoint
of this preliminary price range and the final offer price represents the price update. We find that
the price update is significantly related to information that is publicly available when the IPO is
filed, such as the underwriter rank, the industry of the IPO firm, and the exchange on which the
2