NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LIQUIDITY EFFECTS IN THE BOND MARKET
Boyan Jovanovic
Peter L. Rousseau
Working Paper 8597
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8597
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2001
The authors thank the NSF for financial help, Fernando Alvarez, Robert Lucas, and participants at the
NBER’s 2001 Summer Institute for useful comments, and Timothy Daniels for assistance in obtaining data.
Special thanks go to David Marshall and Helen Koshy for many detailed comments on earlier drafts. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2001 by Boyan Jovanovic and Peter L. Rousseau. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Liquidity Effects in the Bond Market
Boyan Jovanovic and Peter L. Rousseau
NBER Working Paper No. 8597
November 2001
JEL No. E44, E52
ABSTRACT
Our paper reports the following two findings:
1) In monthly data, bond purchases by the Fed raise bond prices and reduce bond yields. The residual
bond-supply to traders is not fully predictable, and this supply-risk adds between 10 and 40 basis points
to the standard deviation of the real interest rate on T-bills.
2) The Fed's open market purchases do not raise stock prices or reduce stock returns. If anything, they
raise stock returns. More generally, bonds and stocks do not co-move at high frequencies.
To explain these two facts, we model the bond and stock markets as spatially separate or 'segmented'.
In the model, bond purchases lower bond rates, but they do not affect stock returns, and this is consistent
with both facts.
Boyan Jovanovic Peter L. Rousseau
Department of Economics Department of Economics
University of Chicago Vanderbilt University
1126 E. 59th Street Box 6182, Station B
Chicago, IL 60637 Nashville, TN 37235
and NBER and NBER
bjovanov@uchicago.edu peter.l.rousseau@vanderbilt.edu

Liquidity Effects in the Bond Market
Boyan Jovanovic and Peter L. Rousseau
∗
October 20, 2001
1 Introduction
Monthly data show that surprise bond purchases by the Fed raise bond prices and
reduce bond yields. Surprisingly, such injections do not raise stock prices or reduce
stock returns. If anything, they raise stock returns. In other words, the two markets
show a lack of comovement at high frequencies. This goes against the common view
that liquidityisgoodforbonds andstocksalike—it iscommonlyargued, forinstance,
that a discount-rate cut raises both bond prices and stock prices. Barsky (1989)
had argued that the prices of stocks and bonds will move in opposite directions
if risk-aversion changes, and this may well explain some of the decade-to-decade
changes or even changes that occur at business-cycle frequencies (Bernanke, Gertler
and Gilchrist, 1996, Þg. 1), but it is less compelling an explanation for monthly data.
Wequantifytheliquidityeffect on interest ratescausedbysupply-riskinthebond
market. This risk adds somewhere between 10 and 40 basis points to the standard
deviation of the real rate of interest on T-bills. The risk may well increase unless the
Fed expands the set of assets that it uses to conduct open market operations.
To explain these Þndings, we present a model that has a liquidity effect in the
bond market, but not in the stock market. We extend Lucas’s (1990) shopper-trader
paradigm by having the trader Þrst visit the stock market and then a separate bond-
market in which he is surprised by the injection of bonds. The bond injection has no
effect on stock prices because it is “sterilized” by lump-sum taxes. Expected policy
actions have no effect in the model, and this is consistent with the fact that the
long run relative decline in bond Þnance does not seem to have raised interest-rate
volatility as some other models would have predicted. We do show, however, that the
Fed will Þnd it harder and harder to keep bond-supply risk low because the gradual
TheauthorsthanktheNSFforÞnancialhelp,FernandoAlvarez,RobertLucas,andparticipants
∗
at the NBER’s 2001 Summer Institute for useful comments, and Timothy Daniels for assistance in
obtainingdata. Special thanksgo toDavidMarshall and Helen Koshyfor manydetailed comments
on earlier drafts.
1

payingdownof thefederal debt hasmeantthat it hasbecome hardertoexpandT-bill
issues to accommodate unexpectedly large rollover demands from foreign sources.
T-bills vs. non-borrowed reserves Since the 1970s, the Phillips-curve relation
seems to have broken down, and money seems to have no clear effect on real interest
rates either. Only if we assume that some part of money responds to real variables
can we conclude that the exogenous part of money does move interest rates. Evans
andMarshall(1998),forexample,describeseveralscenarios—identifyingassumptions—
underwhichsomepartofthemoneysupplycanplausiblybesaidtomoverealinterest
rates. In other words, what we infer about a liquidity effect on interest rates depends
on what we believe the Fed reacts to when it sets the money supply.
But, if we wish to estimate the liquidity effect on interest rates, or even if we wish
to study the interest rate channel of monetary policy, is money the right measure of
policy? The rate of interest is the return on bonds, which depends most directly not
on the supply of money but on the supply of bonds. Using the quantity of bonds ,
one can Þnd a liquidity effect without introducing a host of other variables.
Whether we measure money by non-borrowed reserves or more broadly, injections
of money are not the same as withdrawals of, say, Treasury bills (T-bills). This is
because the Fed sometimes injects money by buying long-term bonds, and this will
affect short-term rates less than would a purchase of T-bills. Indeed, table 1 shows
that, since1961, thecorrelationbetweenmonthlygrowthintherealpercapitasupply
of outstanding Treasury securities (T-secs) and non-borrowed reserves (NBR), which
one might expect to be negative, has been slightly positive at .048.1 The table also
shows that, at least since 1980, growth in non-borrowed reserves has reduced short-
term rates, but not as strongly as a contraction of T-secs. Over the whole period,
however, growth in both non-borrowed reserves and T-secs is positively correlated
with short-term rates—which, for non-borrowed reserves, is the wrong sign.
Table 1 — Correlations among monthly growth-rates
Variable Period
1961-99 1980-99
corr(r ,gNBR) .046 -.063
t,t+1 t 1,t
−
corr(r ,gT secs) .137 .107
t,t+1 t −1,t
−
corr(NBR,T-secs) .048 -.007
1Tables 1 and 2 both deal with ex-post real returns of investors who purchase three-month U.S.
Treasury bills in the secondary market with two months remaining until maturity and sell them
a month later. In the tables, r is the return obtained from purchasing the T-bill in month t
t,t+1
and selling in month t+1. The gNBR and gT secs terms denote growth in the per capita real
t 1,t t −1,t
supplies of non-borrowed reserves an−d marketab−le T-secs in the hands of the public (excluding the
Fed’s holdings) over the previous month (i.e., from month t 1 to month t). We obtain monthly
−
nonborrowed reserves from the FRED database of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, and
describe other data sources in the text and in footnote 8.
2