NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EMPIRICS OF MONETARY POLICY RULES IN OPEN ECONOMIES
Richard H. Clarida
Working Paper 8603
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8603
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2001
This paper was prepared as a Keynote Address for the ESRC Conference on the Future of Macroeconomics
held at the Bank of England Conference Center on April 14, 2000. The views expressed herein are those of
the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2001 by Richard H. Clarida. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Empirics of Monetary Policy Rules in Open Economies
Richard H. Clarida
NBER Working Paper No. 8603
November 2001
JEL No. F31
ABSTRACT
This paper was prepared as a Keynote Address for the ESRC Conference on the Future of
Macroeconomics held at the Bank of England Conference Center on April 14, 2000. It uses the
empirical framework for formulating and estimating forward looking monetary policy rules developed
in Clarida ,Gali, Gertler (1998; 1999; 2000;2001) and Clarida (2000) to assess what we know , don’t
know, and can’t tell about monetary policy making in an open economy with an (implicit) inflation target.
Among the issues discussed are: the relationship between structural VAR models of monetary policy and
exchange rates and estimates of forward looking Taylor rules; the relationship between inflation targeting
and leaning against the (exchange rate) wind; why central bankers are averse to even wide - band target
zones; quantifying that stresses and costs of a one size fits all monetary policy for the members of a
monetary union or currency bloc.
Richard Clarida
NBER and Columbia University
Room 1014
420 W. 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
rhc2@columbia.edu

THE EMPIRICS OF MONETARY POLICY RULES IN OPEN
ECONOMIES
Richard H. Clarida
Columbia University
The National Bureau of Economic Research
1. Introduction and Motivation
The line of research that Mark Gertler and Jordi Gali and I have been
working on for the past several years was initially motivated by a question and,
later, a realization. The question was how to use the tool of choice in empirical
macroeconomics, the structural VAR, to understand why some central banks (such
as the Fed and the Bundesbank) were more successful than others during the
1980s and 1990s in maintaining low and stable inflation.
A structural VAR can be used to trace through the dynamic effects of
shocks to monetary policy on such variables as inflation, output, and the exchange
rate and to estimate the importance monetary policy shocks in explaining particular
episodes in macroeconomic history. This strategy has been employed with much
success by Sims (1980), Bernanke and Blinder (1992), and Christiano,
Eichenbaum Evans (1994) to study the US economy, and to study the effects of
monetary policy on exchange rates by Eichenbaum and Evans (1994). When
Clarida and Gertler (1997) applied this approach to Germany, they found similar
results. A positive, structural shock to the policy instrument, the day-to-day
2

interest rate, resulted in a decline in production and sales, an appreciation of the
DM, and eventually a slowdown in inflation.
Empirical results of this sort, while useful and interesting in themselves, are
not particularly informative with respect to actually explaining the success of
central banks at reducing and maintaining low and stable inflation. To answer
such a question, we realized that it is necessary to take a stand on the systematic
component of monetary policy, and not just identify the structural shocks to
monetary policy (which is all that the structural VAR approach requires). The
structural VAR restrictions provided estimates of the contemporaneous
relationship between surprises in the policy instrument and surprises in other
macro variables such as inflation, production, sales, commodity prices, the US
interest rates, and the exchange rate, thus yielding a central bank reaction
function in surprises. The question remained: how to tease out of the VAR, or
more precisely to tease out of the VAR equation for the short term interest rate, a
parsimonious and empirically refutable interpretation of the systematic response
of the policy instrument to all lagged as well as current information about the
macro variables included in the VAR.
One possibility is to calculate from the VAR dynamic impulse responses as
well as a real time historical decomposition of the policy instrument so as to
characterize the average dynamic response of monetary policy to various macro
shocks as well as to estimate the relative importance of these shocks in explaining
3