NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE TRANSMISSION MECHANISM AND THE
ROLE OF ASSET PRICES IN MONETARY POLICY
Frederic S. Mishkin
Working Paper 8617
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8617
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2001
Prepared for the Oesterrische Nationalbank conference on "The Monetary Transmission Mechanism,"
November 9, 2001. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2001 by Frederic S. Mishkin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

The Transmission Mechanism and the Role of
Asset Prices in Monetary Policy
Frederic S. Mishkin
NBER Working Paper No. 8617
December 2001
JEL No. E52, E40
ABSTRACT
This paper surveys the transmission mechanisms of monetary policy beyond the standard interest
rate channel by focusing on how monetary policy affects the economy through other asset prices. It
outlines how the monetary transmission mechanisms operating through stock prices, real estate prices,
and exchange rates affect which affect investment and consumption decisions of both firms and
households. Given the role that asset prices play on the transmission mechanism, central banks have been
often tempted to use them as targets of monetary policy. This paper shows that despite the significance
of asset prices in the conduct of monetary policy, targeting asset prices by central banks is likely to lead
to worse economic outcomes and might even erode the support for their independence.
Frederic S. Mishkin
Graduate School of Business
Uris Hall 619
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
fsm3@columbia.edu

Although the instrument set by monetary policymakers is typically an interest rate,
monetary policy affects the economy through other asset prices besides those on debt
instruments. Thus, movements in these other asset prices are likely to play an important role in
how monetary policy is conducted. But what is the appropriate role for them to play? This
paper answers this question by first surveying the monetary transmission mechanism through
these other asset prices and then discusses their role in the conduct of monetary policy.
I.
Asset Prices in the Monetary Transmission Mechanism
In the literature on the monetary transmission mechanism, there are three categories of
asset prices besides those on debt instruments that are viewed as providing important channels
through which monetary policy affects the economy: 1) stock market prices, 2) real estate prices,
and 3) exchange rates.
Stock Market Prices
Fluctuations of the stock market, which are influenced by monetary policy, have
important impacts on the aggregate economy. Transmission mechanisms involving the stock
market are of three types: 1) stock market effects on investment, 2) firm balance-sheet effects, 3)
household wealth effects and 4) household liquidity effects.
Stock Market Effects on Investment. Tobin's q-theory (Tobin, 1969) provides an
important mechanism for how movements in stock prices can affect the economy. Tobin's q is
defined as the market value of firms divided by the replacement cost of capital. If q is high, the
market price of firms is high relative to the replacement cost of capital, and new plant and
equipment capital is cheap relative to the market value of firms. Companies can then issue stock
and get a high price for it relative to the cost of the facilities and equipment they are buying.
1

