NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SHORT SALES, DAMAGES AND CLASS CERTIFICATION IN 10B-5 ACTIONS
Robert C. Apfel
John E. Parsons
G. William Schwert
Geoffrey S. Stewart
Working Paper 8618
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8618
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2001
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2001 by Robert C. Apfel, John E. Parsons, G. William Schwert and Geoffrey S. Stewart. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Short Sales, Damages and Class Certification in 10b-5 Actions
Robert C. Apfel, John E. Parsons, G. William Schwert and Geoffrey S. Stewart
NBER Working Paper No. 8618
December 2001
JEL No. G14, G18, K22
ABSTRACT
In a short sale, an investor sells a share of stock he does not own and profits when the price of the
stock declines. A peculiar feature of short sales is the apparent increase in the number of shares of stock
beneficially held by investors over and above the actual number of shares issued by the corporation. It
has previously been noted that this may create problems in the execution of proxy votes. In this paper
we illustrate a related problem in the prosecution of claims of securites fraud. We examine this problem
using the recent case of Computer Learning Centers, Inc., (CLC) in which the number of short sales was
extremely large. Plaintiffs in the Computer Learning Centers case proposed a class including all those
who purchased CLC common stock from April 30, 1997 to April 6, 1998. Defendants opposed
certification of the class, focusing on the large number of short sales and the resulting difficulty in
establishing which members of the class actually had standing to sue. The court denied the motion for
class certification. Although the court gave plaintiffs leave to amend the class, the case was settled before
a new class was identified.
Robert C. Apfel John E. Parsons
Bondholder Communications Group Charles River Associates
New York, NY 10004 Boston, MA 02116
jep@crai.com
G. William Schwert Geoffrey S. Stewart
Simon School of Business Jones Day Reavis and Pogue
University of Rochester Washington, DC 20004
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
schwert@schwert.ssb.rochester.edu

Short Sales, Damages and Class Certification in 10b-5 Cases
1. Introduction
In a short sale, an investor sells a share of stock he does not own, and only later purchases
a share to close out the transaction. The short seller profits when the price of the stock declines.
A peculiar feature of short sales is the apparent increase in the number of shares of stock
beneficially held by investors over and above the actual number of shares issued by the
corporation. It has previously been noted that this may create problems in the execution of proxy
votes.1 In this paper we illustrate a related problem in the prosecution of claims of securities
fraud. We examine this problem using the recent case of Computer Learning Centers, Inc.,
(CLC) in which the unusually large number of short sales factored significantly into the case.
See Ganesh, L.L.C. v. Computer Learning Centers, Inc., 183 F.R.D. 487 (E.D. Va. 1998).
Plaintiffs in the Computer Learning Centers case proposed a class including all those who
purchased CLC common stock from April 30, 1997 to April 6, 1998, with some exceptions.
Defendants opposed certification of the class, focusing on the large number of short sales and the
resulting difficulty in establishing which members of the class actually had standing to sue. The
court denied the motion for class certification. Focusing on the fact that the fraud on the market
presumption of reliance does not apply to short sellers, the court found that individual issues in
regard to proof of reliance would overwhelm common questions of law or fact. The court gave
plaintiffs leave to amend the class, but the case was settled before a new class was identified.
The case raised a number of interesting legal questions surrounding short sales that did not get
addressed prior to settlement.
1 Short-Selling Activity in the Stock Market: Market Effects and the Need for Regulation, Part I, Report of the
Committee on Government Operation, U.S. House of Representatives, December 6, 1991, pp. 24-35.
1

Short Sales, Damages and Class Certification in 10b-5 Cases
2. The Computer Learning Centers Case
Computer Learning Centers, Inc., provided education and training in computers and
information technology. Its adult students obtained associate and non-degree diplomas in pursuit
of entry-level jobs. Students were expected to complete their programs in 8 to 16 months for full-
time students and 16 to 32 months for part-time students. CLC also provided shorter continuing
education and training programs. As of January 31, 1998, shortly before the class action suit was
filed, CLC enrolled about 12,000 new students annually at its 25 locations. At that time, tuition
ranged from $6,100 to $16,500 for diploma programs and from $15,210 to $21,995 for associate
degree programs. The majority of CLC’s students participated in some federally supported
student financial aid program, and in 1998 approximately 73% of the company’s revenues were
funded from Title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965.2
CLC was incorporated in 1987. In 1995 it made an initial public offering and its started
trading on the NASDAQ. At the start of 1998 there were 16.2 million shares outstanding. Of
these, either officers or directors of CLC owned about 5 million shares. Institutional investors
owned another 6.1 million shares. Only about 5 million shares were available for active trading.
On March 10, 1998 news stories appeared describing a complaint filed by the Attorney
General of Illinois in the Circuit Court of Cook County, which asserted that CLC had defrauded
students at its Schaumberg, Illinois Learning Center.3 This precipitated a nearly 50% drop in the
price of CLC stock in the two days following the announcement, from $36.875 on March 9 to
2 Computer Learning Centers, Inc., 10K, Fiscal year ended January 31, 1998.
3 The suit alleged violation of Illinois Private Business and Vocational Schools Act and the Illinois Consumer Fraud
and Deceptive Business Practices Act.
2