NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TAKEOVER BIDS VS. PROXY FIGHTS IN CONTESTS FOR CORPORATE CONTROL
Lucian Bebchuk
Oliver Hart
Working Paper 8633
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8633
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2001
We are grateful to Jennifer Arlen, Oren Bargil, Laurent Calvet, John Coates, Zsuzsanna Fluck, Henry
Hansmann, Milt Harris, Bert Huang, Kose John, Louis Kaplow, Randy Kroszner, Asis Martinez-Jerez,
Gerhard Orosel, and participants in seminars at Berlin, Harvard, NYU, Gerzensee, the American Finance
Association 2000 meeting, and the American Law and Economics 2001 meeting for helpful comments. We
acknowledge the financial support of the Harvard John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and Business
(Bebchuk) and the National Science Foundation through the National Bureau of Economic Research (Hart).
Subsequent revisions of this paper may be retrieved from www.law.harvard.edu/faculty/bebchuk or
www.post.economics.harvard.edu/faculty/hart/hart.html. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2001 by Lucian Bebchuk and Oliver Hart. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Takeover bids vs. Proxy Fights in Contests for Corporate Control
Lucian Bebchuk and Oliver Hart
NBER Working Paper No. 8633
December 2001
JEL No. G30, G34, K22
ABSTRACT
This paper evaluates the primary mechanisms for changing management or obtaining control in
publicly traded corporations with dispersed ownership. Specifically, we analyze and compare three
mechanisms: (1) proxy fights (voting only); (2) takeover bids (buying shares only); and (3) a combination
of proxy fights and takeover bids in which shareholders vote on acquisition offers. We first show how
proxy fights unaccompanied by an acquisition offer suffer from substantial shortcomings that limit the
use of such contests in practice. We then argue that combining voting with acquisition offers is superior
not only to proxy fights alone but also to takeover bids alone. Finally, we show that, when acquisition
offers are in the form of cash or the acquirer’s existing securities, voting shareholders can infer from the
pre-vote market trading which outcome would be best in light of all the available public information. Our
analysis has implications for the ongoing debates in the US over poison pills and in Europe over the new
EEC directive on takeovers.
Lucian Bebchuk Oliver Hart
Harvard Law School Department of Economics
1557 Massachusetts Avenue Littauer Center 220
Cambridge, MA 02138 Harvard University
and NBER Cambridge, MA 02138
bebchuk@law.harvard.edu and NBER
oliver_hart@harvard.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
An important issue for any firm but the very smallest is how the firm’s owners select the
managers who have authority over the firm’s operations. This issue is particularly relevant in the
case of a public company with dispersed ownership, where owners are commonly passive and
managers consequently have substantial discretion to pursue their own goals.
In this paper we examine and assess alternative methods for choosing or replacing the
management team (board) in companies with dispersed ownership. We focus on three principal
mechanisms: (1) a proxy contest, i.e., a straight vote on replacement of the board; (2) a takeover
bid; and (3) a combination of (1) and (2), specifically, an acquisition offer accompanied by a
vote. We identify and compare the problems involved in each of these mechanisms. We show
how combining an acquisition offer with voting can be superior both to straight proxy fights and
to straight takeover bids, and we put forward a simple and clean arrangement for such a
combined mechanism. We also show that a mechanism in which shareholders vote on
acquisition offers can exploit the ability of shareholders to draw inferences from market prices.
Our conclusions have implications for a range of arrangements, used in both the U.S. and
Europe, that introduce voting requirements in conjunction with takeover bids.
We start by analyzing proxy fights. At first sight, it seems that proxy contests would be a
good way for superior managers to replace an incumbent, given that they do not require the costly
acquisition of shares. However, straight proxy contests suffer from serious problems that limit
their use to replace managers in practice. In our view, the most serious disadvantage arises not
from the familiar public good problem that challengers will have to bear the costs of a campaign
whose benefits will be largely captured by shareholders. This problem by itself could be solved
1

by reimbursing successful challengers for their expenses. Rather, the fundamental difficulty
with a proxy contest, we argue, is that of persuading shareholders that a rival’s victory would be
beneficial for them.
Because control provides private benefits, the fact that a rival is interested in replacing the
incumbent does not imply that the rival would manage the company better. Consequently, if
shareholders do not observe the quality of rivals, but know that the average quality of potential
rivals is worse than the incumbent’s, the rational strategy of shareholders will be to vote for the
incumbent. Indeed, we show that, even if the quality of a certain rival is known by the most
informed shareholders, voting shareholders may well be unable to infer this quality from the
market price and thus may vote generally for the incumbent. As a result, even a rival who in fact
would be better might have difficulty in persuading the shareholders to vote for it.1 This problem
of proxy fights can be overcome by a rival’s putting an acquisition offer on the table. A rival that
would in fact be better can offer a high bid that would make it clear to the shareholders that they
would benefit from the rival’s gaining control without having to convince them of the rival’s
superior abilities.
There are two other potential problems with pure proxy contests that tender offers can
overcome. First, it might be the case that a rival could create a higher value, but some of this
value would flow directly to the rival (in the form of private benefits or synergies) and a victory
by the rival in a proxy contest would thus be against the interests of shareholders. In this case,
the rival can still gain control by making an acquisition offer to buy shareholders out at an
1The idea that a rival of uncertain quality may have difficulty in getting shareholders to
vote for it in a proxy contest has been noted previously by Pound (1988) and Bebchuk and Kahan
(1990).
2