NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DOTCOM MANIA:
THE RISE AND FALL OF INTERNET STOCK PRICES
Eli Ofek
Matthew Richardson
Working Paper 8630
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8630
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2001
Stern School of Business, New York University. We would like to thank an anonymous referee, Ken French
(the NBER discussant), Stewart Myers, Jay Ritter, Jeremy Stein, Robert Whitelaw and participants at MIT,
NYU and the NBER summer institute for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2001 by Eli Ofek and Matthew Richardson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

DotCom Mania: The Rise and Fall of Internet Stock Prices
Eli Ofek and Matthew Richardson
NBER Working Paper No. 8630
December 2001
JEL No. G
ABSTRACT
This paper provides one potential explanation for the rise, persistence and eventual fall of internet
stock prices. Specifically, we appeal to a model of heterogenous agents with varying degrees of beliefs
about asset payoffs who are subject to short sales constraints. In this framework, it is possible that
“optimistic” investors overwhelm “pessimistic” ones, leading to prices not reflecting fundamental values
about cash flows summarized by aggregate beliefs. Empirical support for this explanation is provided by
exploring the behavior of internet stock prices during the period January 1998 to November 2000. In
particular, we document four important elements to our story: (i) the high level of internet stock prices
given their underlying fundamentals, (ii) responses of stock prices to a shift towards potentially optimistic
investors, (iii) empirical results consistent with shorting being at its maximum possible level for internet
stocks, and (iv) the eventual fall, or bubble bursting, of internet stocks being tied to the increase in the
number of sellers to the market via expiration of lockup agreements.
Eli Ofek Matthew Richardson
Stern School of Business Stern School of Business
New York University New York University
44 West 4th Street 44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012 New York, NY 10012
and NBER and NBER
mrichardson@stern.nyu.edu

I. Introduction
By February 2000, the internet sector equaled 6% of the market capitalization of all
U.S. public companies and 20% of all publicly trade equity volume. Moreover, in just a
two-year period of time, the entire sector earned over 1000% returns on their public
equity. This paper provides a new look at the behavior of stock prices in this sector. In
particular, we develop a cohesive explanation of the rise, persistence and then subsequent
fall of internet stock prices.
Of particular interest is the question of how the mispricing of internet stocks could
persist in the presence of well-funded, rational investors. We provide an analysis based
on Lintner’s (1969) model of asset prices with investors having heterogenous beliefs and
facing short sale restrictions. For Lintner’s model to produce “bubble-like” behavior in
asset prices, two conditions are necessary: (i) heterogeneity in beliefs, and (ii) short sale
restrictions for the pessimistic investors. In his framework, asset prices are a weighted
average of beliefs about asset payoffs with the weights being determined by the
investor’s risk aversion and beliefs about asset price covariances. While the asset prices
are equilibrium-determined to the extent that they reflect the underlying beliefs about
payoffs, short sale restrictions force the pessimistic investors out of the market, leaving
only optimistic investors left and thus inflated asset price levels.1
There are four elements required to give empirical support for this explanation: (i)
were internet firms overvalued?, (ii) if so, were the marginal investors of these stocks
overly optimistic?, (iii) why did pessimistic investors not push internet prices back to
fundamental levels?, and (iv) within this framework, what type of conditions could
eventually lead to the eventual collapse of internet prices? This paper posits an answer to
each of these questions and provides corresponding empirical support.
First, we investigate whether internet stock prices were too high relative to traditional
valuation metrics. Specifically, we use an implied price/earnings measure to generate the
necessary excess returns on capital or growth rates in earnings to justify the internet stock
1 There is a long history in the finance literature of developing the equilibrium implications of short sales
restrictions, e.g., see Lintner (1969), Miller (1977), Jarrow (1981), Detemple and Murthy (1997), and, more
recently, Basak and Croitoru (2000) , Chen, Hong and Stein (2000), and Jones and Lamont (2001), among
others.
3

price levels. In general, across entire sectors of the internet economy, these
returns/growth rates are far in excess of any values previously documented (even for the
ex post most successful firms in other industries).
Second, we explore two examples of shifts in the heterogeneity of investors. The first
example documents the holders of internet stocks and shows that, by in large, a much
greater fraction are retail investors relative to holders of non-internet stocks. The second
example explores what happens to internet stock prices when there is a shift in the
distribution of investors, i.e., optimistic ones entering the market. To gather evidence on
this latter topic, we look at a far-reaching event, which affect all firms, related to the
IPO: (i) the first day, and (ii) the quiet period. Using these events illustratively, we argue
here that there is a link between asset price behavior and the beliefs of these agents being
overly optimistic.
Third, why didn’t “realistic” investors come into the market and drive prices back
down to fundamental levels? One particular explanation is that even though there might
have been plenty of capital available for rational trading, the market had limited ability to
short internet stocks. We show evidence via (i) short interest, and (ii) the rebate rate on
shorts, that there were significant short positions in internet stocks relative to “old
economy” stocks with indirect evidence of it being difficult to accumulate additional
short positions. That is, pessimistic traders were trying to bring markets back to
reasonable price levels, but they were being overrun by the size and volume of optimistic
trading.
Fourth, what caused the so-called internet bubble to burst? We offer a potential
explanation consistent with the Lintner model that does not require a shift in the beliefs
(at least initially) of the optimistic investor. During the Spring and latter half of 2000, an
extraordinary number of lock-ups expired. Though there is evidence that the constraint
against shorting these stocks was binding, these lock-up expirations added a significant
number of new investors to the market. If a fraction of these investors were either
agnostic or pessimistic, then these “realistic” beliefs would get incorporated into asset
prices. We present evidence consistent with this explanation.
II. The Story
4