NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE MODIGLIANI AND MILLER THEOREM AND MARKET EFFICIENCY
Sheridan Titman
Working Paper 8641
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8641
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2001
This paper is the basis of my October 2001 Keynote Address to the FMA conference. I have benefited from
conversations with Andres Almazan, Keith Brown and Tim Opler. The views expressed herein are those of
the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2001 by Sheridan Titman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Modigliani and Miller Theorem and Market Efficiency
Sheridan Titman
NBER Working Paper No. 8641
December 2001
ABSTRACT
Most of the recent literature on risk management and capital structure assumes that markets are
perfect, i.e., efficient and complete. This paper presents anecdotal evidence that suggests that different
capital markets (e.g., debt, equity and warrants markets) may not be perfectly integrated, and discusses
the implications of this lack of integration on financing strategies. I argue that although models that
assume perfect markets are sufficient to explain cross-sectional differences in financing and risk
management choices within an economy, that issues relating to market conditions may be necessary to
explain differences in these choices across countries and across time.
Sheridan Titman
Department of Finance
University of Texas
Austin, TX 78712-1179
and NBER
titman@mail.utexas.edu

As we all know, the first step in understanding corporate finance theory is the
Modigliani and Miller theorem, which specifies conditions under which various
corporate financing decisions are irrelevant. When the theorem was first stated,
most of us thought of it as a proposition about a firm’s debt-equity mix.
However, applications of the theorem has since been expanded to discussions of
debt maturity, risk management, and even mergers and spinoffs, which, according
to the logic of M&M, neither create nor destroy value in the absence of positive or
negative synergies. By clearly stating the conditions under which these decisions
have no relevance, the theorem provides a basis for focusing on how these choices
can create and destroy value for a corporation.
A simple expression of the M&M proposition
Lets start with a simple expression of the proposition, which effectively
combines a number of assumptions into what I consider the two core assumptions. This
shortened version of the M&M Theorem states the following:
Financing and risk management choices will not affect firm value if the following
conditions hold:
Al) total cash flows to a firm’s financial claimants are unaffected by these
choices.
A2) “efficient markets”
The first assumption is the no taxes, no bankruptcy cost, and perfect
contracting assumption, which is the basis for most of the capital structure
literature that has been developed over the past 25 years. Most financial
economists have a pretty good understanding of this assumption, so I don’t really
need to elaborate on it here. The second assumption can be viewed as the
complete and perfect markets assumption that was the subject of substantial
debate 20 to 30 years ago. I am putting “efficient markets” in quotations to
2

indicate some ambiguity about what is required for market conditions to have an
effect on financing and risk management choices.
The literature that considers the second assumption has received very little
attention in the academic literature in the past 20 years.1 Most of this earlier
literature focused on increasing our understanding of the exact conditions under
which capital structure is irrelevant when assumption 1 holds. In contrast to the
more recent literature that focuses on assumption 1, there is almost no discussion
in the literature on how deviations from assumption 2 affect financing patterns,
which is the focus of this talk.
The Second Assumption
The second assumption implies that corporations need not be concerned
about what I will be calling market conditions and the needs of investors when
designing their financial structures. As a first pass, it is useful to consider the
capital structure choice in frictionless and complete markets. Under these
conditions, investors can create a portfolio with any cash flow pattern that they
desire (and which meets their budget constraint) so there is no need for
corporations to design their capital structures in ways that tailor their securities to
satisfy these desires.
Given assumption 1, frictionless and complete markets are clearly
sufficient for capital structure irrelevance. However, the complete markets
assumption can be substantially weakened. In particular, if financial
intermediaries, like investment banks, can costlessly repackage securities,
creating new securities that generate any feasible cash flow pattern that the
corporations can create on their own, then there will be no need for corporations
to do this tailoring on their own.
1 There has been a substantial literature on capital structure within setting where managers view
the market price of their equity as being incorrectly priced, e.g., Myers and Majluf (1984). Under
a variety of conditions, capital structure choices will be affected if prices underreact to the
information implicit in capital structure choices. The analysis in this paper ignores information
asymmetries and thus does not address this issue.
3