NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE RISE OF THE REGULATORY STATE
Edward L. Glaeser
Andrei Shleifer
Working Paper 8650
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8650
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2001
We are grateful to Simeon Djankov, Claudia Goldin, Oliver Hart, Simon Johnson, Larry Katz, Louis Kaplow,
Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Steven Shavell, and Lawrence Summers for helpful comments,
and to the NSF for funding. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2001 by Edward L. Glaeser and Andrei Shleifer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

The Rise of the Regulatory State
Edward L. Glaeser and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 8650
December 2001
JEL No. K2, K13, K42, L51, N41
ABSTRACT
During the Progressive Era at the beginning of the 20 th century, the United States replaced
litigation by regulation as the principal mechanism of social control of business. To explain why this
happened, we present a model of choice of law enforcement strategy between litigation and regulation
based on the idea that justice can be subverted with sufficient expenditure of resources. The model
suggests that courts are more vulnerable to subversion than regulators, especially in an environment of
significant inequality of wealth and political power. The switch to regulation can then be seen as an
efficient response to the subversion of justice by robber barons during the Gilded Age. The model makes
sense of the progressive reform agenda, and of the successes and failures of alternative law enforcement
strategies in different countries.
Edward L. Glaeser Andrei Shleifer
Harvard University Harvard University
315A Littauer Center M9 Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138 Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu ashleifer@harvard.edu

1. Introduction.
Before 1900, significant commercial disputes in the United States were generally
resolved in courts. Courts ruled on liability in industrial accidents, on anti-competitive practices
such as railroad rebates, on safety of foods and medicines, and even on the constitutionality of
the income tax. In the three decades between 1887, when Congress passed the Interstate
Commerce Act, and 1917, when “participation in the war put an end to the Progressive
movement,” (Hofstadter, 1955), this situation changed radically. Over thirty years, reformers
eroded the 19th century belief that litigation was the only appropriate response to the socially
harmful acts. During the Progressive Era, regulatory agencies at both the state and the federal
level began to replace courts in anti-trust policy, railroad pricing, food and drug safety, and many
other areas. At the same time, the U.S. politics experienced other important changes, such as
reform of the civil service, use of voter referendums to decide local issues, direct election of
senators, recall of judges, and the growth of government more generally. In this paper, we
attempt to understand why these changes occurred in the United States between 1887 and 1917.
Conventional economic theories of regulation do not help understand the Progressive
movement. The standard public interest theory holds that regulation deals with market failures
and externalities (Pigou 1934, Stiglitz 1989), but does not explain why either contract or tort law
could not address these problems in the first place. Coase (1960) draws attention to this failure of
regulatory economics to deal with the alternative possibility of judicial enforcement of laws and
contracts, but does not address the choice of courts versus regulators. Posner (1992) and Shavell
(1984a) discuss this choice between courts and regulators from the efficiency perspective. Posner
(1992) emphasizes the fixed cost of lawsuits as a potential argument for regulation, whereas
Shavell (1984a) points to the limits on the violator’s ability to pay as a drawback of litigation.
Both of these theories predict that as cases became larger and the defendants’ pockets deeper
3

during the Gilded Age, efficiency calls for more litigation and less regulation. The reality, of
course, was the opposite. Finally, Stigler (1971) and McChesney (1987) rejuvenated the
economic theories of regulation by questioning the motives and the capabilities of the regulators.
Their theories, however, are not helpful in thinking about the Progressive era, when the pressure
for regulation came from the public and populist politicians rather than industry itself.
To discuss progressive reforms, we present a model of choice of a law enforcement
regime between court-enforced liability and regulator-enforced input controls. A society can
impose liability payments for accidents, for example, or require precautionary investments.
Whatever approach a society chooses, law enforcement is not free, and the incentives, costs and
opportunities facing law enforcers crucially shape the efficiency of alternative choices. As a
consequence, different institutional arrangements are appropriate for different countries at
different stages of economic and political development.
In our model, the crucial difference between liability and regulation as alternative
systems of controlling market behavior is their vulnerability to subversion by the potential
violator. Subversion includes such techniques as intimidating judges and regulators, bribing
them, and using delay tactics to postpone a trial or a liability payment. By expending sufficient
resources on subversion of justice, the potential violator can avoid either regulatory compliance
or a liability payment. However, because liability regimes entail large payments with a small
probability, such regimes are more vulnerable to ex post subversion than the regulation of inputs,
especially in countries lacking law and order in the first place. Moreover, the problem of
subversion of liability regimes becomes worse in situations of extreme inequality of economic
and political resources between plaintiffs and defendants. In such circumstances, regulation is
more efficient than liability. This reason for the switch to regulation complements several others
4