NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
COPYCAT FUNDS: INFORMATION DISCLOSURE REGULATION AND THE RETURNS
TO ACTIVE MANAGEMENT IN THE MUTUAL FUND INDUSTRY
Mary Margaret Myers
James M. Poterba
Douglas A. Shackelford
John B. Shoven
Working Paper 8653
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8653
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2001
We are grateful to Dan Bergstresser, Joel Dickson, Jennifer Wilson, seminar participants at the University
of Illinois-Chicago and Indiana University, and especially Mark Wolfson for helpful discussions. We also
thank Jennifer Blouin, V.J. Bustos, Rachel Ferguson, Michael Myers, Angel Townsend, and Candice
Whitehurst for excellent research assistance, the Ernst & Young Foundation, the National Science
Foundation (Poterba) and the University of Chicago (Myers) for research support, and John Rekenthaler and
Annette Larson at Morningstar for providing mutual fund data. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2001 by Mary Margaret Myers, James M. Poterba, Douglas A. Shackelford and John B. Shoven. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Copycat Funds: Information Disclosure Regulation and the Returns to
Active Management in the Mutual Fund Industry
Mary Margaret Myers, James M. Poterba, Douglas A. Shackelford and John B. Shoven
NBER Working Paper No. 8653
December 2001
JEL No. G28, G23, K22, L15
ABSTRACT
Mutual funds must disclose their portfolio holdings to investors semiannually. The costs and
benefits of such disclosures are a long-standing subject of debate. For actively managed funds, one cost
of disclosure is a potential reduction in the private benefits from research on asset values. Disclosure
provides public access to information on the assets that the fund manager views as undervalued. This
paper tries to quantify this potential cost of disclosure by testing whether “copycat” mutual funds, funds
that purchase the same assets as actively-managed funds as soon as those asset holdings are disclosed,
can earn returns that are similar to those of the actively-managed funds. Copycat funds do not incur the
research expenses associated with the actively-managed funds that they are mimicking, but they miss the
opportunity to invest in assets that managers identify as positive return opportunities between disclosure
dates. Our results for a limited sample of high expense funds in the 1990s suggest that while returns
before expenses are significantly higher for the underlying actively managed funds relative to the copycat
funds, after expenses copycat funds earn statistically indistinguishable, and possibly higher, returns than
the underlying actively managed funds. These findings contribute to the policy debate on the optimal level
and frequency of fund disclosure.
Mary Margaret Myers James M. Poterba
Graduate School of Business Department of Economics
University of Chicago Massachusetts Institute of Technology
1101 East 58th Street 50 Memorial Drive
Chicago, IL 60637 Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
poterba@mit.edu
Douglas A. Shackelford John B. Shoven
Kenan-Flagler Business School Department of Economics
University of North Carolina Stanford University
Campus Box 3490, McColl Building Encina Hall
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3490 Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER and NBER

The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission is currently considering modifying the regulations
that govern disclosures that mutual funds must make to their shareholders. Under the 1940 Investment
Company Act, investment companies must disclose both their performance and their current portfolio
holdings in semi-annual reports to shareholders. These reports must be sent to the shareholders no more
than sixty days after the reporting period ends. A number of organizations representing fund shareholders
have called for more frequent disclosure of mutual fund holdings, on the grounds that they would enable
investors to more accurately select funds that match their investment objectives. More frequent
disclosure would presumably permit shareholders to detect, sooner, changes in fund investment strategy.
They would consequently reduce the risk that fund managers could pursue investment strategies that do
not coincide with their shareholders' wishes.
Previous research on financial disclosure recognizes that mandatory disclosure has both costs and
benefits. The costs include the direct expenses associated with producing and disseminating information
on investment positions, as well as a range of potential costs that a discloser may face when private
information becomes publicly available. The benefits of disclosure emanate from improved monitoring
of fund managers, and from potential improvements in investor choice that result from detailed
information availability. Both the costs and benefits of disclosure are typically very difficult to quantify.
In the mutual fund context, Wermers (2001) notes that there are two potential costs to the
investors in a fund when the fund is required to disclose its holdings. First, when a fund discloses its
holdings, it becomes easier for other investors to use information on fund inflows to "front-run" the fund's
trades, thereby bidding up the prices of the securities that the fund manager wishes to buy. This cost is
presumably greater when disclosure is more frequent, and it translates into a lower return on the fund's
investments. Second, disclosure reduces the time period over which fund investors are able to reap the
private rewards of their manager's securities research. The managers who direct investments in actively-
managed open-end mutual funds carry out research about various securities to identify underpriced assets
that will generate above-average, risk-adjusted returns. Because disclosure reveals the identity of the
securities that the fund manager has purchased, it reduces the potential returns to a manager's research.
2

Potential competitors, as well as fund shareholders, learn about a fund manager's investments when the
fund discloses its holdings. The fund manager's unique return to investing in the securities that his
research suggests are under-valued is therefore limited to the time between the completion of the research,
and the next disclosure date. This analysis presumes that research by fund managers uncovers positive
return opportunities; a large empirical literature, reviewed for example in Gruber (1996), suggests that
this assumption is open to debate.
These two costs must be balanced against the potential benefits of disclosure both from the
standpoint of an individual fund manager who is considering increasing the frequency of disclosure, and
from the standpoint of a regulator trying to design an optimal policy. One potential benefit of disclosure
may be heightened demand for the securities owned by a disclosing fund. If other investors decide to
purchase the securities that a fund already owns because they believe that the disclosing manager has
private information, this may drive up the price of these securities, thereby raising the returns on the fund
that makes the disclosure.
Another benefit is that some investors may attach substantial value to frequent disclosure, and
therefore be prepared to accept higher fees or lower returns to receive frequent fund disclosures. Frequent
disclosure makes it difficult for funds to pursue strategies that are substantially different from the ones
that they advertise. The gains from such disclosure depend on the likelihood that funds change their
strategies without informing their shareholders, and on the cost to shareholders of deviations from pre-
announced strategies. Although the current regulatory environment requires semi-annual disclosure,
some managers voluntarily disclose their fund positions more frequently than the SEC requires. They
presumably believe that investors are more likely to invest in a fund that provides timely portfolio
information, and they value the associated increase in their fund's assets more highly than the potential
future inflows associated with higher current returns.
The possibility that some firms may voluntarily disclose more than the regulators require, to
attract a particular investor clientele is not unique to the mutual fund market. In discussing insider trading
regulation, Manne (1966) argued that even if insiders were not legally prevented from trading in their
3