NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE OPTIMAL CONCENTRATION OF CREDITORS
Arturo Bris
Ivo Welch
Working Paper 8652
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8652
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2001
The latest version of this paper can be downloaded from http://welch.som.yale.edu/. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2001 by Arturo Bris and Ivo Welch. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The Optimal Concentration of Creditors
Arturo Bris and Ivo Welch
NBER Working Paper No. 8652
December 2001
JEL No. G20, G33, G21, G32
ABSTRACT
There are situations in which dispersed creditors (e.g., public creditors) have more difficulties and
higher costs when collecting their claims in financial distress than concentrated creditors (e.g., banks).
Under this assumption, our model predicts that measures of debt concentration relate [a] positively to
creditors’ chosen aggregate debt collection expenditures; [b] positively to management’s chosen
expenditures to avoid paying; [c] positively to total net litigation costs/waste in financial distress; and [d]
positively to accomplished claim recovery by creditors (to which we present some preliminary favorable
empirical evidence). Under additional assumptions, measures of debt concentration relate [e] positively
to intrinsic firm quality; [f] positively to creditor monitoring and negatively to managerial waste; [g]
positively to optimal continuation/discontinuation choices; [h] negatively to issuing marketing expenses.
In a signaling model, when concentration alone is not a sufficient signal, firms choose the ultimately
concentrated debt (i.e., a house bank) and have to pay a high interest.
Arturo Bris Ivo Welch
Yale University Yale University
46 Hillhouse Avenue 46 Hillhouse Avenue
Box 208200 Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200 New Haven, CT 06520-8200
arturo.bris@yale.edu and NBER
ivo.welch@yale.edu

I Introduction
Coordination failure among multiple claimants, be they creditors or owners, is a
subject well-studied in the academic literature. Such coordination failures can lead
totakeoverfailures(GrossmanandHart(1980))orbank-runs(DiamondandDybvig
(1983),Obstfeld(1996);MorrisandShin(1998);MorrisandShin(1999)),orgenerally
reducetheprobabilityofsuccessfulrenegotiationtoaproposedreorganizationplan
when renegotiation requires simultaneous assent by many claimants (Preece and
Mullineaux(1996);Hege(1997);Bergloef,Roland,andvonThadden(2000)). Inmany
of these models, the coordination failures aid the dispersed claimants. In a sense,
claimants cooperation has to be purchased with an offer that is attractive enough
for each and every claimant to choose to collaborate. Thus, coordination failure
can suggest that dispersed creditors or owners can receive higher settlements than
their hypothetically more concentrated but otherwise identical counterparts.
Zingales(1995)usesthisinsighttoshowthatanentrepreneurmayprefertosell
a firm to dispersed owners in an IPO, who in turn can later obtain a higher price
forthesharesfromapotentialacquirorthanthisentrepreneurcouldhaveobtained
by herself.1 In Bolton and Scharfstein (1996), the paper most interested in the
optimalconcentrationofcreditorsandthusmostsimilaringoalstoourownpaper,
coordination failure is used to explicitly derive an optimal number of creditors: in
financial distress, two creditors can extract more surplus than one creditor. This
can deter inappropriate (strategic) default by management. However, coordination
problemscanalsomaketwocreditorslesslikelytofacilitatecorporatecontinuation
when it is optimal. The optimal number of creditors is thus a coordination tradeoff
designed to approximate optimal termination/continuation.2
Yet, it is possible to draw a different conclusion from the fact that dispersed
creditors cannot easily coordinate. Dispersed creditors are first and foremost un-
1Ofcourse,itcouldbethatbeingpublicraisestheprobabilitythatthisfirmwillappearonthe
radarscreenofpotentialacquirors.
2Rajan (1992), Repullo and Suarez (1998), and others consider the tradeoff between a concen-
trated creditor’s ability to collect information and decide intelligently, and his worse ability to
negotiateabettersettlementduetolowerconcentration.
1

able to be proactive. Thus, even though they are at an advantage when positive
assent to a relief plan is required from every creditor, they are at a disadvantage
whenactiveoppositiontomanagement’sreliefplanisrequired. Inthiscase,mutual
free-ridingincentivesweakenstheoveralloutcomefordispersedclaimants. Agood
example of how dispersion can facilitate bondholder expropriation are Gertner and
Scharfstein (1991) and Bernardo and Talley (1996), in which management can use
exchange offers to expropriate wealth from uncoordinated creditors.
OurpaperbeginswithamotivatingpilotstudyfromtheNewYorkStatebankruptcy
court. In a sample of 63 bankruptcies, and adjusting for firm size, secured creditor
concentration helps secured creditors, and unsecured creditor concentration hurts
secured creditors in avoiding APR violations in favor of unsecured creditors.
Ourmodelassumesthatcreditorsmustpro-activelyseektoenforcetheirclaims.
Our model is based on a conflict game, in which more proactive claimants can
achievebetteroutcomesforthemselves. Conflicttheorycanbeviewedasareduced-
form method of modeling negotiations, which sidesteps the usually complex, often
asymmetricinformationgameswhichunderlieformalmodelsofbargainingderived
from first principles (e.g., Rubinstein (1982)). In exchange for a certain ad-hocness
in the specification of how legal effort aids outcomes, conflict models sometimes
offer a more realistic description of empirical bargaining outcomes. Their reduced
form of modeling can provide interesting and relatively easily empirically testable
predictions. Conflicttheoryisbynowanacceptedmainstreammethodofmodeling
(e.g., Hirshleifer (1978), Hirshleifer (1989), Hirshleifer (1991), Welch (1997), Rajan
and Zingales (1998), Bernardo, Talley, and Welch (2000) and many others).
In our model, multiple creditors have to negotiate with the entrepreneur in case
of financial distress. Our paper uses “management,” “equity”, and “entrepreneur”
interchangeably. Collectioncostscanstemfromthecostsoffilingaclaim,following
upthroughthebankruptcyprocess,investigatingthefirm’strueresources,commu-
nicatingandnegotiatingwithandpressuringmanagement, hiringlawyers, bringing
motions to the court, etc. Management can establish procedures which make it dif-
ficult for its creditors to prove and recover their claims, or hire lawyers to outright
2