NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RISK TAKING, LIMITED LIABILITY AND THE COMPETITION OF BANK REGULATORS
Hans-Werner Sinn
Working Paper 8669
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8669
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2001
The author wishes to thank Frank Westermann and Paul Kremmel for careful research assistance, and he
gratefully acknowledges useful comments by Vesa Kanniainen. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2001 by Hans-Werner Sinn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Risk Taking, Limited Liability and the Competition of Bank Regulators
Hans-Werner Sinn
NBER Working Paper No. 8669
December 2001
JEL No. D8, H0
ABSTRACT
Limited liability and asymmetric information between an investment bank and its lenders provide
an incentive for a bank to undercapitalise and finance overly risky business projects. To counter this
market failure, national governments have imposed solvency constraints on banks. However, these
constraints may not survive in systems competition, as systems competition is likely to suffer from the
same type of information asymmetry which induced the private market failure and which brought in the
government in the first place (Selection Principle). As national solvency regulation creates a positive
international policy externality on foreign lenders of domestic banks, there will be an undersupply of such
regulation. This may explain why Asian banks were undercapitalised and took excessive risks before the
banking crisis emerged.
Hans-Werner Sinn
CESifo
Schackstr. 4
80539 Munich
Germany
and NBER
Tel: ++49 89 2180 2747
Fax: ++49 89 397 303
hws@ces.vwl.uni-muenchen.de

Banking Risks
Banking is not a safe business. Banks can have bad luck when they finance private investment and they
can go bankrupt, inflicting a loss on savers who do not get their money back. To keep the risks under
control, the banking business is heavily regulated in most countries, but not in all. Where the regulation
is lax there tend to be problems. This paper provides a welfare analysis of banking regulation and studies
the competitive forces affecting this type of regulation in systems competition.
The Asian banking crisis demonstrates clearly how important the risks resulting from loose
banking regulation can be. The crisis began in Thailand. Foreign bank lenders went on strike when they
witnessed that Thai banks were issuing excessively bad loans, and so the Thai bath depreciated strongly.
In South Korea, Malaysia, Indonesia, Taiwan, Singapore and the Philippines the situation was no
different, and the currencies of these countries soon followed similar paths, leaving a long trail of
bankrupt banks behind. The Asian banking crisis propelled the Asian economies into a sharp recession
in 1998, which had severe repercussions on economic growth in the rest of the world.
The Asian problems had been preceded by the S&L crisis in the United States and the Mexican
crisis in the early 1990s. Both of these crises had a weaker impact on the world economy because they
had been mitigated with generous loans by the US government and the IMF. However, they had paved
the way for the Asian disaster by making financial investors aware of the risks they were facing.
While the various banking crises had many facets which cannot be discussed here, there seems to
be a common element in that the banks were undercapitalised and had taken excessive risks in the
capital market. For instance, in Korea the equity asset ratio fell from 9.5% in 1990 to 6.5% in 1996, the
year before the crisis began, and in Mexico the ratio fell from 6.24 % in 1990 to 5.5% in 1994, the year
of the crisis.1 There are illustrative descriptions by Corsetti, Pesenti and Roubini (1998), Dekle and
Kletzer (2001), Kane (2000) and Calomiris and Powell (2000), showing that in East Asia as well as
1 OECD, Bank Profitability: Financial Statements of Banks, 2000.
3

Mexico, a substantial part of the problem had indeed been excessive risk-taking and the lack of domestic
bank regulation. In Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, Malaysia and Singapore, banking regulation was
fragmented between different regulatory agencies, and overall was too lenient or simply ignored in
practice. In his Munich Lectures, Dornbusch (1998) argued that it was primarily the preceding
liberalisation of bank regulation which had made the Asian crisis possible and led the world into a
recession.2
Undercapitalisation not only makes a bank vulnerable in a crisis, it could even trigger off the
crisis by inducing excessive risk taking when the bank enjoys the privilege of limited liability as all
corporations do. When the equity base is low, limited liability effectively truncates the probability
distributions of income among which a bank can choose and thus creates an artificial type of risk loving
behaviour which was characterised (Sinn 1980, 1982) by the term “BLOOS rule”, after the English
proverb “You can’t get blood out of a stone”.3 As will be clarified in a separate section below, this is
basically the same as what was later called a gamble for resurrection or resuscitation.
Because of the Asian banking crisis, the issue of how sound banking behaviour could be
assured has regained much attention in the public debate, including that between the IMF and the World
Bank. Often this debate neglects the implications of the BLOOS rule, but the Basel I Accord of 1988 and
the new Basel II Accord, which is currently being negotiated and is scheduled to be implemented in
2005, do reflect the concerns implied in this rule. Both accords define minimum equity requirements of
banks, but Basel II allows for a fine tuning in that the banks are obliged to assess the risks of their
borrowers and to allocate specific equity amounts to them in order to minimise the bankruptcy risk.
2 The macroeconomic implications are not self-evident, though. Blum and Hellwig (1995) argued that banking regulation
itself tends to bring about business cycle risks, because the solvency requirements imply particularly harsh credit constraints
in a time of recession.
3 “Sinn (1980)” refers to the German publication of the author’s 1977 dissertation where the phenomenon had been called
MAEHKMINN-Regel (Mehr als er hat kann man ihm nicht nehmen.) The term BLOOS rule was chosen in the translation that
came out with North Holland in 1983, as cited in the references.
4