NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
COMPETITION AND INTERVENTION IN SOVEREIGN DEBT MARKETS
Bernhard Paasche
Stanley E. Zin
Working Paper 8679
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8679
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2001
We would like to thank Ravi Bansal, V.V. Chari, Rick Green, Burton Hollifield, Kenneth Kletzer, Uday
Rajan, Chris Telmer, and participants of Duke’s First Annual Research Workshop on the “Macroeconomics
of Global Market Imperfections” in Venice, participants of the Fourth UTDT Workshop in International
Economics and Finance in Buenos Aires, and seminar participants at Carnegie Mellon University, for helpful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2001 by Bernhard Paasche and Stanley E. Zin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Competition and Intervention in Sovereign Debt Markets
Bernhard Paasche and Stanley E. Zin
NBER Working Paper No. 8679
December 2001
JEL No. F33, E44, G15, G12
ABSTRACT
We investigate markets for defaultable sovereign debt in which even though there are many
identical lenders and symmetric information (including no hidden actions), perfect competition does not
obtain. When a private lender allows a sovereign country to increase its level of indebtedness, that lender
implicitly imposes a default externality on others who have lent to that sovereign. That is, in the case
where the borrower would be able to pay back the first loan in the absence of a second loan, the borrower
may have a strong incentive to take both loans and default on both loans. When a lender has no control
over the actions of other lenders, they must anticipate this behavior and devise a lending strategy that is
consistent with the strategies not only of the sovereign borrower, but also of other lenders. We develop
a model of this strategic lending behavior in the presence of default, and show that even though there are
many competing lenders, the perfectly competitive outcome does not necessarily obtain. Moreover, the
equilibrium can result in monopoly-like outcomes in prices and quantities. We also study the
consequences of intervention in these markets by a seemingly benevolent international financial
institution, and find that these interventions, though well-intentioned, can in some cases be welfare
reducing for sovereign countries and welfare improving for private lenders.
Bernhard Paasche Stanley E. Zin
GSIA, Carnegie Mellon University GSIA, Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890 Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890
and NBER
zin@bobbyorr.gsia.cmu.edu

1 Introduction
Discussions about the behavior of international credit markets, and markets
for sovereign debt in particular, are often predicated on one of two very
different assumptions about the structure of the markets. If we assume that
markets for sovereign debt are competitive and, if left to their own devices,
borrowers and lenders would organize their activities in an efficient manner
(as they presumably do in many other markets), any intervention by an
institution like the IMF is distortionary and necessarily welfare reducing. On
the other hand, if lenders are assumed to be unable to closely monitor the
behavior of sovereign borrowers and are unable to enforce international debt
contracts, these markets are subject to severe moral hazard problems which
can lead to severe market failures. In this case the IMF’s role is to enhance
privateloanmarketstoreducefearsofmarketfailureandimprovethewelfare
of both borrowers and lenders. Clearly then, the proper role of intervention
by an institution like the IMF is strongly influenced by assumptions about
the structure of the market for defaultable sovereign debt.
There is a large literature dealing with a variety of aspects of sovereign
debt markets (see, for example, Eaton and Fernandez (1995), Eichengreen
(1991), Eaton and Gersovitz (1981), Bulow and Rogoff (1989), and Gibson
and Sundareson (2001), among many others). The foundation for virtually
all of this work, however, is competitive equilibria (with or without frictions).
Inthispaper,weadoptadifferentperspectiveonthesemarkets. Wemaintain
the assumptions that there are manycompeting lenders and there is symmet-
ric information — assumptions that are typically associated with first-best
competitive outcomes. However, we show that the competitive outcome need
not obtain. The ability of a sovereign to retain some of their income in the
case of default induces a “default externality” that lenders must account for
when offering defaultable bond contracts to a sovereign borrower. In other
words, lenders must behave strategically even though they have no compet-
itive or informational advantage.
Ourmodelisoneofstrategicinteractionsbetweenlendersandthesovereign
borrower, rather than more abstract bond-market participants. Hence, it is
more likely to apply in situations in which a country doesn’t have access to
liquidinternationalbondmarkets,butrathermustrelyonloansfrominterna-
tional banks. This is common for small countries. For example, throughout
1

the 1980’s and 1990’s, Ghana issued no long-term bonds to private creditors,
but borrowed significant amounts from commercial banks and other private
lenders. On the other hand, of the $87.5 billion of Mexico’s long-term pub-
lic debt outstanding in 1999, only $9.7 billion came from commercial banks
and private lenders. Our model may also apply when a sovereign’s likeli-
hood of default is very high, hence, it is excluded from further borrowing
in international bond markets, e.g., Argentina in 2001. Overall, banks play
a significant role in sovereign debt markets. Banks held 97 percent of all
emerging markets debt at the end of the 1980s. This number fell to roughly
two-thirds by the mid-1990s as the volume of debt grew enormously (see
Eichengreen and Mody (1998) and Bernstein and Penicook (1998)), how-
ever, it is still the dominant form of credit when one excludes the largest
of emerging-market economies e.g., Mexico and Brazil (see Chanda et al
(2001)). Moreover, two necessary assumptions of our model, first that loan
contracts are non-exclusive, and second, that sovereign borrowers can shelter
some of their income from creditors in the event of default, seem to apply in
many situations involving private institutions lending to sovereign countries.
Empirical work on sovereign loan markets suggest that standard compet-
itive models of sovereign loan markets do not provide a sufficient explanation
for much of what we observe. Edwards (1984) shows that spreads on loans
to sovereign LDCs in the late 1970’s exhibit a lot of variation that cannot
be explained with standard economic factors. (Edwards (1986) demonstrates
thatthisappliesforsovereignbondsaswellasloans.) Othershavefoundthat
interest-rate spreads on sovereign debt seem puzzling from the perspective
of standard competitive models. Eichengreen and Mody (1998) have docu-
mentedthatintheearly1990s, muchofthevariabilityininterestratespreads
on emerging market debt is accounted for by a country-specific fixed effect,
and that the explanatory power of economic fundamentals is much less than
standard theory would suggest. In addition, a recent IMF report (Chadha et
al. (2001)) finds that emerging-market interest-rates do not have a clear re-
lationship with default episodes. They also find that emerging market debt
outperforms other comparably risky investments including corporate debt
and even the S&P500 index. Generally, therefore, it is difficult to explain
either the high level or the co-movements with standard economic fundamen-
tals for interest rates observed in sovereign debt contracts. Understanding
these data, therefore, would seem to require a different approach.
2