NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
POLITICAL COMPETITION WITH CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS
AND INFORMATIVE ADVERTISING
Stephen Coate
Working Paper 8693
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8693
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2001
Work on this project was undertaken during a visit to the Institute for International Economic Studies at the
University of Stockholm. I thank the Institute for its hospitality and David Stromberg for useful discussions.
I also thank Tim Besley for his input in the early stages of this project and Julia Epifantseva for excellent
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2001 by Stephen Coate. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Political Competition with Campaign Contributions and Informative Advertising
Stephen Coate
NBER Working Paper No. 8693
December 2001
JEL No. D72
ABSTRACT
This paper presents a model of political competition with campaign contributions and informative
political advertising. Policy-motivated parties compete by selecting candidates and interest groups provide
contributions to enhance the electoral prospects of like-minded candidates. Contributions are used to
finance advertising campaigns that provide voters with information about candidates’ ideologies. The
model embodies rational behavior on the part of all actors, is analytically tractable, and has a unique
equilibrium. The paper uses the model to analyze the welfare economics of contribution limits. Such
limits are shown to redistribute welfare from moderate voters to interest group members. They may or
may not raise aggregate welfare.
Stephen Coate
Department of Economics
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
sc163@cornell.edu

1 Introduction
Thispaperpresentsamodelofpoliticalcompetitionwithcampaigncontributionsandinformative
political advertising. The model incorporates three groups of political actors; parties who select
candidates, interest groups who contribute to candidates, and voters who vote for candidates.
Campaigncontributionsare position induced inthesensethatinterestgroups givetoenhancethe
electoralprospectsoflike-mindedcandidates(asopposedtobuyingpolicyfavors). Interestgroups’
contributions are used to finance advertising campaigns that provide voters with information
about candidates’ ideologies. The model embodies rational behavior on the part of all actors, is
analytically tractable, and has a unique equilibrium.
In light of the explosion of theoretical models of electoral competition, the reader might be
forgivenforquestioningthevalueofyetanotherone.1 Thedevelopmentofthismodelismotivated
byadesiretoanalyzeissuesinthefinancingofpoliticalcampaigns. Theappropriateregulationof
campaigncontributionsisanimportanttopicintheUnitedStates,withsignificantdissatisfaction
with the current system and many proposals for reform. To analyze such proposals, one needs
a framework that adequately captures the role contributions play in elections. As commonly
understood, this role is to finance the provision of information about candidates to voters. From
a social viewpoint, this means that contributions should help produce more informed choices.
Moreover, their presence should provide parties with a greater incentive to select candidates with
characteristicsthatvoterswant. Whiletherehavebeenanumberofinterestingstudiesofcampaign
contributions,theliteraturehasyettoproduceatheorythatsatisfactorilycapturesthisrole. The
model presented here is designed to fill this gap.
Themodelassumesthattherearetwopoliticalpartiesrepresentingopposingideologies. Parties
can choose to run either partisan or moderate candidates, with party members preferring the
1 SeePerssonandTabellini(2000)andGrossmanandHelpman(2001)foroverviewsofrecentwork.
1

ideologyoftheformer. Votersknowacandidate’spartyaffiliationbutnotwhetherheisapartisan
or a moderate. Advertising allows a candidate to provide voters with this information. The idea
is that candidates have past records that reveal their ideologies and advertising can inform voters
of those records.2 Such advertising can be advantageous for a moderate candidate because it
may attract moderate voters of the opposing ideology. Resources for campaign advertising are
providedbyinterestgroupsconsistingofpartisansofopposingideologies. Thesegroupscontribute
only to moderate candidates because only they can benefit from advertising their ideologies.3
To illustrate the value of the model for policy analysis, the paper uses it to study the case
for limiting the amount that interest groups can contribute to campaigns. The analysis reveals
a basic trade-off: contribution limits reduce expected campaign spending, but also decrease the
likelihood that parties select moderate candidates. The existence of this trade-off means that
contributionlimitscannotbeevaluatedviatheParetocriterion. Rather,theyredistributewelfare
between different groups. Moderate voters are made worse off; partisans who do not belong to
interest groups are unaffected; and partisans who are interest group members are actually made
better off. Thus, imposing a contribution limit redistributes welfare from moderates to interest
group members. The question of whether the gains to interest group members offset the losses
to moderate voters turns on the fraction of the latter in the population. Contribution limits are
always desirable from an aggregate viewpoint when only a small fraction of the population are
moderates, while limits will tend to be harmful when moderates dominate.
The organization of the remainder of the paper is as follows. The next section explains how
2Thus,forexample,moderateleft-wingcandidateswillhaverecordsofbeingtoughoncrime,fiscallyresponsible,
orprovouchers. Alternatively,iftheyhavenotpreviouslyheldelectedoffice,theywillhavehadbusinessexperience
anddisplayedstrongfamilyvalues. Incontrast,theirpartisancounterpartswillhaverecordsofsupportforradical
programs (such as gay marriage), a history of community activism, or strong ties to the union movement. They
mayalsohavebelongedtopartisanassociations(suchasAlSharpton’spresidentialadvisorycommittee).
3 The conclusion that partisan candidates recieve no campaign contributions arises because there is only one
dimension of difference between candidates and negative advertising is not permitted. In reality, it would be an
unusualraceinwhichacandidatecouldnotbenefitbyrevealingsomeinformationabouthimselforhisopponent.
Nonetheless,thegeneralconclusionthatthosecandidateswithcharacteristicsthatswingvotersvalueshould,ceteris
paribus,receivelargercontributionswouldseemanaturalimplicationoftheinformationalperspective.
2