NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THROWING GOOD MONEY AFTER BAD?
BOARD CONNECTIONS AND CONFLICTS IN BANK LENDING
Randall S. Kroszner
Philip E. Strahan
Working Paper 8694
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8694
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2001
We would like to thank Gary Gorton, Raphael de la Porta and an anonymous referee for useful comments.
Kroszner would like to thank the Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation for research support. Comments
welcome. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2001 by Randall S. Kroszner and Philip E. Strahan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Throwing Good Money After Bad?
Board Connections and Conflicts in Bank Lending
Randall S. Kroszner and Philip E. Strahan
NBER Working Paper No. 8694
December 2001
JEL No. G3
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates the frequency of connections between banks and non-financial firms
through board linkages and whether those connections affect lending and borrowing behavior. Although
a board linkages may reduce the costs of information flows between the lender and borrower, a board
linkage may generate pressure for special treatment of a borrower not normally justifiable on economic
grounds. To address this issue, we first document that banks are heavily involved in the corporate
governance network through frequent board linkages. Banks tend to have larger boards with a higher
proportion of outside directors than non- financial firms, and bank officer-directors tend to have more
external board directorships than executives of non- financial firms. We then show that low- information
cost firms -- large firms with a high proportion of tangible assets and relatively stable stock returns -- are
most likely to have board connections to banks. These same low- information cost firms are also more
likely to borrow from their connected bank, and when they do so the terms of the loan appear similar to
loans to unconnected firms. In contrast to studies of Mexico, Russia and Asia where connections have
been misused, our results suggest that avoidance of potential conflicts of interest explains both the
allocation and behavior of bankers in the U.S. corporate governance system.
Randall S. Kroszner Philip E. Strahan
Graduate School of Business Carroll School of Management
University of Chicago Boston College
1101 East 58th Street 140 Commonwealth
Chicago, IL 60637 Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER philip.strahan@bc.edu
randy.kroszner@gsb.uchicago.edu

THROWING GOOD MONEY AFTER BAD?
BOARD CONNECTIONS AND CONFLICTS IN BANK LENDING
Randall S. Kroszner and Philip E. Strahan
August 2001
I. Introduction
Connections between banks and potential borrowers raise important issues in both
economic theory and regulatory practice. Connected lending occurs when the lender has more
than a simple arm’s length relationship with the borrower. One potentially important connection
in the U.S. occurs through the board of directors. Although a board linkage may provide the
benefit of better information flows between a borrower and lender, a person on the board of both
a bank and a borrowing firm may face a conflict of interest: the person has a fiduciary duty to
both the bank and the firm and these interests may diverge. In particular, regulators are
concerned that such connections could lead banks to “throw good money after bad” by favoring
connected firms that become distressed and thereby expose the deposit insurer and taxpayer to
unduly large losses. Connections between banks and potential borrowers thus involve a tradeoff
in which the benefits of better information must be weighed against the costs of worsened
conflicts.
Economic and finance theory does not tell us how this tradeoff is resolved. Lamoreaux
(1994) argues that connected lending was important to the development of U.S. banking during
the nineteenth century because it was an efficient mechanism for reducing monitoring and
enforcement costs. Hoshi, Kashyap and Sharfstein (1991) argue that firms in Japan connected to
1

their bank through a keiretsu were insulated from cash flow shocks that could distort investment
choices. Both of these studies suggest that the information benefits of connections outweigh the
costs of conflicts.
Other studies suggest, however, that conflicts associated with connected lending are the
primary reasons for the fragility of many financial systems. Rajan and Zingales (1998), for
example, argue that much of the collapse of the Asian tigers in 1997 and 1998 was due to
connected lenders continuing to extend credit to distressed borrowers rather than cutting off bad
credits early and forcing restructuring before problems grew out of control. La Porta, Lopez-de-
Silanes, and Zamarripa (2001) argue that connected lending in Mexico was tantamount to looting
of the banks. Laeven (2001) finds that connected lending in Russia during the 1990s also
exposed banks to undue risks.
In this paper we argue that in the United States, just as in the emerging economies, the
potential for conflicts can explain bank connections to potential borrowers. U.S. legal and
regulatory doctrines designed to punish bankers that exploit their position, along with effective
protection of shareholder rights, however, raise the cost of exploiting conflicts here.1 Thus,
rather than see bankers taking advantage of their connections, in the U.S. we show that bankers
avoid connections with firms where the temptation to exploit information and control would be
greatest. We also show that banks with connections avoid lending to firms where the potential
for exploitation of information would be greatest.
1 More broadly, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998, 1999) argue that the
degree of the protection of the rights of shareholders and creditors can explain differences in capital
market development, ownership concentration, and firms’ access to external finance.
2