NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DOES INWARD FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT
BOOST THE PRODUCTIVITY OF DOMESTIC FIRMS?
Jonathan E. Haskel
Sonia C. Pereira
Matthew J. Slaughter
Working Paper 8724
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8724
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2002
For very helpful discussion we thank Andrew Bernard, Bruce Blonigen, Steve Machin, Nina Pavcnik, Dave
Richardson, Joel Slemrod, Scott Stern, and seminar participants at London School of Economics, University
of Michigan, Syracuse University, the CEPR Labor Economics Workshop, and the NBER Summer Institutes
for Productivity and International Trade and Investment. The data in this paper were used as part of the U.K.
Office of National Statistics business-data-linking project. For financial support Haskel and Pereira thank
the U.K. Economic and Social Research Council for grant #R000223239, and Slaughter thanks the National
Science Foundation and the National Bureau of Economic Research. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Jonathan E. Haskel, Sonia C. Pereira and Matthew J. Slaughter. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Does Inward Foreign Direct Investment Boost the Productivity of Domestic Firms?
Jonathan E. Haskel, Sonia C. Pereira and Matthew J. Slaughter
NBER Working Paper No. 8724
January 2002
JEL No. F2, L1
ABSTRACT
Are there productivity spillovers from FDI to domestic firms, and, if so, how much should host
countries be willing to pay to attract FDI? To examine these questions we use a plant-level panel covering
U.K. manufacturing from 1973 through 1992. Across a wide range of specifications, we estimate a
significantly positive correlation between a domestic plant’s TFP and the foreign-affiliate share of activity
in that plant’s industry. This is consistent with positive FDI spillovers. We do not generally find
significant effects on plant TFP of the foreign-affiliate share of activity in that plant’s region. Typical
estimates suggest that a 10 percentage-point increase in foreign presence in a U.K. industry raises the TFP
of that industry’s domestic plants by about 0.5 percent. We also use these estimates to calculate the per-
job value of these spillovers. These calculated values appear to be less than per-job incentives
governments have granted in recent high-profile cases, in some cases several times less.
Jonathan E. Haskel Sonia C. Pereira Matthew J. Slaughter
Department of Economics Department of Economics Department of Economics
Queen Mary College Queen Mary College Dartmouth College
University of London University of London 309 Rockefeller Hall
London E1 4NS London E1 4NS Hanover, NH 03755
England England and NBER
and CEPR s.pereira@qmw.ac.uk slaughter@dartmouth.edu
j.e.haskel@qmw.ac.uk

1
1. Introduction
An important part of globalization in recent years has been the ongoing rise in foreign direct
investment (FDI). UNCTAD (2000) reports that from 1979 to 1999, the ratio of world FDI stock
to world gross domestic product rose from 5% to 16% and the ratio of world FDI inflows to
global gross domestic capital formation rose from 2% to 14%. One consequence is that an
increasing share of countries’ output is accounted for by foreign affiliates of multinational firms.
The foreign-affiliate share of world production is now 15% in manufacturing and other tradables
(Lipsey, et al, 1998).
An obvious policy issue for governments is whether incentives should be offered to
multinational firms to induce local affiliate production. In recent decades dozens of countries
have altered laws to at least grant multinationals national treatment, if not to favour these firms
via policies such as subsidies and tax breaks (UNCTAD, 2000).1 Policy promotion of FDI is
now common not just in developing countries but in many developed countries as well. The
exact values of FDI incentive packages are typically hard to know, but the values of many well-
known FDI packages appear very high. In the late 1980s the U.S. state of Kentucky offered
Toyota an incentive package worth (in present value) $125-$147 million for a plant planning to
employ 3,000 workers (Black and Hoyt, 1989). In 1994 the state of Alabama offered Mercedes
an incentive package of approximately $230 million for a new plant planning to employ 1,500
workers (Head, 1998). In 1991 Motorola was paid £50.75 million to locate a mobile-phone plant
in Scotland, employing 3,000 workers. The factory closed in 2001, and Motorola paid back
£16.75 million in grants. Siemens was offered £50 million in 1996 to locate a 1000-worker
semiconductor plant in Tyneside, in Northeast England. The factory closed 18 months later, at
which point Siemens had to repay £18 million in grants.
Is there economic justification for this kind of policy promotion? There would be if the
social returns to FDI exceed the private returns. One often-claimed possibility is that inward FDI
raises the productivity of domestic plants by bringing new knowledge into the host country that
is, at least partly, a public good. This positive externality of knowledge spillovers may arise
along industry and/or regional lines.
1 For example, as Aitken and Harrison (1998) document, before 1989 foreign firms in Venezuela were taxed at a higher rate than
domestic firms (50% versus 35%), were forced to repatriate profits at officially fixed exchange rates and could not enjoy
confidentiality privileges in joint ventures. See Hanson (2001) for an overview of issues involved in FDI policy.

2
There are thus two empirical questions that we seek to shed light on in this paper. First, are
there productivity spillovers from FDI to domestic firms? Second, if so, how much should host
countries be willing to pay to attract FDI? Despite the public interest and policy importance of
these two questions, there is very little empirical evidence offering answers.
Existing evidence on whether there are productivity spillovers is of three types. The first are
case studies. Cases can offer rich description about episodes and exemplify general issues, but
do not always offer quantitative information and do not easily generalize. Second, there are
industry-level studies (e.g., Caves, 1974; Blomstrom, 1986; and Driffield, 2000). Many have
documented a positive industry-level correlation between FDI inflows and productivity.
However, the causal meaning of this correlation is unclear. It may be that inward FDI raises
host-country productivity via spillovers. But it may also be that inward FDI raises host-country
productivity by forcing the exit of low-productivity domestic plants, or simply by raising the
market share of foreign firms who are, on average, more productive. Or it may be that
multinationals tend to concentrate in high-productivity industries. This latter interpretation is
consistent with recent “knowledge-capital” models of multinational firms, in which these firms
generate knowledge assets that can be deployed in different countries (e.g., Carr, et al, 2001).
The third set of studies are micro-level analyses. These studies examine whether the
productivity of domestic plants (or firms) is correlated with FDI presence in the industry and/or
region of the domestic plants. Of the few micro-level studies we are aware of, only one finds
any evidence of positive spillovers. Haddad and Harrison (1993) find increased industry-level
FDI is correlated with lower domestic-plant productivity in Moroccan manufacturing plants.
Aitken and Harrison (1999) find the same negative result for Venezuelan manufacturing. They
suggest these negative spillovers reflect adverse effects of FDI due to competition and further
that FDI spillovers might not be positive in developing countries whose firms do not have the
absorptive capacity. Chung, et al (1998) find that Japanese automobile firms operating in the
United States did not boost the productivity of their American component-supplier firms via
technology spillovers. Girma and Wakelin (2001) look at one industry, U.K. electronics, and
find a positive correlation between domestic-firm productivity and regional Japanese FDI.2
2 Using data not on firms or plants but rather data on patent citations, Branstetter (2001) looks for spillovers of Japanese FDI into
the United States. Subsequent to our work in this paper, Harris and Robinson (2001) look for spillovers in a collection of 20
detailed U.K. industries. In footnote 21 we compare our methods with theirs.