NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CONTROLLING THE COST OF MINIMUM BENEFIT GUARANTEES IN PUBLIC
PENSION CONVERSIONS
Kent Smetters
Working Paper 8732
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8732
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2002
This paper was written while visiting the Department of Economics at Stanford University. Parts of this
paper circulated under a different title in the past, and very helpful comments on previous drafts were
received from John Campbell, Martin Feldstein, Bill Gale, Steven Ross, Elena Ranguelova, Jan Walliser,
and seminar participants at the 1998 NBER Summer Institute, UC – Berkeley, Brookings Insitution,
Michigan State, World Bank, Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank, Congressional Budget Office, the 1999
AEA Association Meetings, and the January 15 - 16, 1999 NBER Conference Meetings held in Florida.
Comments provided by anonymous referees helped improve the paper’s exposition. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Kent Smetters. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Controlling the Cost of Minimum Benefit Guarantees in Public Pension Conversions
Kent Smetters
NBER Working Paper No. 8732
January 2002
JEL No. G12, G13, G23
ABSTRACT
Unfunded defined-benefit (DB) public pension plans throughout the world are being converted
to funded defined-contribution (DC) plans that typically contain a minimum benefit guarantee (DC-MB).
Risk management techniques must be used to control the cost of these guarantees. The most common
technique is to “over-fund” the benefit: the contribution rate is set high enough so that the expected
benefit is much larger than the guaranteed minimum benefit.
This paper shows that while over-funding is very effective in controlling guarantee costs in
traditional DB plans, it is highly ineffective for DC-MB plans. This result holds even at very large
contribution rates and when risky investments are restricted to a very diversified index like the S&P500.
Calculations show that the true risk-adjusted value of unfunded guarantees in a realistic DC-MB plan
equals 40 to 90 percent (or more) of the value of the unfunded liability in the DB benefit being replaced,
depending on design. This result is true even when the contribution rate in the DC-MB plan is chosen to
produce an expected benefit five times larger than the DB benefit.
This paper considers two approaches to controlling guarantee costs. The first approach borrows
from the recent catastrophic insurance literature. A “standardized” portfolio is guaranteed, requiring
agents to accept “basis risk” if they chose a non-standard portfolio. However, for large conversions from
DB to DC-MB plans, in which there is little or no DB benefit remaining, the government must still worry
about any “implicit guarantee” extending beyond the standardized portfolio, thereby enticing agents to
accept a lot of basis risk (a “Samaritan’s Dilemma”). The second method, therefore, uses a more brute
force approach: private portfolio returns in the good states of the world are taxed while returns in the bad
states are subsidized. Both options are very effective at controlling guarantee costs, and they can be used
separately or together. Calculations demonstrate that all of the unfunded liabilities associated with modern
pay-as-you-go public pension programs can be eliminated under both approaches even at a modest
contribution rate.
Kent Smetters
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Economic Policy
The United States Treasury
1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20220,
The Wharton School, University on Pennsylvania (on leave),
and NBER
Email: smetters@wharton.upenn.edu

I. Introduction
Pay-as-you-go public pension systems, like the US Social Security system, contain large
unfunded liabilities. More funding, maybe as part of a privatization plan, could reduce burdens on
future generations. But conversions of public pension systems to a system with individually-
managed accounts often contain unfunded liabilities of their own. The main liability takes the form
of a guarantee made by the government to each participant. Specifically, the government promises
that each new private account will be large enough at the point of retirement to pay an annuitized
benefit level above some minimum level. But assets, equal in value to the ex-ante cost of these
guarantees are almost never set aside for this purpose. Instead, these guarantees are pay-as-you-go,
or unfunded. Managing the cost of these guarantees, therefore, is critical to the success of any
conversion. The most common technique currently being used to control these costs is to “over-
fund” the benefit: the contribution rate is set high enough so that the expected benefit is much larger
than the guaranteed minimum benefit. But this paper shows that this technique is not very effective
at controlling these costs. Two alternative methods are proposed, both of which are effective.
Public Pension Conversions throughout the World
Many countries have converted their public pension systems from pay-as-you-go Defined-
Benefit (DB) plans to Defined-Contribution plans with Minimum Benefit guarantees (DC-MB).
Chile’s conversion began in 1981. The Chilean government guarantees that private accounts for new
workers will produce a minimum pension payment equal to about 25 percent of average wages. The
recently converted Mexican retirement system guarantees about 40 percent of average wages. Other
countries with converted retirement systems include Argentina, Australia, Bolivia, Columbia, El
Salvador, Hungary, Kazakhstan, Peru, Poland, Switzerland, and United Kingdom (CBO, 1998).1
1 Some countries supplement only private accounts with small balances at the point of retirement, the focus on
this paper. Other countries provide a pay-as-you-go benefit to everyone, which is generally more expensive.
- 1 -

The United States has not yet begun the process of converting its public pension system to
a system based in part on private accounts. But considerable debate is now taking place. Many of
the plans being discussed include minimum benefit guarantees, including the plans by Feldstein and
Samwick (1997, 2000). The original Feldstein-Samwick (1997) plan would convert the entire Social
Security system to private accounts. Their newer “lite” version (2000) would introduce private
accounts to augment a reduced, but still positive, level of Social Security benefit that can be afforded
in the future at today’s payroll tax rate.2 In both of their plans, pensioners receive a combined
(public plus private) benefit at least equal in value to the present-law Social Security benefit level.3
Policymakers have also began devising their own plans with benefit guarantees. In the proposal by
US Senator Phil Gramm (1998), for example, the government would guarantee that a worker
receives an annuitized benefit equal to the amount that they would have received under Social
Security plus twenty percent of the value of the investment they build up “over their working lives.”
The Cost of Guarantees
Among academics, it is becoming more appreciated in recent years that benefit guarantees
can be quite costly. The cost of pension guarantees have been analyzed in papers by Pesando (1982),
Marcus (1985, 1987), Bodie and Merton (1993), and, most recently, Bodie (2001).4 Smetters (2001)
focuses on recent privatization plans, including the Feldstein-Samwick (1997) plan and the Gramm
(1998) plan. He shows that unfunded minimum benefit guarantees can be costly enough to undo
2 Due to long-term insolvency problems facing Social Security, maintaining present-law benefit levels requires
increasing the payroll tax rate from 12.3 percent of payroll to over 19 percent (Social Security Trustees, 2000). The
Feldstein-Samwick “lite” plan would increase funding today in order to avoid a payroll tax increase in the future. Hence,
Feldstein and Samwick are tackling the hardest baseline, rather than a baseline with smaller benefits.
3 Investment risk is addressed in Feldstein, Ranguelova and Samwick (2001) and in other articles by them
referenced therein. US Social Security benefits for a person with average lifetime earnings is a little more than 40
percent of average wages. Hence, the level of guarantee needed in the Feldstein-Samwick plan is similar to Mexico’s.
4 In a different context, a recent interesting paper by Stanton (2000) demonstrates how many 401(k) plans give
participants a valuable option to time retirement or rollovers.
- 2 -