NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DEFAULT, CURRENCY CRISES AND SOVEREIGN CREDIT RATINGS
Carmen M. Reinhart
Working Paper 8738
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8738
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2002
This paper was prepared for the New York University-University of Maryland Project The Role of Credit
Rating Agencies in the International Economy. The author wishes to thank François Bourguignon, Stijn
Claessens, Ricardo Hausmann, Peter Kenen and three anonymous referees for very helpful comments,
Facundo Martin, Juan Trevino, and Ioannis Tokatlidis for superb research assistance and the Center for
International Political Economy for financial support. This paper was written while the author was Professor
at the University of Maryland. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research or the IMF.
© 2002 by Carmen M. Reinhart. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Default, Currency Crises and Sovereign Credit Ratings
Carmen M. Reinhart
NBER Working Paper No. 8738
January 2002
JEL No. F30, F31, F34
ABSTRACT
Sovereign credit ratings play an important role in determining the terms and the extent to which
countries have access to international capital markets. In principle, there is no reason why changes in
sovereign credit ratings should be expected to systematically predict a currency crisis. In practice,
however, in developing countries there is a strong link between currency crises and default. About 85
percent of all the defaults in the sample are linked with currency crises. The results presented here suggest
that sovereign credit ratings systematically fail to anticipate currency crises--but do considerably better
predicting defaults. Downgrades usually follow the currency crisis--possibly highlighting how currency
instability increases default risk.
Carmen M. Reinhart
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20431
and NBER
Tel: 202-623-4793
Fax: 202-623-7271
Email: creinhart@imf.org
www.puaf.umd.edu/papers/reinhart.htm

I. Introduction
Sovereign credit ratings play an important role in determining the terms and the extent to
which countries have access to international capital markets. As more countries are added to the
list of rated sovereigns, the issue of the information content of ratings becomes even more
important.1 Credit ratings have been shown to have a significant impact on sovereign bond yield
spreads.2 Indeed, sovereign credit ratings are supposed to serve as a summary measure of a
country’s likelihood of default. Hence, it is hardly surprising to find that the countries with the
lowest ratings are those that are unable to borrow from international capital markets altogether
and depend on official loans from multilateral institutions or from individual governments. In
this cross-sectional sense, sovereign credit ratings do well in distinguishing across borrowers.
Industrial countries take international capital market access for granted. At the other end
of the spectrum, many low income countries, mired with a debt overhang, have no access to
international lending even under relatively favorable states of nature.3 For emerging markets
(EMs), however, access to international capital markets is precarious and highly variable across
time. It is for these economies that the sovereign credit ratings play their most critical role.
In principle, there is no reason why changes in sovereign credit ratings should be
expected to systematically predict a currency crisis or a banking crisis. After all, industrial
1 To cite a recent example, Standard and Poor’s added Guatemala to the list of rated
sovereigns in November 2001.
2 See, for example, Larrain, Reisen and Von Maltzan (1997), who find evidence that ratings
“Granger-cause” sovereign bond yield spreads.
3 Examples of favorable states of nature include both shocks that are idiosyncratic to the
country--such as an increase in the terms of trade, or common shocks such as declining world
interest rates.
2

countries have had their share of currency crises (i.e., France and the United Kingdom in the
1992-93 Exchange Rate Mechanism crisis), banking crises (Japan, the S&L crisis in the United
States), or both simultaneously (i.e., the Nordic countries and Spain).4 In practice, however, in
EMs there is a strong link between currency crises and default.5 Without the colossal bail-out
packages that were put together by the international community, there is little doubt that the
currency crises in Mexico, South Korea, Thailand and, more recently, Turkey would have all
produced a sovereign debt default.6 Hence, if credit ratings are forward-looking and currency
crises in EMs are linked to defaults, then it logically follows that currency crises should be
systematically preceded by downgrades. It is this temporal (rather than cross sectional) behavior
of credit ratings that I am interested in investigating.
Yet, recent anecdotal evidence does not suggest that financial crises were preceded by
downgrades in credit ratings. As the chronology in Table 1 illustrates, the downgrades appear to
materialize after and not before the crises in Asia. A question that arises from these recent
episodes is if this failure on the part of the rating agencies to anticipate debt servicing difficulties
is more generalized and systematic. Goldstein, Kaminsky, and Reinhart (2000), who examine the
links between currency and banking crises and changes in sovereign credit ratings for 20
countries for Institutional Investor and Moody’s, find mixed evidence on rating agencies ability
to anticipate financial crises. Neither of the rating agencies predict banking crises but--they
4 For an analysis of twin crises episodes, see Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999).
5 Further more, some of the indicators that are useful in predicting currency crises arealso
useful to predict debt crises, see Detragiache and Spilimbergo (2001).
6 Even if the government does not have much outstanding debt, history has shown that in
such times governments assume private sector debt time after time.
3