NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TAX-LOSS TRADING AND WASH SALES
Mark Grinblatt
Matti Keloharju
Working Paper 8745
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8745
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2002
We are grateful to Amit Goyal, Matti Ilmanen, Juhani Linnainmaa, and Harri Toivonen for superb research
assistance, to the Academy of Finland and the UCLA Academic Senate for financial support, to Jay Ritter
for many helpful discussions, and to both the editor, William Schwert and an anonymous referee for many
useful comments on earlier drafts. A portion of this research was undertaken at Yale University, whose
support we are appreciative of. We are especially indebted to Henri Bergström, Mirja Lamminpää, Tapio
Tolvanen, and Lauri Tommila of the Finnish Central Securities Depositary for providing us with access to
the data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Mark Grinblatt and Matti Keloharju. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Tax-Loss Trading and Wash Sales
Mark Grinblatt and Matti Keloharju
NBER Working Paper No. 8745
January 2002
JEL No. G0, G1
ABSTRACT
An analysis of trades in the Finnish stock market around the turn of the year shows that Finnish
investors tend to realize losses more than gains towards the end of December. They also buy back the
same stocks they recently sold, with a repurchase rate that depends on the size of the capital loss and how
close the sale is to the end of December. The resulting net buying pressure from these "wash sale"
repurchases is greater for stocks with small market capitalizations and has a calendar pattern that is
similar to that of stock returns.
Mark Grinblatt Matti Keloharju
UCLA Helsinki School of Economics
Anderson Graduate School of Management Department of Accounting and Finance
110 Westwood Plaza Runeberginkatu 22-24
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481 FIN-00100 Helsinki, Finland
and NBER Tel: +358 9-4313-8486
Tel: 310-825-2508 Fax: +358 9-4313-8678
Fax: 310-206-5455 matti.keloharju@hkkk.fi
mark.grinblatt@anderson.ucla.edu

1. Introduction
Most finance researchers suspect that tax-loss selling of stocks occurs at the end of the year,
but there is little direct evidence that tax considerations actually motivate end-of-year trading in
these securities. Moreover, while research hints that the January effect may be tied to December
tax-loss selling, no one has documented that purchases after the turn of the year are linked to
December sales. This paper presents a tax-loss sales analysis of the trades of household and
institutional participants in the market for Finnish stocks. We use a unique data set to analyze the
calendar pattern of tax-loss selling activity and repurchases of stock and document how this
pattern relates to capital gains and losses on the stock, firm size, and stock return seasonalities.
The earliest arguments in the literature for the existence of tax-loss trading at the turn of the
year are based on observed volume and return seasonalities. Dyl (1977) found that December
trading volume is larger for losing stocks. Givoly and Ovadia (1983), Reinganum (1983), Keim
(1983), Roll (1983), and Lakonishok and Smidt (1986) hypothesized that the daily return pattern
for stocks in the United States at the turn of the year is due to tax-loss selling. Although the
hypothesis itself is intriguing, return patterns per se are not compelling evidence that tax-loss
trading takes place. International comparisons, for example, suggest that return patterns around
the turn of the year are not necessarily indicative of tax-loss trading. Stocks in countries like
Australia and Japan, despite having tax years that differ from the calendar year period used for
taxation of most U.S. investors have turn-of-the-year return patterns that are similar to those of
U.S. stocks.1 Also, Chan (1986) found that stocks with large short-term gains have higher January
returns.
There is more compelling evidence in Sias and Starks (1997), which is based on cross-
sectional differences in individual vs. institutional ownership of the stock, and in both Poterba and

2
Weisbenner (2001) and Grinblatt and Moskowitz (2001), which are based on differences in the
strength of January reversals associated with tax regimes. Nevertheless, a direct tie to the
reversals and the behavior of investors is lacking from these papers.
Several studies have provided direct data on investor behavior around the turn of the year.
Odean (1998) notes that the difference between the proportion of stocks sold with capital gains and
the proportion sold with capital losses is markedly different in December than in the rest of the
year, (although even in December, gains are still realized more than losses). However, this
December tempering of what has been referred to as the disposition effect2 could also arise from
the momentum effect documented by Jegadeesh and Titman (1993). Stocks that have declined
throughout the year are likely to underperform other stocks. As Grinblatt and Moskowitz (2001)
note, for stocks that have declined in value over the year, the momentum effect is about 2 ½ times
larger in December than in the rest of the year and about an order of magnitude larger than the
overall winner momentum effect. Stocks that have declined in value over the prior year tend to be
those for which most investors have experienced capital losses. Hence, even in the absence of tax
loss considerations, it may be rational to sell stocks in December that have declined in value.3
It is also possible to argue that December stock sales, particularly those in late-December
(although Odean does not analyze intra-December sales), arise from window dressing. The end-
of-year holiday season is often a time for recapping investment performance. The embarrassment
of possessing a loser may be a psychological motivator for these sales, especially for institutions
that must report to investors on their holdings.
1 See, for example, Brown, Keim, Kleidon, and Marsh (1983) and Kato and Schallheim (1985).
2 Shefrin and Statman (1985) first employed the term ”disposition effect” for a tendency to hold onto losing
investments. This effect is an application of Kahneman and Tversky’s (1979) prospect theory. Evidence of the
disposition effect has been documented by Odean (1998), Heath, Huddart, and Lang (1999), and Grinblatt and
Keloharju (2001), among others, in a variety of contexts. The disposition effect can be regarded as the opposite of
tax-loss selling in that investors are holding onto losing stocks more than they are holding onto winning stocks.
3 This does not appear to be the case in Finland, as the momentum effect appears to be rather weak in December.