NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DOES FUNCTION FOLLOW ORGANIZATIONAL FORM?
EVIDENCE FROM THE LENDING PRACTICES OF LARGE AND SMALL BANKS
Allen N. Berger
Nathan H. Miller
Mitchell A. Petersen
Raghuram G. Rajan
Jeremy C. Stein
Working Paper 8752
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8752
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2002
Research support from the following sources is gratefully acknowledged: the National Science Foundation
(Rajan, Stein), and the George J. Stigler Center for Study of the State and Economy (Rajan). Thanks also to
seminar participants at Yale University and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and to Abhijit Banerjee,
Michael Kremer and Christopher Udry for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research or the
Federal Reserve Board.
© 2002 by Allen N. Berger, Nathan H. Miller, Mitchell A. Petersen, Raghuram G. Rajan and Jeremy C.
Stein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Does Function Follow Organizational Form?
Evidence From the Lending Practices of Large and Small Banks
Allen N. Berger, Nathan H. Miller, Mitchell A. Petersen,
Raghuram G. Rajan and Jeremy C. Stein
NBER Working Paper No. 8752
February 2002
JEL No. D21, D23, G21
ABSTRACT
Theories based on incomplete contracting suggest that small organizations may do better than
large organizations in activities that require the processing of soft information. We explore this idea in
the context of bank lending to small firms, an activity that is typically thought of as relying heavily on soft
information. We find that large banks are less willing than small banks to lend to informationally
“difficult” credits, such as firms that do not keep formal financial records. Moreover, controlling for the
endogeneity of bank-firm matching, large banks lend at a greater distance, interact more impersonally
with their borrowers, have shorter and less exclusive relationships, and do not alleviate credit constraints
as effectively. All of this is consistent with small banks being better able to collect and act on soft
information than large banks.
Allen N. Berger Nathan H. Miller Mitchell A. Petersen
Board of Governors of the Board of Governors of the Northwestern University
Federal Reserve System Federal Reserve System Kellogg Graduate School
Division of Research and Statistics 20th and C Streets, NW of Management
Mail Stop 153 Washington, DC 20551 2001 Sheridan Road
20th and Constitution Avenue, NW Evanston, IL 60208
Washington, DC 20551
Raghuram G. Rajan Jeremy C. Stein
University of Chicago Harvard University
1101 East 58th Street Department of Economics
Chicago, IL 60637 Littauer 209
and NBER Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jeremy_stein@harvard.edu
617-496-6455

I. Introduction
One of the most enduring questions in economics was posed by Coase (1937):
What determines the boundaries of the firm? The question is perhaps most often framed
in terms of vertical integration—i.e., when can it make sense for upstream and
downstream activities to be combined under the roof of a single firm? But one can also
ask about the circumstances under which horizontal integration creates value. A good
present-day illustration of this version of the question comes from the commercial
banking industry, where ongoing consolidation raises the issue of whether the resulting
large banks will behave differently than the small banks that they are displacing.
A partial answer to Coase’s question comes from the work on transaction-cost
economics of Williamson (1975, 1979, 1985) and Klein, Crawford and Alchian (1978).
These authors focus on the hold-up problems that can accompany market transactions,
and argue that such problems can be mitigated by having the firm, rather than the market,
mediate trade. While this approach is helpful in identifying the advantages of integration
(i.e., a reduction in market hold-up problems), it is less clear on the disadvantages. As
such, it is somewhat of a one-sided theory—unless one invokes factors outside the model,
like unspecified “costs of bureaucracy,” it has the awkward implication that efficiency
would be best served by placing all of the economy’s assets inside a single firm.
The disadvantages of integration emerge much more clearly in the property-rights
approach of Grossman and Hart (1986), Hart and Moore (1990), and Hart (1995),
henceforth GHM. At its most general level, the central insight of the GHM paradigm is
that, in a world of incomplete contracts, agents’ ex ante incentives are shaped by the
extent to which they have control or authority over physical assets. Thus, for example, if
1

firm A acquires firm B, the manager who was previously CEO of firm B may become
discouraged now that he is subordinate to the CEO of firm A, and no longer has full
control rights over B’s assets. As a result, this manager’s ex ante (non-contractible)
investment may be reduced; herein lies the potential cost of integration.
The GHM property-rights paradigm is an extremely powerful conceptual tool, and
it has had enormous influence on the subsequent development of the theory of the firm.
But it has proved challenging to construct sharp, decisive empirical tests of the theory.
As discussed in Whinston (2001), this is in part due to the fact that the predictions of
property-rights models can be very sensitive to specific assumptions, such as the nature
of the non-contractible investments that need to be made ex ante. A further difficulty is
that because the GHM paradigm focuses on ownership over physical assets as the
exclusive source of power and incentives in the firm, it abstracts from other
considerations that might be present in a richer, more empirically realistic model.1
One strategy for dealing with these problems is to not take the original GHM
models too literally as a basis for empirical testing, and to work instead with “second-
generation” models that build on the basic GHM insights, but that are more tailored to
delivering clear-cut comparative static predictions, either for a specific type of
investment, or in a particular institutional setting. This strategy is followed by Baker and
Hubbard (2000a, 2000b, 2001), whose work centers on the trucking industry, and the
question of whether drivers should own the trucks they operate, as well as by Simester
and Wernerfelt (2000), who look at the ownership of tools in the carpentry industry.
1 Such considerations include: differentially informed agents as in Aghion and Tirole (1997); incentive
structures as in Holmstrom and Milgrom (1994) and Holmstrom (1999); or access to critical resources as in
Rajan and Zingales (1998, 2001).
2