NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MEASURING INVESTMENT DISTORTIONS WHEN RISK-AVERSE MANAGERS
DECIDE WHETHER TO UNDERTAKE RISKY PROJECTS
Robert Parrino
Allen M. Poteshman
Michael S. Weisbach
Working Paper 8763
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8763
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2002
We would like to thank Jennifer Carpenter, Ludger Hentschel, Kose John, Anthony Lynch, Bob McDonald,
Lisa Meulbroek, Erwan Morellec, Neil Pearson, Peter Tufano and seminar participants at University of
Arizona, University of Kansas, Loyola University, New York University, the New York Federal Reserve
Bank, NBER, Ohio State University, University of Rochester, University of Southern California, Texas
A&M University, and University of Texas at Dallas for helpful suggestions, and Sergey Tsyplakov for
excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Robert Parrino, Allen M. Poteshman and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Measuring Investment Distortions when Risk-Averse Managers Decide
Whether to Undertake Risky Projects
Robert Parrino, Allen M. Poteshman and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 8763
February 2002
JEL No. G3, H2
ABSTRACT
This paper examines distortions in corporate investment decisions when a new project changes
firm risk. It presents a dynamic model in which a self-interested, risk-averse manager makes investment
decisions at a levered firm. The model, calibrated using data from public firms, is used to estimate the
magnitude of distortions in investment decisions. Despite potential wealth transfers from debtholders,
managers compensated with equity prefer safe projects to risky ones. Important factors in this decision
are the expected changes in the values of future tax shields and bankruptcy costs when firm risk changes.
We also evaluate the extent to which this effect varies with firm leverage, managerial risk aversion,
managerial non-firm wealth, project size, debt duration, and the structure of management compensation
packages.
Robert Parrino Allen M. Poteshman Michael S. Weisbach
Department of Finance Department of Finance Department of Finance
McCombs School of Business College of Commerce and College of Commerce and
University of Texas at Austin Business Administration Business Administration
Austin, TX 78712-1179 University of Illinois University of Illinois
Tel: 512-471-5788 Champaign, IL 61820 Champaign, IL 61820
Email: Parrino@mail.utexas.edu Tel: 217-265-0565 and NBER
Email: Poteshma@uiuc.edu Tel: 217-265-0258
Email: Weisbach@uiuc.edu

Measuring Investment Distortions when Risk-Averse Managers Decide
Whether to Undertake Risky Projects
Distortions in investment decisions resulting from conflicts of interest between claimholders have
been modeled extensively in the corporate finance literature. These models generally imply that firms
make sub-optimal project choices, either in terms of good projects that are rejected, or bad projects that
are accepted. Since it is difficult to observe management forecasts of project net present values,
especially for projects that are not ultimately undertaken, it is difficult to assess the importance of these
models quantitatively.
One approach to evaluating the importance of investment distortions is to calibrate a model using
real-world data and then to estimate the magnitude of the distortion in investment decisions by examining
the characteristics of the projects that the model predicts would be accepted or rejected. This approach
has been used to estimate the magnitude of the impact of stockholder/debtholder conflicts on investment
decisions (Mello and Parsons (1992), Leland (1998), Parrino and Weisbach (1999), and Moyen (2000)).
Papers that examine stockholder/debtholder conflicts in this way typically assume that managers
maximize the value of the firms’ stock (i.e., they assume away any conflict of interest between managers
and stockholders).
In this paper, we relax this assumption and estimate the magnitude of stockholder/manager
conflicts, their interactions with stockholder/debtholder conflicts, and their effect on a firm’s investment
decisions. In particular, we consider a risk-averse manager who makes a firm’s investment decisions
while seeking to maximize his own utility function. In our model, the manager owns shares in a levered
firm (which he cannot hedge), options on the firm’s stock, and has other wealth that is independent of the
value of that firm. The firm is modeled using the dynamic approach of Ju (2001), in which new debt is
issued when old debt matures, the firm enters bankruptcy if its value hits a pre-specified bankruptcy
boundary, and interest payments are fully deductible in computing corporate taxes. The manager has the
option to undertake a project that would alter the firm’s value process. If the firm defaults on its debt, the
1

stock owned by the manager (and other shareholders) becomes worthless and the debtholders recover a
fixed percentage of the remaining value of the firm.
We first estimate the magnitude of these conflicts for a hypothetical firm, constructed to be
typical of publicly traded firms on the Standard and Poor’s Compustat database. Before adopting the
project, the firm is financed with ten-year coupon-bearing debt and has a market debt to total capital ratio
of 21.90 percent. We assume that the manager has a constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) utility
function with a risk aversion parameter of 2 and has 50 percent of his non-option wealth invested in
shares of the firm, with the remainder invested in risk-free assets. The value of the project’s assets (e.g.,
the value of the cash flows from operations) is assumed to equal 20 percent of the value of the firm’s
assets without the project. We vary the volatility of the value of the assets of the firm with the project
holding other factors constant to determine the effects of incremental changes in risk.
We assume that the manager is considering a project that changes the risk of the firm. For any
potential project, we calculate its impact on the value of stockholder and debtholder claims, as well as the
manager’s utility. In doing so, we calculate explicitly the changes in the values of the firm’s future tax
shields and the expected bankruptcy costs. We characterize the magnitude of stockholder/manager
conflicts arising from manager risk-aversion by estimating the net present value (NPV) of the project that
makes the manager indifferent to accepting or rejecting it. We also compute the implied incremental
(relative to that required for a zero NPV project) cost of equity that makes the manager indifferent. The
mapping between the indifference NPV and the incremental rate of return with the risk of the project
provides a measure of managerial aversion to project risk, once all factors are considered.
We find that, in contrast to the usual arguments in the literature, a manager compensated entirely
with equity-based compensation is likely to favor projects that lower firm risk. In other words, he will
want to undertake some projects that lower firm risk even if they have a negative NPV, and to ignore
some high-risk projects despite the fact that they have a positive NPV. This effect occurs even though
risky projects transfer wealth from debtholders to stockholders. Managerial risk aversion is of course one
2