NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE FED AND THE NEW ECONOMY
Laurence Ball
Robert Tchaidze
Working Paper 8785
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8785
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2002
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2002 by Laurence Ball and Robert Tchaidze. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The Fed and the New Economy
Laurence Ball and Robert Tchaidze
NBER Working Paper No. 8785
February 2002
JEL No. E58, E65, N12
ABSTRACT
This paper seeks to understand the behavior of Greenspan’s Federal Reserve in the late 1990s.
Some authors suggest that the Fed followed a simple “Taylor rule,” while others argue that it deviated
from such a rule because it recognized that the “New Economy” permitted an easing of policy. We find
that a Taylor rule based on inflation and unemployment does break down in the late 1990s. However,
the Fed’s behavior appears stable once one accounts for the falling NAIRU of the period. A rule based
on inflation and the deviation of unemployment from the NAIRU captures the Fed’s behavior through
the entire period from 1987 to 2000.
Laurence Ball Robert Tchaidze
Department of Economics Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218 Baltimore, MD 21218
and NBER tchaidze@jhu.edu
lball@jhu.edu

THE FED AND THE NEW ECONOMY
By Laurence Ball and Robert R. Tchaidze*
Starting with John Taylor (1993), a large literature argues that monetary policy under Alan
Greenspan is well-explained by a simple reaction function. Interest rates rise when inflation rises,
and fall when there is greater economic slack. Estimates of such a reaction function produce high
R2 s for the Greenspan era. Observers such as N. Gregory Mankiw (2001) conclude that monetary
policy is predictable based on inflation and aggregate slack, and that there is little role for other
variables or for judgement about the economy.
This view conflicts, however, with historical accounts of policy in the late 1990s – the “New
Economy” era. Many authors suggest that Greenspan’s Fed deviated from its normal behavior
because it recognized changes in the economy, such as higher productivity growth. In particular, it
held interest rates steady despite a booming economy and falling unemployment that normally
would have triggered a tightening. Alan Blinder and Janet Yellen (2001) call this behavior
“forbearance”; explaining it, they say, is “an important question for macro-historians.” Journalist
Bob Woodward (2000) makes the point more dramatically: Alan Greenspan is “the innovative
technician who spotted productivity growth in the 1990s and refused to raise interest rates when the
traditional economic models and theories cried out for it.”
This paper asks whether the Fed’s behavior can really be explained by a simple Taylor rule, or
whether it deviated from such a rule in the late 1990s. And if it did deviate, then why? As Milton
Friedman (2001) has asked, “does Alan Greenspan have an insight into movements in the economy
and the shocks that other people don’t have?”
1

We investigate these issues by estimating Taylor rules for two parts of Greenspan’s tenure at the
Fed, the “old economy” period from 1987 through 1995 and the “new economy” period from 1996
through 2000. We begin in Section I with a particularly simple version of the rule proposed by
Mankiw: the federal funds rate depends on the inflation rate and the unemployment rate. For the
old-economy period, this rule explains Fed behavior well: the R2 is 0.94. But the rule breaks down
after 1995. The interest rates chosen by the Fed are lower than those implied by the old-economy
rule by amounts that increase over time to over 200 basis points. This result confirms Blinder and
Yellen’s story of Fed forbearance in the face of falling unemployment.
Section II presents our explanation for the Fed’s behavior: it held interest rates down because it
observed a fall in the NAIRU (the non-accelerating-inflation rate of unemployment). The proper
measure of economic slack is the deviation of unemployment from the NAIRU; a Taylor rule that
simply includes unemployment is misspecified if the NAIRU changes over time. We reestimate the
Taylor rule from the previous section with the correct variable, using a NAIRU for each point in
time based on estimates by leading economists. This modification makes little difference for the
pre-1996 period, because the NAIRU series is almost constant. Starting in 1996, however,
consensus estimates of the NAIRU fell steadily. This implies greater slack in the economy, and so
the Taylor rule predicts lower interest rates. In this case, the predictions of the old-economy rule
are close to the Fed’s actual behavior through 2000. Once a changing NAIRU is taken into
account, there is little evidence that the Fed shifted its behavior in response to the New Economy.
Section III presents our conclusions.
2