NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EXCHANGE TRADED FUNDS:
A NEW INVESTMENT OPTION FOR TAXABLE INVESTORS
James M. Poterba
John B. Shoven
Working Paper 8781
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8781
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2002
We are grateful to Yingcong Lan for excellent research assistance, and to Daniel Bergstresser, Rob Engle,
Burton Malkiel, and especially Joel Dickson and John Rea for many helpful discussions. The Hoover
Institution, the National Science Foundation, and the Finance Program of the Stanford Institute for Economic
Policy Research provided us with research support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by James M. Poterba and John B. Shoven. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Exchange Traded Funds: A New Investment Option for Taxable Investors
James M. Poterba and John B. Shoven
NBER Working Paper No. 8781
February 2002
JEL No. H24, G23, G24
ABSTRACT
Exchange traded funds (ETFs) are a new variety of mutual fund that first became available in
1993. ETFs have grown rapidly and now hold nearly $80 billion in assets. ETFs are sometimes
described as more "tax efficient" than traditional equity mutual funds, since in recent years, some large
ETFs have made smaller distributions of realized and taxable capital gains than most mutual funds. This
paper provides an introduction to the operation of exchange traded funds. It also compares the pre-tax and
post-tax returns on the largest ETF, the SPDR trust that invests in the S&P500, with the returns on the
largest equity index fund, the Vanguard Index 500. The results suggest that between 1994 and 2000, the
before- and after-tax returns on the SPDR trust and this mutual fund were very similar. Both the after-tax
and the pre-tax returns on the fund were slightly greater than those on the ETF. These findings suggest
that ETFs offer taxable investors a method of holding broad baskets of stocks that deliver returns
comparable to those of low-cost index funds.
James M. Poterba John B. Shoven
Department of Economics Department of Economics
E52-350 Stanford University
MIT Stanford, CA 94305
50 Memorial Drive and NBER
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347 650-326-5377
and NBER shoven@leland.stanford.edu
617-253-6673
poterba@mit.edu

1
Exchange traded funds (ETFs) are a rapidly growing class of financial products. ETFs
are typically organized as unit trusts. They were introduced in 1993, and by the end of 2001, they
held $79 billion in assets -- 2.4 percent of the total assets in equity mutual funds. The share of
equity mutual fund assets held through ETFs doubled in 2000 and rose by nearly fifty percent in
2001. With several years of continued growth at this pace, the assets held through ETFs will
rival the amount held in equity index funds.
Exchange traded funds are of interest to public finance researchers concerned with
taxation and portfolio behavior for two reasons. First, they represent new financial innovations
that are sometimes described as prototypes for the future evolution of the mutual fund industry.
It is therefore important to understand their tax treatment and their after-tax returns. Second,
ETFs are often promoted as being more "tax efficient" than traditional equity mutual funds. By
reducing the tax burden on investments in corporate stocks, relative to investments in such stocks
held through equity mutual funds, ETFs may therefore move closer to the consumption-tax
treatment of corporate capital income.
In this brief paper, we compare the pre-tax and after-tax return on the largest exchange
traded fund, the SPDR trust that holds the securities in the S&P500, with the returns on the
largest equity index fund, the Vanguard Index 500 fund. This fund tracks the same index as the
SPDR trust. We extend the ETF return calculations of Elton, Gruber, Comer, and Li (2000) by
focusing on a longer sample period and by comparing ETF returns with those on index funds.
Mutual funds are subject to specialized tax rules. In particular, they must pass through
realized capital gains to their shareholders. Dickson and Shoven (1995) and Dickson, Sialm, and
Shoven (2000) emphasize that this raises the tax burden on mutual fund investors relative to the
tax burden on a buy-and-hold portfolio of securities. When a fund manager sells appreciated

2
shares, buy-and-hold investors in an equity mutual fund may become taxable on the fund's
realized capital gains. Exchange traded funds are technically mutual funds, so they are
governed by the same tax rules, but they have used a technique known as “redemption in kind”
to substantially reduce or even eliminate their distributions of realized capital gains. This
accounts for their historical tax advantage relative to many traditional equity mutual funds.
1. The Mechanics of Exchange Traded Funds
ETFs are traded securities. Gastineau (2001, 2002) provides a very detailed history of
both the history of ETFs, and the current operation of these products. The first ETFs were traded
on the American Stock Exchange, although ETFs are now traded on the New York Stock
Exchange as well. Each ETF share is a claim on a trust that holds a specified pool of assets. The
SPDR trust, for example, holds the stocks in the S&P500. ETF shares are created when an
authorized financial institution deposits a portfolio of securities with the trustee and receives
ETF shares in return. These ETF shares can be sold to other investors. The market for ETF
shares operates like the market for shares of a common stock. Investors can buy or sell ETF
shares at any point during the day. ETF share prices may diverge from the underlying net asset
value (NAV) of the securities held in the trust, although such divergence is restricted by the
capacity of authorized financial institutions to create and redeem ETF shares. If the ETF share
price rises too far above the NAV for the underlying assets, the creating institutions will buy the
associated securities, deposit them in the trust, and create new ETF shares. If the ETF share
price falls below the NAV of the underlying assets, institutions will purchase ETF shares and
redeem them for the underlying securities.
ETF shares must be purchased through brokerage firms, which entails commission costs.
They can be purchased on margin and sold short. These features, as well as the opportunity to
trade ETF shares throughout the day, distinguish ETFs from shares in traditional equity mutual