NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
COLUMBUS’ EGG: THE REAL DETERMINANT OF CAPITAL STRUCTURE
Ivo Welch
Working Paper 8782
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8782
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2002
I thank Judy Chevalier, Eugene Fama, John Graham, David Hirshleifer, Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes, Roni
Michaely, Gerard Hoberg, Sheridan Titman, and seminar participants at Yale for comments. Gerard Hoberg
provided terrific research assistance. The most recent version of this paper and author contact information
is available at http://welch.som.yale.edu/academics/. The views expressed herein are those of the author and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Ivo Welch. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Columbus’ Egg: The Real Determinant of Capital Structure
Ivo Welch
NBER Working Paper No. 8782
February 2002
JEL No. G24
ABSTRACT
This paper shows that managers fail to readjust their capital structure in response to external stock
returns. Thus, the typical firm's capital structure is not caused by attempts to time the market, by attempts
to minimize taxes or bankruptcy costs, or by any other attempts at firm-value maximization. Instead,
capital structure is almost entirely determined by lagged stock returns (which, when applied to ancient
equity values, predict current equity value and with it debt equity ratios). Consequently, one should
conclude that capital structure is determined primarily by external stock market influences, and not by
internal corporate optimizing decisions.
Ivo Welch
Yale University
School of Management
46 Hillhouse Ave.
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
ivo.welch@yale.edu

Columbus’ Egg is a myth in many non-English languages. Supposedly, at a
dinnerbanquetinhonorofColumbus’discoveryoftheAmericas,someguests
claimedthatanyonecouldhavediscoveredacontinentasbigastheNewWorld.
In response, Columbus challenged them to balancean egg on the table. Every-
one tried and failed. Columbus then cracked the egg on one side, so that it
would easily stand. The point of this anecdote is to describe how difficult the
obvious can be before it is pointed out.
I Introduction
Inertia is often a difficult phenomenon for empiricists to measure. Observing the
same behavior as in the past can simply be due to the fact that the same behavior
that was optimal in the past continues to be optimal in the future. Thus, to test a
theory of inertia, it is important to identify a situation in which the empiricist can
measure the underlying causes that should cause an optimizer to change course.
Capital structure, that is a firm’s choice of financing between debt and equity, is
a good candidate for testing inertia. Not only is there good data on firm’s financing
structure and well established theories to give guidance on optimal active firm be-
havior (Harris and Raviv (1991)), but if the firm does not respond by readjusting its
capital structure, its capital structure will be whipsawed by external market forces.
Moreover, the whipsaw effect is opposite of that suggested by most economic
theories of firm value maximization. Firms which experience positive shocks to
their enterprise values should take on higher, not lower debt/equity ratios: ce-
teris paribus, firms being worth more are less likely to go bankrupt and thus have
lower expected bankruptcy costs. Weighing these lower expected bankruptcy costs
against any preexisting benefits of debt (e.g., from the tax shield), this increase in
enterprisevaluebyitselfshouldbesufficienttoimplythatthefirmshouldreadjust,
i.e., issue more debt in order to retain at least as high a debt/equity ratio as it had
before.1
1“Opportunistic” managerial behavior may be an exception. Baker and Wurgler (2002) argue
thatfirmsmayissuemoreequitywhensharepricesincrease. However,ourresultswillshowthat
opportunisticbehaviorisnotamajordeterminant,either.
2

In contrast, an inert firm which does not respond to positive stock returns—
which causes an increase in its public market equity value—will mechanistically
find itself with a lower debt/equity ratio. Unlike many other behavioral finance hy-
potheses (but not all; see Benartzi and Thaler (2001)), the inertia hypothesis has a
specific quantitative prediction on the debt ratio: the inert firm’s debt-equity ratio
would change exactly according to the equity value change implied by its histori-
cal stock returns. This specificity of the behavioral alternative allows our paper to
both qualify and quantify the relative importance of inertia vs. a tax-bankruptcy
valueoptimization. Ourpaperisratherdifferentfrommuchotherrelatedeconomic
research, in that our definition of the inert capital structure ratio allows us to fo-
cus primarily on the quantitative instead of the qualitative dimension of the capital
structure choice problem.
Wefindthatfirmsexperiencingincreasesinmarketvalueshownomovementto
return towards their original debt ratio. Instead, firms’ capital structure is practi-
cally perfectly in line with that mechanistically induced by their stock returns. The
effect is long-lasting, at least 4 to 5 years. We can thus conclude that inertia is the
primarycharacterofmanagerialbehavior. Inturn,thismeansthatcapitalstructure
is primarily determined exogenously by raw stock returns—and not by one of the
manyfavoriteinformationandtaxtheoriesproposedbyfinancialeconomists, such
as managerial optimization with respect to tax rates, bankruptcy costs, earnings,
profitability, or even market timing and the exploitation of undervaluation. These
theoriesstandupwellintermsofnormativevalue,buttheyhaveatbestonlyminor
positive descriptive ability.
Our paper intends not to take a stance on whether inertia itself is the outcome
of an agency problem, a memory problem (e.g., Hirshleifer and Welch (2002)), an
influence problem (e.g., Rajan and Zingales (2000)), financial transaction costs and
markets frictions (e.g., Fischer, Heinkel, and Zechner (1989), Leland (1994)), or a
near-rationalorirrationalbehaviorpattern(e.g., SamuelsonandZeckhauser(1988),
BenartziandThaler(2001)). Thus,weleavetheinertiahypothesisunderthegeneral
rubric of “behavioral finance,” which can cover both rational and irrational behav-
ior. For simplicity, we shall just name the two contrasting hypotheses “optimizing”
3