NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHO UNDERREACTS TO CASH-FLOW NEWS?
EVIDENCE FROM TRADING BETWEEN INDIVIDUALS AND INSTITUTIONS
Randolph B. Cohen
Paul A. Gompers
Tuomo Vuolteenaho
Working Paper 8793
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8793
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2002
We would like to thank Nicholas Barberis, Alon Brav, Timothy Burch, John Campbell, John Heaton, Matti
Keloharju, Owen Lamont, Rafael Laporta, Christopher Polk, Andrei Shleifer, Erik Stafford, Jeremy Stein,
Bhaskaran Swaminathan, Kent Womack (a discussant), and two anonymous referees for helpful comments.
The paper has also benefited from the comments of the participants at the Chicago Quantitative Alliance
spring meeting, Federal Reserve Bank of New York finance workshop, Harvard University Department of
Economics finance seminar, MIT Sloan School of Management finance brown-bag lunch and finance
seminar, NBER Behavioral Finance working group meeting, and Stanford Business School finance seminar.
Errors and omissions remain our responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Randolph B. Cohen, Paul A. Gompers and Tuomo Vuolteenaho. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Who Underreacts to Cash-Flow News?
Evidence from Trading between Individuals and Institutions
Randolph B. Cohen, Paul A. Gompers and Tuomo Vuolteenaho
NBER Working Paper No. 8793
February 2002
JEL No. G120, G140
ABSTRACT
A large body of literature suggests that firm-level stock prices “underreact” to news about future
cash flows, i.e., shocks to a firm’s expected cash flows are positively correlated with shocks to expected
returns on its stock. We estimate a vector autoregession to examine the joint behavior of returns,
cash-flow news, and trading between individuals and institutions. Our main finding is that institutions
buy shares from individuals in response to good cash-flow news, thus exploiting the underreaction
phenomenon. Institutions are not simply following price momentum strategies: When price goes up in
the absence of positive cash-flow news, institutions sell shares to individuals. Although institutions are
trading in the “right” direction, institutions as a group outperform individuals by only 1.44 percent per
annum before transaction and other costs, because they are extremely conservative in deviating from the
value-weight market index.
Randolph B. Cohen
Harvard Business School
Boston, MA 02163
Paul A. Gompers
Harvard Business School and the NBER
Boston, MA 02163
pgompers@hbs.harvard.edu
Tuomo Vuolteenaho
Harvard University and the NBER
Cambridge, MA 02138
t_vuolteenaho@harvard.edu

An emerging body of empirical literature suggests that stock prices “underreact” to new information
about firms’ cash flows. Events that are a priori likely to contain cash-flow-relevant information, such as
earnings surprises and dividend initiations and omissions, are followed by a stock-price drift in the same
direction as the initial announcement return.1 While some researchers (e.g., Fama (1998)) argue that these
empirical findings are sample-specific chance results, others have tried to devise behavioral models to
explain them (Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998), Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam (1998), and
Hong and Stein (1999)).
This paper uses a highly stylized vector autoregression (VAR) to offer additional evidence on
investor heterogeneity and underreaction. By definition, a firm’s stock returns are driven by shocks to
expected cash flows (i.e., cash-flow news) and/or by shocks to expected returns (i.e., expected-return news)
(Campbell (1991)). Vuolteenaho’s (2002) firm-level VAR results show that the immediate price response
to firm-level cash-flow news is less than one-for-one, consistent with the underreaction pattern found in
many event studies. Our contribution is to measure the response of institutional ownership to cash-flow
news, thus documenting whether the institutions as a group trade to exploit the underreaction phenomenon.
In addition, we explore a more general research question: Does institutional trading push prices towards
fundamental values or away from them?
Our main findings are easily summarized. First, institutions respond to positive cash-flow news by
buying shares from individual investors, thus exploiting the underreaction pattern. According to the VAR,
25 percent cash-flow news results in institutions buying approximately 2 percent of the shares outstanding.
Considering that the average stock has a cash-flow-news standard deviation of 47 percent and institutional
ownership of 36 percent, this response is economically significant. Second, we find that institutions are not
simply following price-momentum strategies. When the stock price increases 25 percent in the absence of
any cash-flow news, institutions sell approximately 5 percent of the shares outstanding to individuals.
Third, the response of institutional ownership to cash-flow news is weaker for small stocks. Since small
stocks also exhibit the strongest underreaction patterns, this finding is consistent with institutions facing
exogenous constraints in trading small stocks. As a result of these trading patterns, the institutional
overweight of a stock has a 0.64 estimated correlation with the stock’s long-horizon expected abnormal
return.

To answer the above research questions, it is necessary to jointly model the rich time-series dynamics
of prices, cash flows, and institutional ownership. Table I illustrates this point with our data. In Panel A,
we use a naïve approach and independently sort stocks into cells based on accounting returns (ROEs) and
stock returns. For each cell, we measure the average contemporaneous change in institutional ownership.
Controlling for the stock return, institutional buying is stronger for stocks with high accounting returns. The
naïve approach is thus able to show that institutions prefer to buy stocks with positive cash-flow news.
The naïve approach in Panel A of Table I also shows that, controlling for the accounting return,
institutions prefer to buy stocks with higher (contemporaneous) stock returns. Since institutional buying
appears to be correlated with the component of the stock return that cannot be explained by the
contemporaneous accounting return, it is tempting to conclude from Panel A that institutional buying
occasionally pushes prices above the fundamental values. However, such reasoning implicitly assumes that
the current accounting return is a perfect proxy for all new information about all future cash flows. Since
past stock returns and changes in institutional ownership forecast future profitability in our data, this
implicit assumption is clearly false. It is thus difficult to draw strong conclusions along these lines from
Panel A.
This is where our VAR methodology pays off: We use the VAR model to compute a measure of
cash-flow news that better captures the new information about all future cash flows. Panel B of Table I
repeats the sort using our VAR cash-flow-news measure in place of the naïve cash-flow measure of Panel A.
Using the VAR cash-flow-news measure strengthens the conclusion that institutions buy on cash-flow news,
controlling for contemporaneous stock return. More importantly, when the VAR cash-flow news is used as
the cash-flow proxy, the cash-flow proxy drives the marginal relation between institutional buying and
contemporaneous stock returns from positive to negative. The more complicated VAR approach is
necessary, because the use of a better cash-flow-news proxy reverses the evidence suggesting that
institutional buying coincides with a stock becoming more expensive relative to cash-flow fundamentals.2
This study connects to the previous literature at a number of points. A large body of empirical
literature investigates the investment behavior of institutions, and our paper both builds on and adds to this
evidence. First, Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1992a), Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1995),
Wermers (1999, 2000), Nofsinger and Sias (1999), Grinblatt and Keloharju (2000a, b), and others show that
institutional buying and stock returns are contemporaneously correlated. Our paper qualifies this result
2