NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INTERNATIONAL RENT SHARING IN MULTINATIONAL FIRMS
John W. Budd
Jozef Konings
Matthew J. Slaughter
Working Paper 8809
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8809
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2002
For helpful discussion we thank Jonathan Haskel. For financial support Konings thanks the Flemish Science
Foundation, and Slaughter thanks the National Science Foundation and the National Bureau of Economic
Research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by John W. Budd, Jozef Konings and Matthew J. Slaughter. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

International Rent Sharing in Multinational Firms
John W. Budd, Jozef Konings and Matthew J. Slaughter
NBER Working Paper No. 8809
March 2002
JEL No. F23, J30
ABSTRACT
We use a unique firm-level panel data set of multinational parents and their foreign affiliates to
analyze whether profits are shared across borders within multinational firms. Using both fixed-effects
and generalized method-of-moments estimators, affiliate wage levels are estimated to respond to both
affiliate and parent profitability. The elasticity of affiliate wages to parent profits per worker is
approximately 0.03, which can explain over 20 percent of the observed variation in affiliate wages. These
results reveal a previously ignored aspect of labor-market rent sharing. They also reveal an important
micro-level linkage with potential macro-level implications. International rent sharing can transmit
economic conditions across national borders, and can thereby provide an implicit cross-country
risk-sharing mechanism.
John W. Budd Josef Konings
Industrial Relations Center LICOS, Center for Transition Economics
3-300 Carlson School of Management Economics Department
University of Minnesota Catholic University of Leuven
Minneapolis, MN 55455-0438 Debériotstraat 34
jbudd@csom.umn.edu 3000 Leuven, Belgium
and CEPR
josef.konings@econ.kuleuven.ac.be
Matthew J. Slaughter
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755-3514
and NBER
slaughter@dartmouth.edu

1
1. Introduction
The economic implications of increased globalization have been widely conjectured and
researched. One prominent concern has been how foreign competition, trade protection, and
1
foreign ownership affect the level and distribution of wages. Largely overlooked, however, has
been the issue of whether international linkages condition how firms share profits with their
workers.
A large literature has found that economic rents are often shared with workers: profits and
2
wages move together. With the exception of Budd and Slaughter (2000), however, this rent-
sharing literature has an explicitly domestic focus: industry, firm, or establishment wages in a
specific country are regressed on profit measures for operations in that same country. Yet with
increased globalization, this implicitly closed-economy perspective may miss important
international aspects of wage setting.
Consider, for example, the United Auto Workers. This U.S. labor union agreed to major
concessions in the early 1980s to help save the then-U.S.-owned Chrysler. More recently,
however, the UAW has reportedly been unwilling to grant concessions because while the U.S.
3
operation is struggling financially, its German parent Daimler-Chrysler is profitable. As an
1 Foreign ownership has been studied by Aitken, Harrison, and Lipsey (1996) and Feliciano and Lipsey (1999) trade protection
by Gaston and Trefler (1995), and Haskel and Slaughter (2001); and foreign competition by Borjas and Ramey (1995), and
Freeman and Katz (1991). These are representative examples, as the trade-and-wages literature has grown very large. Many
representative studies can be found in the volumes of Abowd and Freeman (1991) and Feenstra (2000).
2 Analyses of inter-industry wage differentials (e.g., Katz and Summers, 1989) revealed positive correlation between these
differentials and industry profitability. A number of subsequent studies, whether using industry wages and profits (Blanchflower,
Oswald, and Sanfey, 1996), union contract wages with company profits (Abowd and Lemieux, 1993; Currie and McConnell,
1992; Svejnar, 1986), union contract wages with industry profits (Christofides and Oswald, 1992; Budd and Slaughter, 2000), or
company wages with company profits (Hildreth and Oswald, 1997), all find that wages depend on ability to pay.
3 The December 18, 2000 issue of Business Week reported, “He's [Chrysler Group President Dieter Zetsche] not likely to get
much of a hearing from UAW President Stephen P. Yokich. After winning the richest contract terms in years in 1999, union
members have little reason to start giving money back. That's in part because, despite Chrysler's deepening problems--it's
expected to lose some $1 billion in the fourth quarter--the German parent remains exceedingly profitable.” More recently, a
similar cross-border wage dispute has arisen in multinational steel producer Corus. The February 12, 2002 edition of The Times
reported, “Corus, the Anglo-Dutch steel maker, could face industrial action in a clash with unions for imposing a pay freeze in
the U.K. while increasing salaries of Dutch workers … A spokesman for the [British] union said, ‘We all work for the same
company, and we should all get the same deal.’”

2
example of international rent sharing as an explicit compensation strategy of multinational firms,
in 1989 PepsiCo implemented a global employee stock ownership plan in which all employees
worldwide were granted shares of stock equivalent to 10 percent of their pay. Numerous other
companies have implemented similar strategies (Irwin, 1998). Lastly, Mexican law mandates
cross-border profit-sharing: Mexican employees must receive 10 percent of the worldwide
profits of their employer, not just of the employer’s profits earned in Mexico (Meyers, 2000).
These examples all demonstrate how cross-border flows of capital, labor, goods, and
information may exert strong influences on the nature of profit sharing between firms and
workers. Budd and Slaughter (2000) consider whether wages in one country may depend on
profit conditions outside of that country. Empirically, they found that union wage contracts in
Canadian manufacturing industries depend not just on Canadian industry profits but also on U.S.
industry profits—and also that the nature of this profit sharing depends on the nationality of the
firm and union.
This paper builds on this theme of international rent sharing by examining whether profits are
shared across borders within multinational firms. We do this using a rich firm-level panel data
set on multinationals with parents and affiliates operating in Europe. This panel we assembled
from the Amadeus Database, which reports detailed financial and operational data for both
4
parents and affiliates in multinationals. The panel spans 1993 through 1998, with a total of 865
parents and 1919 foreign affiliates. With this panel we can ask whether affiliate wages vary not
just with affiliate profits but also with parent profits, and similarly whether parent wages vary not
just with parent profits but also with affiliate profits.
4 In other contexts, Budina, Garretsen, and de Jong (2000) and Konings, Van Cayseele, and Warzynski (2001) use this same data
source. It is available from Bureau van Dijck Electronic Publishing.