NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MONITORING, MOTIVATION AND MANAGEMENT:
THE DETERMINANTS OF OPPORTUNISTIC BEHAVIOR IN A FIELD EXPERIMENT
Daniel Nagin
James Rebitzer
Seth Sanders
Lowell Taylor
Working Paper 8811
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8811
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2002
We would like to thank the following people for helpful advice and criticism: Dan Black; John Bound,
Robert Frank, Dan Hammermesh, Ed Lazear, and Yoram Weiss. We also benefited from comments received
during presentations at: the Society for Labor Economists meetings, the NBER Summer Institute, Case
Western Reserve University's Markets, Organizations and Public Policy seminar , and Princeton University's
Industrial Relations seminar. Laura Leete graciously provided the census extracts we use in our analysis. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2002 by Daniel Nagin, James Rebitzer, Seth Sanders and Lowell Taylor. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Monitoring, Motivation and Management: The Determinants of
Opportunistic Behavior in a Field Experiment
Daniel Nagin, James Rebitzer, Seth Sanders and Lowell Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 8811
March 2002
JEL No. D2, J2, L2, L8, M12
ABSTRACT
Economic models of incentives in employment relationships are based on a specific theory of
motivation. Employees are “rational cheaters,” who anticipate the consequences of their actions and shirk
when the perceived marginal benefit exceeds the marginal cost. Managers respond to this decision
calculus by implementing monitoring and incentive pay practices that lessen the attraction of shirking.
This “rational cheater model” is not the only model of opportunistic behavior, and indeed is viewed
skeptically by human resource practitioners and by many non-economists who study employment
relationships.
We investigate the “rational cheater model” using data from a double-blind field experiment that
allows us to observe the effect of experimentally-induced variations in monitoring on employee
opportunism. The experiment is unique in that it occurs in the context of an ongoing employment
relationship, i.e., with the firm’s employees producing output as usual under the supervision of their
front-line managers. The results indicate that a significant fraction of employees behave roughly in
ccordance with the “rational cheater model.” We also find, however, that a substantial proportion of
employees do not respond to manipulations in the monitoring rate. This heterogeneity is related to
employee assessments about their general treatment by the emp loyer.
Daniel Nagin James Rebitzer
H. John Heinz III School of Public Policy Weatherhead School of Management
and Management Case Western Reserve University
Carnegie Mellon University 10900 Euclid Ave.
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890 Cleveland, OH 44106
and NBER
Seth Sanders Lowell Taylor
Department of Economics H. John Heinz III School of Public Policy
University of Maryland and Management
College Park, MD 20742 Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890

Introduction
Economic models of incentives in employment relationships are based on a very specific
theory of motivation. Employees are “rational cheaters.” They anticipate the consequences of
their actions and shirk when the perceived marginal benefit of doing so exceeds the marginal
cost. Firms respond to this decision calculus by implementing monitoring and incentive pay
policies that make shirking unprofitable.
Although the “rational cheater” model is ubiquitous in economics, it is often viewed
skeptically by human resource practitioners and the other social science disciplines that study
employment relationships (see Baron and Kreps, 1999, Kreps, 1997, March, 1994, and Pfeffer,
1996). The validity of the rational cheater model is an empirical question that is, in principle,
easy to investigate. If employees are rational cheats then, conditional on a given incentive pay
arrangement, a reduction in monitoring will lead to an increase in shirking. The most powerful
sanction available to employers is typically dismissal. Thus, an increase in shirking resulting
from reduced monitoring should be greatest among individuals for whom the ongoing
employment relationship is least valuable.
Empirical investigation of the rational cheater model is hindered by two almost
insurmountable problems. First, truly rational cheaters are most likely to engage in shirking
behavior when it is hard or expensive to detect. Second, should any association between
monitoring and employee actions be found, it will be very difficult to disentangle the effects of
monitoring strategies from responses to other, unobserved features of the firm’s employees or its
human resource system. Resolving these problems requires an experimental setting in which
monitoring levels are exogenously varied across similar sites and substantial resources are
devoted to tracking the behaviors of employees (Rebitzer 1995).
This paper presents the results of just such an experiment. The data were collected by a
large telephone solicitation company. The employees in this company work at 16 geographically
dispersed sites. At each call center, telephone solicitors were paid according to the same

modified piece rate incentive scheme, one in which salary increased with the number of
successful solicitations.1 This piece rate, together with imperfect information on the outcome of
pledges, created incentives for employees to falsely claim that they had solicited a donation.2 To
curb opportunistic behavior, the employer monitored for false donations by calling back a
fraction of those who had responded positively to a solicitation. “Bad calls” were calls in which
donations previously reported by employees were repudiated by donors.
Employees at the company were informed when hired that their activities would be
checked by “call backs” made by management at the company’s central headquarters. The
results of each week’s call backs were communicated to both employees and their immediate
supervisors, and the bad calls were deducted from each individual’s weekly incentive pay.
Stronger sanctions for bad calls were not generally imposed on employees because the number of
bad calls was a noisy indicator of cheating. The noise resulted from the fact that donors
sometimes changed their mind after agreeing to pledge money.
The costs of call backs are substantial; each audit costs as much as the original
solicitation call. To reduce these monitoring costs, the CEO of the firm wanted to operate with
as small an audit rate as necessary. In an attempt to study the effects of reducing oversight, the
company conducted a controlled field experiment. This experiment was “double blind” in the
sense that neither the employees nor their immediate supervisors were aware of departures from
“business as usual.” In the experiment, the employer varied the fraction of bad calls that were
reported back to employees and supervisors at each of its 16 calling units (what we call the
1 During the period of the study, all solicitations were requests for donations to not-for-profit
organizations.
2 At the time of this study, the company’s computer system could not generate reports linking the
outcome of a pledge to an individual caller. In addition, the CEO of the company did not think it
right for employees to bear the risk associated with unfulfilled donations. It typically took weeks
(and sometimes months) to collect the money promised in a donation. The CEO believed that
asking employees to postpone bonuses until the donated money arrived would undermine the
effectiveness of the incentive pay. For all these reasons, the company paid employees their
incentive pay prior to receipt of the money promised.
2