NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MARKET LIQUIDITY AS A SENTIMENT INDICATOR
Malcolm Baker
Jeremy C. Stein
Working Paper 8816
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8816
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2002
We thank Josh Coval, Andrei Shleifer, Tuomo Vuolteenaho and seminar participants at Harvard Business
School and the Atlanta Finance Forum (Georgia Tech, Georgia State, and Emory Universities) for helpful
comments. Financial support from the Division of Research of the Harvard Graduate School of Business
Administration (Baker) and from the National Science Foundation (Stein) is gratefully acknowledged. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2002 by Malcolm Baker and Jeremy C. Stein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Market Liquidity as a Sentiment Indicator
Malcolm Baker and Jeremy C. Stein
NBER Working Paper No. 8816
March 2002
JEL No. G12, G14, G32
ABSTRACT
We build a model that helps explain why increases in liquidity - such as lower bid-ask spreads,
a lower price impact of trade, or higher share turnover - predict lower subsequent returns in both
firm-level and aggregate data. The model features a class of irrational investors, who underreact to the
information contained in order flow, thereby boosting liquidity. In the presence of short-sales constraints,
unusually high liquidity is a symptom of the fact that the market is currently dominated by these irrational
investors, and hence is overvalued. This theory can also explain how managers might successfully time
the market for seasoned equity offerings (SEOs), by simply following a rule of thumb that involves
issuing when the SEO market is particularly liquid. Empirically, we find that: i) aggregate measures of
equity issuance and share turnover are highly correlated; yet ii) in a multiple regression, both have
incremental predictive power for future equal-weighted market returns.
Malcolm Baker Jeremy C. Stein
Harvard Business School Department of Economics
Morgan Hall 361 Harvard University
Boston, MA 02163 Littauer Room 209
mbaker@hbs.edu Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jeremy_stein@harvard.edu

I. Introduction
A growing body of empirical evidence suggests that liquidity predicts stock returns, both
at the firm level and in the time series of the aggregate market. Amihud and Mendelson (1986),
Brennan and Subrahmanyam (1996), and Brennan, Chordia, and Subrahmanyam (1998) find that
measures of increased liquidity, including a low price impact of trade, low bid-ask spreads and
high share turnover, are associated with lower future returns in cross sections of individual firms.
More recently, Chordia, Roll and Subrahmanyam (2000, 2001), Hasbrouck and Seppi (2001),
and Huberman and Halka (2001) document that there is considerable time-variation in market-
wide liquidity, and Amihud (2000) and Jones (2001) show that these market-wide movements in
liquidity also forecast aggregate returns.
The traditional explanation for why liquidity might affect expected returns is a
straightforward one (Amihud and Mendelson (1986), Vayanos (1998)). Investors anticipate
having to sell their shares at some point in the future, and recognize that when they do so, they
will face transactions costs. These costs can stem either from the inventory considerations of
risk-averse market makers, or from problems of adverse selection.1 But in either case, when the
transactions costs are greater, investors rationally discount the asset in question by more. This
story would seem to fit most naturally with the purely cross-sectional results. In particular, if we
compare two stocks, and one is observed to have permanently lower bid-ask spreads and price
impacts than the other, as well as higher turnover, it is plausible that the more liquid stock would
have a somewhat higher price, and hence lower expected returns.
1 On the former, see Demsetz (1968), Garman (1976), Stoll (1978), Amihud and Mendelson (1980), and Grossman
and Miller (1988). On the latter, see Copeland and Galai (1983), Glosten and Milgrom (1985), Kyle (1985), Easley
and O’Hara (1987) and Admati and Pfleiderer (1988).
1

It is less clear whether the same story can be carried over without modification to explain
the time-series results for the aggregate market. First of all, we do not have a well-developed
understanding of what drives the common time-series variation in measures of liquidity. For
example, though it is a possibility, it seems more of a stretch to argue that there are large swings
in the degree of asymmetric information about the market as a whole. Second, as Jones (2001)
shows, and as we verify below, the predictive power of aggregate liquidity for market returns,
particularly for equal-weighted returns, is large. In a univariate regression, a one-standard-
deviation increase in stochastically detrended turnover (equivalent to turnover going from, say,
the 1932-1998 mean of 30 percent up to 42 percent in a given year) reduces expected returns on
the CRSP equal-weighted index over the next year by roughly 13 percent.
In this paper, we develop an alternative theory to explain the connection between
liquidity and expected returns.2 More specifically, our focus is on understanding why time-
variation in liquidity, either at the firm level or for the market as a whole, might forecast changes
in returns. We implicitly accept the premise that the traditional theory is best suited to explaining
why permanent cross-firm differences in liquidity are associated with permanent cross-firm
differences in expected returns.
Our model rests on two key assumptions. First, there is a class of irrational investors, who
underreact to the information contained in order flows. The presence of these irrational investors
lowers the price impact of trades, thus boosting liquidity generally. Second, there are short-sales
2 Although our focus is on the stock market, the link between high prices and market liquidity seems to be pervasive.
See, e.g., Shleifer and Vishny (1992) and Stein (1995) for models of the market for corporate asset sales and the
housing market, respectively. We discuss the relationship of our theory to this work below.
2