NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PARTNERSHIP AND HOLD-UP IN EARLY AMERICA
Howard Bodenhorn
Working Paper 8814
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8814
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2002
The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2002 by Howard Bodenhorn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Partnership and Hold-Up in Early America
Howard Bodenhorn
NBER Working Paper No. 8814
March 2002
JEL No. L14, L22, D23
ABSTRACT
Williamson (1985) argues that individuals form firms with specific internal governance structures
to mitigate certain types of opportunistic behavior that may inhibit efficient contracting between
independent contractors. But once firms are established, the individuals that comprise them may still act
opportunistically. This paper investigates a specific historical case: the partnership in early America.
Partnerships grappled with information-based problems, such as adverse selection, moral hazard, as well
as ex ante and ex post contractual opportunism, including hold-up. Asset specificity and imperfect
contracts made partnerships vulnerable to hold-up, especially when one partner invested in a sunk asset
that enhanced the productivity of all other partners. This was a particular problem facing existing partners
when they invited a new partner into their firm. Empirical evidence from the mid-nineteenth century
suggests that individuals mitigated the effects of pre- and post-contractual opportunism by forming
partnerships with others of similar age, productivity, and capital. This finding brings the traditional
interpretation of partnerships as mentor-protégé relationships into question.
Howard Bodenhorn
Department of Economics
Lafayette College
Easton, PA 18042-1776
and NBER
bodenhoh@lafayette.edu

Partnership and Hold-Up in Early America
On 6 March 1850, John Murphy of John Murphy & Company published the following co-partnership
notice in the (Baltimore) American and Commercial Daily Advertiser: “We have this day, associated
with us in business, Mr. JOHN B. PIET, who has been for the last six years, connected with the
Establishment as Clerk, Salesman, &c.” Blumin (1989) argues that this was typical, that
shopkeepers rewarded clerks with partnerships after a period of loyal service to the firm and that
these partnership bids offered opportunities for upward mobility unavailable elsewhere. Similarly,
Lamoreaux (1985, p. 64) contends that a substantial percentage of Boston’s partnerships were
formed when an experienced businessman offered a partnership to a younger man even when that
man offered the firm little in terms of financial resources or business experience. Young partners
brought their labor and little more. This view envisions the early American partnership as an
inherently mentor-protégé relationship.
Why did experienced businessmen choose to share their profits rather than pay a wage? One
possibility is that employers believed that ownership elicited effort. Economic theory connects
compensation and shirking in team production (Alchian and Demsetz 1972). There are, of course,
a number of agency-related problems beyond shirking that firms must deal with, including moral
hazard, adverse selection, hold-up and post-contractual opportunism. Internal governance structures
and compensation schemes must contend with these as well. The essence of the early American
employ-or-partner choice was ownership. Ownership defined a different bundle of rights and created
different incentives than wage labor. The employ-or-partner choice, then, should have been
responsive to the benefits and costs of alternative assignments. Moreover, alternative ownership
3

assignments had real consequences. Outside Coase’s (1960) world of fully defined property rights
and zero transaction costs, the identity of owners had consequences for resource allocation. “This
is why some bundles of rights are more appropriate to one set of underlying conditions than to
another” (Demsetz 1988, p. 20).
It is unfortunate in some ways that the modern literature concerning the nature of the firm
is labeled “corporate” rather than “firm” governance, but the “corporate” label is apt because the
existing research largely deals with agency problems faced by the modern corporation. But
corporations do not and, historically, have not constituted the universe of organizational forms. Until
the late-nineteenth century, firms were far more likely to be partnerships than corporations. Yet
theoretical treatments of partnerships are all of recent vintage and economic and business historians
have yet to produce more than a handful of studies of partnership within a broad conceptual
framework.1 This long-standing oversight leaves a significant void in our understanding of the firm
as an historical actor. In some occupations, partnerships represented up to 70 percent of firms
(Bodenhorn 2001). Even in industries dominated by proprietorships, partnerships typically
represented up to 20 or 30 percent of firms. Thus an appreciation of the subtleties of firm
governance before the rise of the corporation must account for the choice between proprietorship and
partnership. An important question surrounding the early American firm is: When would an existing
proprietor hire an employee and when would he take in a partner and share the profits? This paper
develops a simple model of the employ-or-partner choice and provides some preliminary empirical
evidence that extends our understanding of the use of business partnerships.
1 Recent theoretical treatments include Kandel and Lazear (1992), Lang and Gordon
(1995) and Legros and Matthews (1993). Economic histories of partnerships include Bodenhorn
(2001) and Lamoreaux (1995, 1998).
4