NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RELATED LENDING
Rafael La Porta
Florencio López-de-Silanes
Guillermo Zamarripa
Working Paper 8848
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8848
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2002
The views expressed here are those of the authors and not of the institutions they represent. We are grateful
to two anonymous referees, David Baron, John Campbell, Simeon Djankov, Dan Kessler, Michael Kremer,
Ken French, Stewart Myers, Paul Romer, Raghuram Rajan, David Scharfstein, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein,
Tuomo Vuolteenaho, Luigi Zingales, and participants of the Finance Seminars at Harvard, Michigan, MIT,
Stanford, Texas A&M, and Yale for helpful comments and to Lucila Aguilera, Juan Carlos Botero, Jamal
Brathwaite, Jose Caballero, Claudia Cuenca, Mario Gamboa-Cavazos, Soledad Flores, Martha Navarrete,
Alejandro Ponce, and Ekaterina Trizlova for excellent arm’s-length research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Rafael La Porta, Florencio López-de-Silanes and Guillermo Zamarripa. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Related Lending
Rafael La Porta, Florencio López-de-Silanes and Guillermo Zamarripa
NBER Working Paper No. 8848
March 2002
JEL No. G3
ABSTRACT
In many countries, banks lend to firms controlled by the bank's owners. We examine the benefits
of related lending using a newly assembled dataset for Mexico. Related lending is prevalent (20% of
commercial loans) and takes place on better terms than arm's-length lending (annual interest rates are 4
percentage points lower). Related loans are 33% more likely to default and, when they do, have lower
recovery rates (30% less) than unrelated ones. The evidence supports the view that rather than enhance
information sharing, related lending is a manifestation of looting.
Rafael La Porta Florencio López-de-Silanes Guillermo Zamarripa
Department of Economics Yale University National Banking and
Harvard University 135 Prospect Street Securities Commision, México
Littauer Building - M7 New Haven, CT 06520 Insurgentes Sur 1971
Cambridge, MA 02138 and NBER México D.F., 01020
and NBER florencio.lopezdesilanes@yale.edu México
rafael_laporta@harvard.edu

I. Introduction.
In many countries, banks are controlled by persons or entities with substantial interests in non-
financial firms. Quite often, a significant fraction of bank lending is directed towards these related parties,
which include shareholders of the bank, their associates and family, and the firms they control. Proponents
of related lending argue that close ties between banks and borrowers may be efficient. For example,
Lamoreaux (1994, page 79) writes of post-Revolution New England that “...given the generally poor quality
of information, the monitoring of insiders by insiders may actually have been less risky than extending credit
to outsiders.” Critics of related lending claim worry that it diverts resources from depositors or minority
shareholders.
The view that close ties between banks and borrowers are valuable is related to Gerschenkron’s
(1962) analysis of long-term bank lending in Germany, to the optimistic assessments of bank lending inside
the keiretsu groups in Japan (Aoki, Patrick and Sheard 1994, and Hoshi, Kashyap, Scharfstein 1991), and to
theoretical work on credit rationing (Stiglitz and Weiss 1981). Related lending may improve credit efficiency
in several ways. Bankers know more about related borrowers than unrelated ones because they are
represented on the borrower’s Board of directors and share in the day-to-day management of the borrower.
They may be able to use such information to assess the ex-ante risk characteristics of investment projects or
to force borrowers to abandon bad investment projects early (Rajan 1992). In addition, both hold-up
problems and incentives for pursuing policies that benefit one class of investors at the expense of others may
be reduced when banks and firms own equity in each other. Thus, related lending may be better for both the
borrower and the lender because more information is shared and incentives are improved. We call this
optimistic assessment of related lending the information view.
The alternative view is that close ties between banks and borrowers may allow insiders to divert
resources from depositors and/or minority shareholders to themselves. This view is related to the idea of
looting (Akerlof and Romer 1993) and tunneling (Johnson et al. 2000) as well as the revisionist view of the
benefits of keiretsu groups in Japan (Morck and Nakamura 1999, Kang and Stulz 1997). Looting can take
several forms. If the banking system is protected by deposit insurance, the controllers of a bank can take
excessive risk or make loans to their own companies on non-market terms, fully recognizing that the
government bears the costs of such diversion. Even without deposit insurance, the controllers of a bank have
a strong incentive to divert funds to companies they control, as long as their share of profits in their own
companies is greater than their share in bank profits. The basic implication is that related lending is very
attractive to the borrower, but may bankrupt the lender. We call this pessimistic assessment of related lending
the looting view.
We study related lending in Mexico using a newly assembled database of individual loans. In
-22-

Mexico, banks are typically controlled by stockholders who also own or control non-financial firms. This is
in direct contrast to previous studies of ownership structures in Germany and Japan where banks exert control
over “group” firms but not vice-versa. Nevertheless, the Mexican banking structure is common in many
developing countries.1 Banks that are controlled by persons or entities with substantial non-financial interests
are prominent in Bangladesh, Bolivia, Bulgaria, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Estonia, Guatemala, Hong
Kong, Indonesia, Kazakstan, Kenya, Korea, Latvia, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Russia, South Africa,
Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, and Venezuela.2 Faccio et al. (2000) report that the ultimate controlling
shareholder of 60% of the publicly-traded firms in Asia also controls a bank. Even in Europe, this figure is
as high as 28%. In fact, the Mexican banking setup is similar not only to that of many developing countries,
but can also be seen in the early stages of development in England, Japan, and the US (Cameron 1967, Patrick
1967, and Lamoreaux 1994).
Using all banks in Mexico, we first examine the identity of each bank’s top 300 borrowers by total
loan size. We find that 20% of loans outstanding at the end of 1995 were to related parties. Banks sharply
increased the level of related lending when they are in financial distress. For each bank, we then collect
information on the borrowing terms of a random sample of 90 loans from the top 300 loans outstanding at
the end of 1995. The results show that related parties borrow at lower rates and are less likely to post
collateral. We then track the performance of the loans in this random sample through December of 1999 to
evaluate their default and recovery rates. After controlling for borrower and loan characteristics, related
borrowers are 33%-35% more likely to default than unrelated ones. We also find that the default rate on
loans made to related persons and to privately-held companies related to the bank is 77.4%. The equivalent
rate for unrelated parties is 32.1%. Moreover, recovery rates are $0.30 per dollar lower for related borrowers
than for unrelated ones.
Overall, the results are consistent with the looting view and challenge the information view. The
sheer magnitude of the gap in default rates between related and unrelated loans makes it difficult to argue that
1 This structure is partially the result of the privatization policies implemented during the last two decades (see
La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer, 2002). The ownership of banks by non-financial firms is unrestricted in 38
countries (including Austria, Germany, Switzerland, and the UK, as well as Bolivia, Brazil, Indonesia, Russia, and
Turkey). The ownership of banks by non-financial firms is prohibited in only four countries (British Virgin Islands,
China, Guernsey, and Maldives). See Barth, Caprio and Levine (2001).
2 Three general sources on the links between banks and non-financial firms in Latin America and Asia are:
AmericaEconomia (Annual Edition, 1995-1996, pages 116-128), Backman (1999) and Lindgren et al. (1996). Country-
specific sources include: Edwards and Edwards (1991) for Chile, Revista Dinero (http://www.dinero.com /old/ pydmar97
/portada/top/topmenu.htm) for Colombia, Standard & Poor’s (Sovereign Ratings Service, November 2000, page 9) for
Ecuador, African Business (May 1999) for Kenya, Garcia-Herrero (1997) for Paraguay, Koike (1993) and The Economist
(8/5/2000, pages 70-71) for Philippines, Nagel (1999) and Laeven (2001) for Russia, The Financial Mail (12/6/1996)
for South Africa, Euromoney (Dec 1997) for Thailand, and Verbrugge and Yantac (1999) for Turkey. Finally, Beim and
Calomiris (2001) discuss the importance of related lending in financial crises.
-33-