NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SUBSIDIZING THE STORK: NEW EVIDENCE ON TAX INCENTIVES AND FERTILITY
Kevin Milligan
Working Paper 8845
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8845
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2002
This research was financially supported in part by the Social Science and Humanities Research Council and
by the Canadian International Labour Network. I thank Michael Baker, Dwayne Benjamin, Jonathan Gruber,
Robert McMillan, Jack Mintz, Aloysius Siow, Michael Smart, and seminar participants at many institutions
for comments that have greatly improved the paper. The views expressed herein are those of the author and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Kevin Milligan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Subsidizing the Stork: New Evidence on Tax Incentives and Fertility
Kevin Milligan
NBER Working Paper No. 8845
March 2002
JEL No. H3, J1
ABSTRACT
Variation in tax policy presents an opportunity to estimate the responsiveness of fertility to prices.
This paper exploits the introduction of a pro-natalist transfer policy in the Canadian province of Quebec
that paid up to C$8,000 to families having a child. I implement a quasi-experimental strategy by forming
treatment and control groups defined by time, jurisdiction, and family type. This permits a triple-
difference estimator to be implemented — both on the program’s introduction and cancellation.
Furthermore, the incentive was available broadly, rather than to a narrow subset of the population as
studied in the literature on AFDC and fertility. This provides a unique opportunity to investigate
heterogeneous responses. I find a strong effect of the policy on fertility, and some evidence of a
heterogeneous response that may help reconcile these results with the AFDC literature.
Kevin Milligan
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
#997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC
Canada V6T 1Z1
and NBER
kevinmil@interchange.ubc.ca

1 Introduction
Families with children receive special treatment under the tax and transfer provisions of
twenty-six of the twenty-nine OECD countries (OECD (2000)). These policies may be mo-
tivated by a concern for equity: the presence of children alters their parents’ ability to pay,
and so merits recognition in the tax liability assigned to the family.1 In addition to equity
considerations, family fiscal policy has efficiency consequences if fertility depends on the cost
of children.2 Economic models of fertility following Becker (1960) have studied the influence
of the cost of children on fertility decisions. In turn, empirical researchers have shown great
interest in trying to uncover evidence of a relationship between prices and fertility. The
endogeneity of key variables has frustrated this effort.3 Hotz et al. (1997) conclude their
survey on the economics of fertility by stating that “the crucial challenge is to find plausibly
exogenous variation in proxies for the price and income concepts appearing in the theories.”
Tax policy may present a solution to this problem. If families with children are treated
differently by tax and transfer policies than families without children, then the tax system
introduces variation in the after-tax price of children. If this variation is unrelated to indi-
viduals’ choices, then it can be used to test for evidence of a relationship between fertility
and prices.
Many researchers have studied the impact of fiscal incentives on fertility. In one strand of
the literature, researchers regress an aggregate time series of fertility on policy variables and
controlvariables.4 Threedistinct problems arise in these aggregate time-series studies. First,
the identification of policy effects from these regressions relies solely on time-series variation.
This leaves the identification vulnerable to trends in unobserved variables. Specifically, if
different cohorts of mothers have different unobservable characteristics that are important
for their child-bearing decisions, then time-series variation in general is not sufficient to
1See, for example, Pechman (1983) or Davies (1990) for the development of these arguments.
2Thecostofachildcomprisesboththedirectcostofthechild’sconsumptionandtheopportunitycostof
the parents’ time used in raising the child. Nerlove et al. (1984) and Batina (1986) set out optimal taxation
frameworks in which the optimal child subsidy and income tax rates depend on the elasticity of the demand
for children, and how this elasticity varies with income.
3Women may have unobserved proclivities for different family sizes. If differences in these proclivities
leadtodifferenthumancapitalaccumulationandmaritaldecisions, thentheopportunitycostoftimeoutof
the labor market will be jointly determined with fertility. See, for example, Rosenzweig and Wolpin (1980).
4Examples include Whittington et al. (1990), Hyatt and Milne (1991), Zhang et al. (1994), and Gauthier
and Hatzius (1997).
2

identify fertility effects of policy. Second, the assumptions about the timing of the response
to policy are arbitrary. Reactions to changes in fertility policy will be delayed by a nine-
monthgestationallag, aswellasanytimenecessaryforthediffusionofinformationaboutthe
change in policy. This makes it unclear which year’s policy influences which year’s fertility.
Finally, many of these time-series studies suffer from the common problem of short series
and the resulting small sample size. This reduces the credibility of asymptotic inferences.
Another large set of studies uses microdata to study the effects of policy on fertility.
Whittington (1992) and Whittington (1993) find a fertility-enhancing effect of the dependent
exemption in the PSID. However, these studies are hampered by small sample sizes and
lack of substantial variation. The bulk of the recent literature, however, focuses on the
incentive effects of payments through Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC)
on female headship and fertility decisions.5 The surveys of this literature in Moffit (1998)
and Hoynes (1997b) both make a distinction between the findings of studies including state
fixed effects and those that do not. On the question of female headship, Moffitt (1994) and
Hoynes (1997a) provide evidence that the inclusion of state-level fixed effects wipes out the
explanatory power of welfare policy. If some unmeasured state-varying factor influences both
femaleheadshipandthedeterminationofstateAFDCrates,thenexcludingstatefixedeffects
from the regression will attribute to the policy what should be attributed to the excluded
variables. This leads Hoynes (1997b) to conclude that there is no compelling evidence of
a response to policy. For fertility, the Hoynes (1997b) survey reaches a similar conclusion.
Moffit (1998), on the other hand, interprets the evidence as being in favor of a relationship,
although without robustness. Harvey et al. (2000) survey the recent experimental literature
on welfare. They conclude that the “evaluations have produced inconsistent results” on the
relationship between family size and welfare benefits.
More recently, Rosenzweig (1999) brings a different approach to the estimation of AFDC
effects on behavior. In his paper, the marital and child-bearing decisions of the woman are
modelled jointly, and estimated as a multinomial logit. This differs from other models that
5AFDCwasatransferprogramforsingleparentswithlowincome. Hoynes(1997b)describesthefeatures
of AFDC in more detail. There is also some work on welfare and behavior in Canada. Allen (1993) finds
some effect of welfare on fertility in a 1986 cross section of microdata. Dooley et al. (2000) study welfare
benefits and female headship in Canada using provincial variation through time, finding no evidence of a
relationship.
3