NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
IMPERFECT CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT
James E. Anderson
Leslie Young
Working Paper 8847
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8847
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2002
This paper began while Anderson visited the Chinese University of Hong Kong,whose support and
hospitality is gratefully acknowledged. Earlier versions were presented to the NBER Summer Institute,and
the Econometric Society and in seminars at the University of Copenhagen, Rice University and the
University of Texas-Austin. Helpful comments from participants are gratefully acknowledged, especially
Jonathan Eaton and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by James E. Anderson and Leslie Young. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Imperfect Contract Enforcement
James E. Anderson and Leslie Young
NBER Working Paper No. 8847
March 2002
JEL No. F10, L14
ABSTRACT
We model imperfect contract enforcement when repudiators and their victims default to spot
trading. The interaction between the contract and spot markets under improved enforcement can
exacerbate repudiation and reduce contract execution, harming all traders. Improved contract execution
benefits traders on the excess side of the spot market by attracting potential counter-parties, but harms
them by impeding their exit from contracts found to be unfavorable. Multiple equilibria and multiple
optima are possible, with anarchy a local optimum, perfect enforcement a local minimum and imperfect
enforcement a global optimum. LDCs exhibit parameter combinations such that imperfect enforcement
is optimal from their side of international markets. The model thus rationalizes the internationally varying
patterns of imperfect enforceability observable in survey data.
James E. Anderson Leslie Young
Department of Economics Asia Pacific Institute of Business
Boston College and Finance Department
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467 Chinese University of Hong Kong
and NBER APIB, 2/F, Li Dak Sum Building
James.Anderson.1@bc.edu CUHK, NT, Hong Kong
leslieyoung@cuhk.edu.hk

The reliability of contract enforcement varies widely across countries according to opinion
surveys of traders, resulting in significant reduction of trade (Anderson and Marcouiller,
2001). Why do many countries fail to develop institutions that ensure contract enforcement,
thereby garnering the full gains from trade? One possibility is that the ruling elite benefits
from a pliant judiciary and contractual chaos and thus has little incentive to foster the rule of
law. However, even such an elite could gain by ensuring contract enforcement in a sphere
such as international trade, which yields taxable activities and business opportunities. Another
possible explanation is institutional incapacity: lack of skilled personnel, professional norms
and organizational frameworks. Yet, many less developed countries (LDCs) with generally
weak institutions operate free trade zones with transparent business environments, which
could presumably be extended to all international trade if that were expedient. Therefore, the
imperfect contract enforcement often observed in LDCs might be due, not just to institutional
incapacity or a Machiavellian political elite, but to the short-term interests of LDC traders.
The key to our story is the general equilibrium interactions amongst contract defaulters
and their victims, both before and after default. In our model, traders negotiate contracts
before sinking the costs of entering a market, but can find these contracts unenforced if
repudiated. Defaulters and victims can resort to a spot market where their sunk costs are
irrelevant to the outcome of one-on-one bargaining. This market generally fails to equilibrate,
implying a transactions inefficiency, as some traders return home empty handed. Traders can
switch between the contract and spot markets, both before and after the disturbances to their
fallback options that motivate contract repudiation.
The general equilibrium effects of improved contract enforcement can increase the rate of
contract repudiation, so that fewer contracts are executed. This harms traders on the scarce
side of the spot market and perhaps the excess side also. For changes close to an equilibrium,
this can occur only if the equilibrium is unstable. However, improved enforcement could also
reduce contract execution via a jump between the stable equilibria that necessarily bracket the
unstable equilibrium. Such perversities arise when the disturbances to scarce side traders
fallback options have a heavy concentration well above their mean: an upside shock , as
occurs in lognormal disturbances of sufficiently high coefficient of variation. Such shocks can
arise endogenously when the disturbances are to the costs of processing the good for re-sale.
Separately, each excess side trader exerts an externality on the others by reducing their

2
probability of matching. Improved contract execution alleviates this congestion by attracting
more scarce side traders, but impedes exit from contracts found to be unfavorable, worsening
excess siders expected terms of trade. For excess siders, this can mean that:
(i) perfect execution is worse than a range of high but imperfect levels of contract execution
and/or:
(ii) zero execution is better than a range of low levels of imperfect execution, even though:
(iii) perfect execution is better than zero execution and between these two situations, the
profits of an excess side monopsonist (monopolist) would fall as the price falls (rises).
In contexts (like international trade) where either buyers or sellers could veto changes in
enforcement, these results offer insights into why contract enforcement often remains
imperfect, despite the gains from trade foregone. For example, China, India or Russia would
appear to have the institutional capacity to enforce all international contracts, yet choose not
to do so perfectly. (i) and (iii) indicate that this policy could be in their overall interests, even
when they have too little market power to gain from the improved terms of trade that would
result from a reduced execution rate. Many Fourth World countries with little market power
show no movement toward enforcing international contracts, despite sermons from the World
Bank about the gains that await them from the foreign trade and investment that would be
attracted by better enforcement. (ii) and (iii) indicate that the small improvements that can
realistically be achieved by a Fourth World country might leave it worse off than zero
enforcement, even when the large improvements envisaged by the World Bank would indeed
make it better off. Our analysis also applies to domestic markets in the plausible case where
the traders on the side of the market with greater individual bargaining power dominate
institutional development because they are politically more effective.
When (i), (ii) and (iii) occur in conjunction with upside shocks to scarce siders fallback
options, incremental enforcement improvements could cause excess siders expected profits to
jump downward or could sharply reverse their previous gains, even within a conventionally
smooth economic structure. This possibility would make excess siders even warier of
improving enforcement. Indeed, given upside shocks, incremental enforcement improvements
could cause downward jumps in the expected profits of all traders.
Section 1 presents the core of our analysis. Section 2 motivates, sets out and solves our
formal model. Section 3 analyzes how enforcement affects contract execution and identifies