NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHO PANICS DURING PANICS?
EVIDENCE FROM A NINETEENTH CENTURY SAVINGS BANK
Cormac Ó Gráda
Eugene N. White
Working Paper 8856
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8856
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2002
We thank Michael Bordo, Hugh Rockoff, and seminar participants at Rutgers University, Yale University,
the NBER Summer Institute, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for comments on an earlier draft. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2002 by Cormac Ó Gráda and Eugene N. White. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Who Panics During Panics?
Evidence from a Nineteenth Century Savings Bank
Cormac Ó Gráda and Eugene N. White
NBER Working Paper No. 8856
April 2002
JEL No. N2, E5
ABSTRACT
Using records of the bank accounts of individual depositors, this paper provides a detailed
microeconomic analysis of two nineteenth century banking panics. The panics of 1854 and 1857 were
not characterized by an immediate mass panic of depositors and had important time dimensions. We
examine depositor behavior using a hazard model. Contagion was the key factor in 1854 but it was not
strong enough to create more than a local panic. In contrast, the panic of 1857 began with runs by
businessmen and banking sophisticates followed by less informed depositors. Uninformed contagion may
have been present, but the evidence suggests that this panic was driven by informational shocks in the
face of asymmetric information about the true condition of bank portfolios.
Cormac Ó Gráda Eugene N. White
Department of Economics Department of Economics
University College Rutgers University
Dublin 4 New Jersey Hall
Ireland New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
white@economics.rutgers.edu

Contagion is greatly feared in today’s financial system. The possibility that
the collapse of a country’s banking system or equity market can set off an
economic crisis is a grave concern for policy makers. To find the appropriate
safeguards and remedies, it is thus important to understand the underlying
causes of contagion. In this paper, we use a unique data set on individual
depositors to examine the most traditional form of contagion, banking panics in
mid-nineteenth century America, for evidence on which models best explain
panics in an era of light regulation and no deposit insurance.
In the large literature on banking panics (see Gorton and Winton, 2001),
there are two general classes of models that have been used to explain why
depositors panic. Models following the seminal paper of Diamond and Dybvig
(1983) view bank runs as ignited by random events that induce each depositor to
run because they believe that other depositors will run on the bank and force it
into a costly liquidation. The fear of being last, when depositors are served
sequentially, drives the run. Panics here are produced by the spread of runs
from one bank to another. Kauffman (1994) terms these panics, where a run on
one bank spreads to otherwise sound banks to be the result of “non-
informational” contagion. In contrast, models based on asymmetric information
(Gorton, 1985; Chari and Jagannathan, 1988; Jacklin and Battacharya, 1988;
Calomiris and Schweikart, 1991; and Calomiris and Gorton, 1992) see runs as
beginning when some depositors observe negative information about the value of
bank assets and withdraw their deposits. Unable to perfectly discriminate
between sound and unsound banks and observing a wave of withdrawals, other
2

1
depositors follow suit, leading to runs on multiple banks. Given that panics of
this character are initiated by identifiable shocks, Kauffman terms them
“informational” contagion.
Although there have been empirical studies of nineteenth century
American panics, these focus at the aggregate level on the number of bank
closings and they find some support for both models. We use the records of
individual depositors of the Emigrant Savings Industrial Bank (EISB), which was
subject to serious runs in 1854 and 1857, to examine the causes of banking
panics using a hazard model. These two episodes provide a natural experiment,
as the panics were the results of different shocks. The panic of 1854 was local
and started with the news of a single bank’s insolvency, while the panic of 1857
was brought about by a system-wide shock that affected the whole financial
sector. The microeconomic evidence reveals that the runs on the EISB do not fit
a simple stylized picture.
In neither 1854 nor 1857 did depositors respond to a signal which led
them to crowd into banks all at once. Instead, panics lasted a few weeks building
and sometimes ebbing in intensity, and only a fraction of all accounts were
closed. Our survival analysis of the accounts supports savvy contemporaries’
observations. The run on the EISB during the panic of 1854 was by
predominantly less wealthy, less experienced, and less sophisticated—
“uninformed”---depositors. The “random” event of another savings bank failure
ignites runs on the EISB and other savings banks even though there was no
1
Calomiris and Kahn (1991) see panics as a monitoring device where depositors are induced to
engage in costly monitoring. The sequential payment of depositors at the window serves as a
3