NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ONE REASON COUNTRIES PAY THEIR DEBTS:
RENEGOTIATION AND INTERNATIONAL TRADE
Andrew K. Rose
Working Paper 8853
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8853
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2002
B.T. Rocca Jr. Professor of International Business, Economic Analysis and Policy Group, Haas School of
Business at the University of California, Berkeley, NBER Research Associate, and CEPR Research Fellow.
I thank: Yin-Wong Cheung, Mike Dooley, Julian di Giovanni, Jonathan Eaton, Barry Eichengreen, Rob
Feenstra, Stefan Gerlach, Ann Harrison, Maury Obstfeld, Ken Rogoff, Phil Suttle, and seminar participants
at Berkeley, the City University of Hong Kong, the European University Institute, the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York, and the University of Colorado at Boulder for comments, and the EUI, the FRBNY, the
HKIMR, the IMF, and the Tel Aviv economics department for hospitality while I worked on this paper. I owe
special thanks to Eddie Dekel and Ben Hermalin, who helped write much of the game-theoretic sub-section.
For assistance with the data, I thank Eduardo Borensztein, Malvina Pollock, and Jeromin Zettelmeyer. The
data set (the part used for the benchmark estimates) and a current version of the paper are available at my
website. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Andrew K. Rose. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

One Reason Countries Pay their Debts: Renegotiation and International Trade
Andrew K. Rose
NBER Working Paper No. 8853
March 2002
JEL No. F10, F34
ABSTRACT
This paper estimates the effect of sovereign debt renegotiation on international trade. Sovereign
default may be associated with a subsequent decline in international trade either because creditors want
to deter default by debtors, or because trade finance dries up after default. To estimate the effect, I use an
empirical gravity model of bilateral trade and a large panel data set covering fifty years and over 200
trading partners. The model controls for a host of factors that influence bilateral trade flows, including
the incidence of IMF programs. Using the dates of sovereign debt renegotiations conducted through the
Paris Club as a proxy measure for sovereign default, I find that renegotiation is associated with an
economically and statistically significant decline in bilateral trade between a debtor and its creditors. The
decline in bilateral trade is approximately eight percent a year and persists for around fifteen years.
Andrew K. Rose
Haas School of Business
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
Tel: 510-642-6609
Fax: 510-642-4700
Email: arose@haas.berkeley.edu
http://haas.berkeley.edu/~arose

I: Introduction
Why do countries pay their international debts? Three reasons are typically proposed.
First, countries that renege on their debts may have their overseas assets seized by foreign
creditors. Second, countries with poor repayment reputations may be cut off from capital flows
in the future. Third, delinquent countries may suffer reduced benefits of international trade.
While all three penalties are of interest, this paper is concerned with the last explanation. The
first sanction is of limited potency for net debtors with little foreign collateral. A number of
economists (most visibly Bulow and Rogoff) have disputed the importance of future exclusion
from capital markets. The third explanation is widely accepted, but has never been quantified.
The objective of this paper is to estimate empirically the effect of sovereign debt renegotiations
on international trade.
There are at least two reasons why international default may reduce trade in principle.
First, trade credit may naturally shrink after default. Alternatively, creditors may wish to punish
default with reduced trade benefits, in order to discourage future default, or default by third
parties. In practice, default seems to be strongly associated with reduced trade. I use a large
panel data set covering over 200 trading partners over fifty years of data to estimate a “gravity”
model of trade. I show that debt renegotiation is associated with a decline in bilateral trade that
is both economically and statistically significant, adding up to a year’s worth of trade, although
the effect is spread over fifteen years.
The next section presents a theoretical framework to frame the relationship between
sovereign default and international trade, while the third section presents the institutional setting
of sovereign default through debt renegotiations at the Paris Club. Next, the empirical
methodology and data set are discussed. The actual empirical results are presented in the fifth
2

section, which includes sensitivity analysis. The paper finishes with some suggestions for future
work and a brief conclusion.
II: Why Might Sovereign Default Affect Trade?
There is a large literature on the issue of sovereign default; Eaton and Fernandez (1995)
and Obstfeld and Rogoff (1996, chapter 6) provide recent surveys. However, little of it has been
explicitly concerned with the interaction between default and trade. In this section, I provide a
theoretical framework for the empirical analysis that follows.
There are two reasons why sovereign default could affect trade. The more interesting
reason is that a creditor may want to discourage further default (either by the debtor in the future
or by other debtors), with a punishing decline in trade. The more banal reason is that default
may naturally result in a drying up of short-term trade credit, the vehicle used to finance most
international trade. In practice, it is difficult and, for my purposes, unimportant, to differentiate
between these explanations. I explore both briefly below.
Restriction of Trade as an Inducement for Debt Repayment
While the literature provides strong hints that restricted international trade can be used to
encourage debt repayment, formal modeling is relatively rare.1 It is not my intention to provide a
full-fledged model of the interaction between sovereign default and trade. Rather, I provide two
intuitive examples of how sovereign default might be punished by a reduction in international
trade. The first example involves multiple debtors; the creditor restricts trade to punish the
defaulter and thereby deter default by other countries. The second example involves only a
single debtor; trade restrictions are used to deter future default.
3