NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE COST OF ACCOUNTABILITY
Caroline M. Hoxby
Working Paper 8855
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8855
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2002
The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2002 by Caroline M. Hoxby. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

The Cost of Accountability
Caroline M. Hoxby
NBER Working Paper No. 8855
April 2002
JEL No. I2, H0, J0
ABSTRACT
Discussions of school accountability focus on two issues: poor test administration and the
expense of accountability. Up to this point, researchers have focused on test quality and simply assumed
that the programs are expensive enough to crowd out other policies, such as class size reduction or higher
teacher salaries. Researchers have also assumed that it is so expensive to have a good accountability
program (which includes good comprehensive tests, well-defined standards, an effective report card
system, and safeguards that prevent cheating and teaching the test) that only poor accountability systems
will be affordable. In this paper, I present the facts about how much accountability costs. The facts are,
fortunately, highly knowable because costs show up both as expenditures on government budgets and as
revenues on companies' (mainly test makers') accounts. Moreover, it turns out that worrying about
measurement error in the cost data is pointless. The costs of accountability programs are so tiny that even
the most generous accounting could not make them appear large, relative to the cost of other education
programs. The "most expensive" programs in the United States generally cost less than one quarter of
1 percent of per pupil spending, and most of these are only as costly as they are because a state is in the
"expensive" and temporary phase of developing its own comprehensive tests.
Caroline M. Hoxby
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
choxby@harvard.edu

1
I. Is Accountability Expensive?
A good accountability program includes a combination of testing, standards against which the
test results can be compared, and report cards that relay this information (as well as information on
schools’ level and use of resources) to parents and policy-makers. Proponents of school accountability
tout the benefits of a well-run accountability system: information for teachers and principals who need to
diagnose their students’ progress, information that gives schools incentives to perform, information for
parents who need to make choices among schools, and information on the degree to which schools are
teaching the material that their constituents (parents, voters, school boards, legislatures) want them to
teach. In fact, school accountability programs are generally seen as complementary to other types of
school reform. School choice, for instance, should work better if parents have more information, rather
than less.
Opponents of school accountability mount arguments on two fronts: poor quality of tests and the
expense of accountability. It is natural to care about the quality of tests because students will naturally
spend time learning the material that is tested and schools will naturally tend to align their curricula with
the material that is tested. Indeed, it is the intention of a good school accountability system that students
study the material tested. The quality of tests and standards, though important, is the topic of a great deal
of other research. This paper focuses instead on the second issue regarding accountability–its expense.
Some opponents of school accountability argue that it is so expensive that it will crowd out other
policies, such as class size reduction or higher teacher salaries. Other opponents argue that is so
expensive to have a good accountability program (which includes well-designed, comprehensive tests,
well-defined standards, an effective report card system, and safeguards that prevent cheating and
teaching the test) that only poor accountability systems will be affordable.
Understanding the cost of accountability turns out to be much simpler than understanding what

2
makes a good test or set of standards. Facts are the best answer to questions about costs, so this chapter
presents the facts. The facts about how much accountability costs, fortunately, knowable. This is
because the costs must show up in two places: as expenditures on some government’s (usually the
state’s) budget and as revenues on some company’s (mainly the test maker’s) accounts. A skeptic might
ask, however: “Even if the accounting facts are knowable, won’t they be imperfect? In one state, the
salaries of state personnel who oversee the program might end up being counted as a cost of
accountability; but another state might count such personnel as mere general staff of the state’s
department education.” This is a reasonable concern, but it turns out that such accounting details are not
worthy of much worry. The costs of accountability programs are so small that even the most generous
accounting could not make them appear large, relative to the cost of other education programs.
II. What Test-Makers’ Revenues Tell Us about the Cost of Accountability
Nearly every achievement and ability test administered to American elementary and secondary
school students is purchased from a commercial test making firm, which also grades the test and prepares
reports at the state, district, school, grade, class, and student levels. The same firms support with their
tests with curriculum guides, suggested standards for criterion-based tests, and materials designed to help
schools understand the tests and standards and use them wisely. Indeed, test-makers tend also to be
textbook publishers, so the knowledge on which they base tests and standards is generally the same
knowledge that they must be able to defend for inclusion in textbooks.1 The American elementary and
secondary testing and standards industry is dominated by a several firms that well known: Harcourt-
Brace Educational Measurement, Reed-Elsevier, Houghton-Mifflin, Prentice-Hall, CTB/McGraw-Hill,
and so on. In practice, these firms rely on similar psychometric research and routinely hire experts from
1 The only important non-commercial elementary or secondary test is the National Assessment
of Educational Progress, which is administered to a random sample of American students at the behest of
the United States Department of Education.