NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PROPERTY RIGHTS AND FINANCE
Simon Johnson
John McMillan
Christopher Woodruff
Working Paper 8852
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8852
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2002
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2002 by Simon Johnson, John McMillan and Christopher Woodruff. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Property Rights and Finance
Simon Johnson, John McMillan and Christopher Woodruff
NBER Working Paper No. 8852
March 2002
JEL No. D23, P23
ABSTRACT
Which is the tighter constraint on private sector investment: weak property rights or limited
access to external finance? From a survey of new firms in post-communist countries, we find that weak
property rights discourage firms from reinvesting their profits, even when bank loans are available.
Where property rights are relatively strong, firms reinvest their profits; where they are relatively weak,
entrepreneurs do not want to invest from retained earnings.
Simon Johnson John McMillan Christopher Woodruff
Sloan School of Management
MIT
50 Memorial Drive, E52-562
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
sjohnson@mit.edu

Property Rights and Finance
Simon Johnson, John McMillan, and Christopher Woodruff*
Which is the tighter constraint on private sector investment: weak property
rights or limited access to external finance? From a survey of new firms in
post-communist countries, we find that weak property rights discourage firms
from reinvesting their profits, even when bank loans are available. Where
property rights are relatively strong, firms reinvest their profits; where they are
relatively weak, entrepreneurs do not want to invest from retained earnings.
(JEL D23, P23)
Property rights are fundamental: entrepreneurs will not invest if they expect to be
unable to keep the fruits of their investment. Country-level studies consistently show that
less secure property rights are correlated with lower aggregate investment and slower
economic growth (Stephen Knack and Philip Keefer, 1995; Paolo Mauro, 1995; Jakob
Svensson, 1998; Daron Acemoglu, Johnson and James Robinson, 2001). The
microeconomic evidence is more limited, but Timothy Besley (1995), for example, finds
in Ghana a significant link between property rights and investment.
Secure property rights may be necessary for entrepreneurial investment, but are
they sufficient? External finance could also matter for investment and growth, for if bank
credit is not available it may be hard for entrepreneurs to take advantage of new
opportunities. There is evidence that a well-functioning financial system contributes to
1

investment and growth (Ross Levine, 1997; Raghuram Rajan and Luigi Zingales, 1998).
Is external finance, in addition to secure property rights, necessary for entrepreneurs to
invest, or is property-rights security all that is needed? Broad cross-country studies
cannot answer this question because effective protection for property rights is positively
correlated with the use of external finance. For example, Rafael La Porta, Florencio
Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny (1997, 1998, 2000) show more
external finance is available when there is a stronger legal system in general and more
effective protection of investors in particular, while Asli Demirgüç-Kunt and Vojislav
Maksimovic (1998) find that firms invest more from external funds in countries with
secure property rights.
Recent experience in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union offers an
experiment that can help disentangle the effects of property rights and external finance.
Although all these former communist countries have relatively weak institutional
environments, there is considerable variation in the extent to which property rights are
protected. For example, Timothy Frye and Shleifer (1997) and Shleifer (1997) provide
evidence that the Russian government acts like a “grabbing hand,” discouraging
entrepreneurs from investing, while the Polish government does not. In general, property
rights have proven more secure in Poland than in other parts of Eastern Europe and the
former Soviet Union. Within countries, also, there is variation in both the perceived
security of property rights and in the access to bank credit. Given these countries’
banking systems, small firms are able to borrow only if they can provide adequate
collateral. Owning collateral is therefore a good proxy for at least having the possibility
to borrow. Firm-level evidence from these post-communist countries therefore allows us
2