NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INTERNATIONAL TAXATION
Roger H. Gordon
James R. Hines Jr.
Working Paper 8854
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8854
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2002
We would very much like to thank Alan Auerbach and Joel Slemrod for comments on an earlier draft. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2002 by Roger H. Gordon and James R. Hines Jr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

International Taxation
Roger H. Gordon and James R. Hines Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 8854
April 2002
JEL No. H87, H25, F23, H21, F32
ABSTRACT
The integration of world capital markets carries important implications for the design and impact
of tax policies. This paper evaluates research findings on international taxation, drawing attention to
connections and inconsistencies between theoretical and empirical observations.
Diamond and Mirrlees (1971) note that small open economies incur very high costs in attempting
to tax the returns to local capital investment, since local factors bear the burden of such taxes in the form
of productive inefficiencies. Richman (1963) argues that countries may simultaneously want to tax the
worldwide capital income of domestic residents, implying that any taxes paid to foreign governments
should be merely deductible from domestic taxable income.
Governments do not adopt policies that are consistent with these forecasts. Corporate income is
taxed at high rates by wealthy countries, and most countries either exempt foreign-source income of
domestic multinationals from tax, or else provide credits rather than deductions for taxes paid abroad.
Furthermore, individual investors can use various methods to avoid domestic taxes on their foreign-source
incomes, in the process also avoiding taxes on their domestic-source incomes.
Individual and firm behavior also differs from that forecast by simple theories. Observed
portfolios are not fully diversified worldwide. Foreign direct investment is common even when it faces
tax penalties relative to other investment in host countries. While economic activity, and tax avoidance
activity, is highly responsive to tax rates and tax structure, there are many aspects of tax-motivated
behavior that are difficult to reconcile with simple microeconomic incentives.
There are promising recent efforts to reconcile observations with theory. To the extent that
multinational firms possess intangible capital on which they earn returns with foreign direct investment,
even small countries may have a degree of market power, leading to fiscal externalities. Tax avoidance
is pervasive, generating further fiscal externalities. These concepts are useful in explaining behavior, and
observed tax policies, and they also suggest that international agreements have the potential to improve
the efficiency of tax systems worldwide.
Roger H. Gordon James R. Hines Jr.
Department of Economics Office of Tax Policy Research
University of California - San Diego University of Michigan Business School
9500 Gilman Drive 701 Tappan Street
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508 Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and NBER and NBER
rogordon@ucsd.edu jrhines@umich.edu

1. Introduction
The design of sensible tax policies for modern economies requires that careful attention be
paid to their international ramifications. This is a potentially daunting prospect, since the analysis
of tax design in open economies entails all of the complications and intricacies that appear in closed
economies, with the addition of many others, since multiple, possibly interacting, tax systems are
involved. These complications are no less harrowing for a researcher interested in studying the
impact of taxation in open economies. Fortunately, the parallel development of theoretical and
empirical research on taxation in open economies offers straightforward and general guidance for
understanding the determinants and effects of tax policies, as well as their normative significance.
The purpose of this chapter is to review the analysis of international taxation, drawing connections
to research findings that are familiar from the analysis of taxation in closed economies.
The rapid development of open-economy tax analysis in the last fifteen or so years differs
sharply from previous patterns, when the bulk of the academic research on taxation posited that the
national economy was closed. In this literature the implications for tax policy of international trade
and international factor movements typically consisted of a short discussion at the conclusion of a
long analysis. In studies of closed economies, real and financial activity cannot cross international
borders, so that prices clear each national market separately. This restriction to a closed economy
characterized not only much of the theoretical work on optimal tax policy but also most of the
general equilibrium models of the effects of taxes, e.g. Fullerton, Shoven, and Whalley (1978) or
Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987), and even most of the econometric studies of tax policy and
behavior.
To be fair, the assumption of a closed economy was widely thought to have been an
adequate approximation of at least the American economy over much of the postwar period. As

seen below, this assumption also succeeded in eliminating many complications that otherwise must
be faced in thinking about tax policy. However, with the growing importance not only of
international trade in goods and services but also of multinational corporations, together with
increasing integration of world capital markets, it is becoming more and more important to rethink
past work on tax policy in an open economy setting.
As described in section 2 below, many aspects of tax policy analysis are affected by the
openness of the economy. For example, while in a closed economy it does not matter whether a
proportional tax is imposed on income from saving or income from investment (since aggregate
saving equals aggregate investment), in an open economy this equivalence no longer holds.
Furthermore, taxpayer responses to policy changes can look very different once the implications of
an open economy are taken into account. In a closed economy, the analysis of the incidence of a
tax on saving or investment depends on its effect on the market clearing interest rate, which in
equilibrium depends on the price elasticities of both individual savings and firms' factor demand for
capital. In contrast, in a small open economy, the interest rate is determined by the world capital
market, so is unaffected by a tax. Similarly, the incidence of commodity taxes becomes simpler in
a small open economy, since the relative prices of at least tradable goods are again set on world
markets and therefore do not respond to tax changes.1 Results on factor price equalization even
suggest that market wage rates should not be affected by tax policy, in spite of the lack of mobility
of people across borders. In all of these cases, the absence of price changes means that quantity
changes will be larger, generally raising the implied efficiency costs of tax distortions.
A greater complication is that the range of behavioral responses to tax policy becomes
broader in an open economy setting. This paper explores in detail the types of behavioral responses
1 World markets greatly dampen the price effects of tax changes from the standpoint of a small open economy, but
since these price changes apply to a very large world economy, their net effect on world welfare need not be negligible.
2