NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
STOCHASTIC DOMINANCE BOUNDS ON DERIVATIVE PRICES IN A MULTIPERIOD
ECONOMY WITH PROPORTIONAL TRANSACTION COSTS
George M. Constantinides
Stylianos Perrakis
Working Paper 8867
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8867
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2002
We thank Michael Brennan, Phil Dybvig, Steve Heston, Haim Levy, Rajnish Mehra (the editor), Rene Stulz,
Robert Tompkins (the referee), and Thaleia Zariphopoulou, for helpful comments. We also thank Ilan Cooper
for computational assistance. We remain responsible for errors. Constantinides acknowledges financial
support from the Center for Research in Security Prices, University of Chicago. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by George M. Constantinides and Stylianos Perrakis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Stochastic Dominance Bounds on Derivative Prices in a
Multiperiod Economy with Proportional Transaction Costs
George M. Constantinides and Stylianos Perrakis
NBER Working Paper No. 8867
April 2002
JEL No. G13
ABSTRACT
By applying stochastic dominance arguments, upper bounds on the reservation write price of
European calls and puts and lower bounds on the reservation purchase price of these derivatives are
derived in the presence of proportional transaction costs incurred in trading the underlying security. The
primary contribution is the derivation of bounds when intermediate trading in the underlying security is
allowed over the life of the option. A tight upper bound is derived on the reservation write price of a call
and a tight lower bound is derived on the reservation purchase price of a put. These results jointly impose
tight upper and lower bounds on the implied volatility.
George M. Constantinides Stylianos Perrakis
Graduate School of Business The John Molson School of Business
University of Chicago Concordia University
1101 E. 58th Street 1445 de Maisonneuve W.
Chicago, IL 60637 Montreal, Quebec
and NBER Canada H3G 1M8
773-702-7258
gmc@gsb.uchicago.edu

1. Introduction and Summary
The paper examines the role of one market imperfection—proportional transaction costs in
trading the underlying security—on the observed discrepancy of European option prices from the
prices that would prevail in a frictionless market. We derive upper bounds on the reservation
write prices of call and put options and lower bounds on the reservation purchase prices of call
and put options by extending stochastic dominance arguments to incorporate proportional
transaction costs.
The main contribution of this paper is the derivation of stochastic dominance bounds in the case
that trading is permitted over the life of the option. These bounds are tight. Furthermore, the
upper bound on the reservation write price of a European call option, derived in Proposition 1,
and the lower bound on the reservation purchase price of a European put option, derived in
Proposition 6, are invariant to the frequency of trading permitted over the life of the option.
These results are to be contrasted to the upper bounds on the call option price derived by the
super-replication method of Bensaid et. al. (1992) and the approximate replication method of
Leland (1985). The latter upper bounds tend to the stock price, as the frequency of trading
increases.
An attractive feature of our bounds is that they may be derived for any given arbitrary
distribution of the stock price, if the stock price is bounded below by zero and the first moment
exists. In particular, as the trading frequency increases, the stock price process need not
1

converge to the lognormal, but may converge to a mixed diffusion - point process. Even if we
were to set the transaction cost rate equal to zero, it is nowhere assumed that the market is either
complete or tends to a complete market, as the frequency of trading increases. Thus, the model
accommodates stochastic volatility and stock price jumps.1
The results of this paper are related to earlier results on option bounds in incomplete markets,
originally derived by Perrakis and Ryan (1984) and extended by Ritchken (1985) and Levy
(1985). These bounds were extended to a multiperiod setup by Perrakis (1986, 1988), and
Ritchken and Kuo (1988), as a generalization of the binomial option pricing model.2
The results of this paper are also related to earlier results by Constantinides and Zariphopoulou
(1999, 2001).3 Specifically, Constantinides and Zariphopoulou (2001) assumed that (i) the utility
1 Since the market is incomplete, the bounds need not tend to the Black-Scholes option price, as the frequency of
trading increases, even if the transaction costs rate is set equal to zero.
2 Indeed, these bounds have been shown to coincide with the binomial option price when the return distribution
achieves only two values, and to converge to the Black-Scholes (1973) value when the multiperiod returns tend to a
diffusion process. See Perrakis (1986) for the binomial model and Perrakis (1988) for the convergence in the
trinomial model to the Black-Scholes price.
3 The basic idea behind both papers is the following. One finds the minimal wealth level of an investor at which it is
feasible to write a call option. At that minimal wealth level, the optimal policy over the lifetime of the option is to
consume nothing and refrain from trading. This property simplifies the derivation of the reservation write price of a
call option at the minimal wealth level. The last but non-trivial step is the demonstration that the reservation write
price at the minimal wealth level serves as an upper bound on the reservation write price at all feasible wealth
2