NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
GLOBAL CAPITAL FLOWS AND FINANCING CONSTRAINTS
Ann E. Harrison
Inessa Love
Margaret S. McMillan
Working Paper 8887
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8887
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2002
Inessa Love acknowledges support from Social Science Research Council Program in Applied Economics
with funds provided by the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Ann E. Harrison, Inessa Love and Margaret S. McMillan. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Global Capital Flows and Financing Constraints
Ann E. Harrison, Inessa Love and Margaret S. McMillan
NBER Working Paper No. 8887
April 2002
JEL No. F2
ABSTRACT
Firms often cite financing constraints as one of their primary obstacles to investment. Global
capital flows, by bringing in scarce capital, may ease host-country firms' financing constraints. However,
if incoming foreign investors borrow heavily from domestic basnks, direct foreign investment (DFI) may
exacerbate financing constraints by crowding host country firms out of domestic capital markets.
Combining a unique cross-country firm-level panel with time-series data on restrictions on international
transactions and capital flows, we find that different measures of global flows are associated with a
reduction in firm-level financing constraints. First, we show that one type of capital inflow--DFI--is
associated with a reduction in financing constraints. Second, we test whether restrictions on international
transactions affect firms' financing constraints. Our results suggest that only one type of restriction--those
on capital account transactions--negatively affect firms' financing constraints. We also show that
multinational firms are not financially constrained and do not appear to be sensitive to the level of DFI.
This implies that DFI eases financing constraints for non-multinational firms. Finally, we show that DFI
only eases financing constraints in the non-G7 countries.
Ann E. Harrison Inessa Love Margaret S. McMillan
University of California The World Bank Tufts University
329 Giannini Hall 1818 H St. NW Department of Economics
Berkeley, CA 94720 MC3-300 Medford, MA
and NBER Washington, DC 20433 617-627-3137
510-643-9676 202-458-0590 mmcmilla@tufts.edu
harrison@are.berkeley.edu ilove@worldbank.org

"Not all direct foreign investment around the world
represents net capital flows. Often such
investments are financed in local markets."
Martin Feldstein (2000)
“There is now broad agreement about the value of
direct foreign investment, which brings not just
capital but also technology and training.”
Joseph Stiglitz (1998)
1. Introduction
Firms in developing countries typically cite financing constraints as one of their primary
obstacles to investment. Some argue that countries should eliminate restrictions on international
transactions and encourage incoming capital flows, especially direct foreign investment (DFI). DFI
may ease these firms' financing constraints by bringing in scarce capital. This is one reason why
policy makers in developing countries have eased restrictions on inward DFI and in many instances
provide special incentives for DFI. Yet if foreign firms borrow heavily from local banks, they may
exacerbate domestic firms' financing constraints by crowding them out of domestic capital markets.
Foreign investors may borrow on domestic capital markets for a variety of reasons, including as a
hedging device against exchange rate fluctuations or in response to artificially low domestic interest
rates. 1 Yet most observers assume that DFI is accompanied by significant capital inflows.2 There
1 Sometimes they borrow domestically as a hedging device against foreign currency debt; other times, they borrow
domestically if local interest rates are low. In many developing countries, interest rates have historically been set at
artificially low levels, leading to credit rationing in cases where the interest rate is set below the market clearing level.
2

has been almost no previous research examining the impact of DFI on host-country firms' financing
constraints.
One reason for the limited empirical evidence is the difficulty in obtaining detailed firm-level
data across countries. In this paper, we combine a firm-level panel data from Worldscope with cross-
country time-series data on restrictions on international transactions and capital flows to test whether
different measures of global flows are associated with a reduction in firm-level financing constraints.
First, we show that one type of capital inflow—DFI--is associated with a reduction in financing
constraints. Second, we test whether restrictions on capital movement affect firms' financing
constraints. Our results suggest that one type of capital control—restrictions on capital account
transactions—negatively affects firms' financing constraints. The results are robust to the inclusion of
other factors that could affect the firm’s financing constraints--such as availability of domestic credit,
business cycle effects, the country’s level of GNP per capita, and the level of financial development.
Our results suggest that one type of capital inflow—DFI--plays a beneficial role and improves on
capital allocation by diminishing the firm’s financing constraints.3
Our work is related to the large body of literature on capital market imperfections and firm
investment; an excellent survey of this literature is in Hubbard (1998). A number of papers have used
2 For example, Stiglitz in an address to the Chicago Council on Foreign Relations (1998) argues that there is broad
agreement about the fact that direct foreign investment brings additional capital. Feldstein (2000) argues that this is not
necessarily the case. Helleiner (1989) in a survey for the Handbook of Development Economics suggests that it is unlikely
that much new equity capital will result from expanded DFI flows.
3 Our results are in contrast to Harrison and McMillan (2001) who find that financing constraints of firms in Cote d’Ivoire
were exacerbated by the entrance of foreign firms, which borrowed heavily on domestic credit market and crowded out
the local firms. However, this paper only includes two low-income countries, India and Pakistan, and it does not include
any countries from Sub-Saharan Africa. This may be important because we would expect the domestic firms in the very
3