NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MOVING TO GREENER PASTURES?
MULTINATIONALS AND THE POLLUTION HAVEN HYPOTHESIS
Gunnar S. Eskeland
Ann E. Harrison
Working Paper 8888
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8888
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2002
We would like to thank Ricardo Sanhueza for superb research assistance. We are greatly indebted to David
Wheeler and Manjula Singh for helpful conversations, for making their database available, and for estimating
the results based on U.S. data. We would also like to thank Art Small, Tarhan Feyzioglu, and two anonymous
referees for very helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research or The World Bank.
© 2002 by Gunnar E. Eskeland and Ann E. Harrison. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Moving to Greener Pastures? Multinationals and the Pollution Haven Hypothesis
Gunnar E. Eskeland and Ann E. Harrison
NBER Working Paper No. 8888
April 2002
JEL No. F23, Q2
ABSTRACT
This paper presents evidence on whether multinationals are flocking to developing country
"pollution havens". Although we find some evidence that foreign investors locate in sectors with high
levels of air pollution, the evidence is weak at best. We then examine whether foreign firms pollute less
than their peers. We find that foreign plants are significantly more energy efficient and use cleaner types
of energy. We conclude with an analysis of US outbound investment. Although the pattern of US
foreign investment is skewed towards industries with high costs of pollution abatement, the results are
not robust across specifications.
Gunnar A. Eskeland Ann E. Harrison
The World Bank University of California
1818 H St. NW 329 Giannini Hall
Washington, DC 20433 Berkeley, CA 94720
geskeland@worldbank.org and NBER
510-643-9676
harrison@are.berkeley.edu

I. Introduction
Passage of the North-American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) reawakened fears that
multinationals would flock to Mexico to take advantage of lax environmental standards. This is the so-
called pollution haven hypothesis, which states that environmental regulations will move polluting
activities for tradeable products to poorer countries. Although existing studies suggest little or no
evidence of industrial relocation, arguments over pollution havens persist. Why?
One answer lies in the fact that the existing literature is primarily based on anecdotes and
scattered case studies. Even the best studies, such as Leonard (1988), make no effort to assess
statistically the relationship between the distribution of US foreign investment and pollution intensity.
Most of these studies make no attempt to control for other factors which may play a role in determining
foreign investment, such as large protected markets. Many of the earlier studies (Pearson, 1985 and
1987; Walter, 1982) use evidence from the 1970s and early 1980s, when the flow of foreign investment
to developing countries was not as high as it is today. One exception is the recent work by Grossman and
Krueger (1993), which focuses on maquiladora activity in Mexico. Yet their research also serves to
highlight the difficulty in explaining the pattern of US investment abroad. They show that neither
pollution abatement costs nor other likely determinants can adequately explain the pattern of maquiladora
activity in Mexico.
Although there is a growing literature on the determinants of global environmental quality, little
research has been done to test the pollution haven hypothesis.2 In this paper, we begin by presenting a
2
Instead, much of the literature focuses on the relationship between income growth and pollution. Grossman and
Krueger (1995) postulate an inverted 'u-curve'. This empirical relationship has found support in other studies as well (see
Selden and Song, 1994; The World Bank, 1992). The hypothesis, supported by their empirical analysis, states that pollution
will first increase with income, then decrease at higher income levels. The initial upward relationship occurs because of a
positive relationship between output and emissions. The downward tendency occurs when higher demand for environmental
quality at higher income levels forces the introduction of cleaner technologies (the technique effect) and an output
combination which is less polluting (the composition effect).
A related literature examines the relationship between openness and environmental quality. Again, the links can be
2

simple model which shows that the effect of environmental regulations imposed at home on outward
investment is ambiguous. Depending on possible complementarities between capital and pollution
abatement, environmental regulation could lead to an increase or a decline in investment in both the host
(developing) country and the originating (developed) country. In other words, environmental regulation
in the home country could lead a firm to increase or reduce its investment in both the home country and
in the country where environmental standards are less stringent.
To resolve the theoretical ambiguity, we turn to an empirical analysis of the pattern of foreign
investment. Our research focuses on three related issues. We begin by analyzing the pattern of foreign
investment in a number of developing countries--looking for evidence which reflects increasing costs of
pollution-intensive activities at home. To control for other factors which may be important in helping to
attract foreign investment, we create measures of trade policies, industrial concentration, the domestic
regulatory environment, factor endowments, and wages at home. We use data from four host countries:
Cote d'Ivoire, Morocco, Mexico, and Venezuela.
Second, we compare the behavior of multinational firms in developing countries with their
counterparts in the host country. In particular, we focus on the emissions behavior of foreign and
domestic plants within the same manufacturing sector. Since emissions across a wide range of countries
decomposed into an output- a composition- and technique effect. In the case of trade reform, however, the composition effect
is of a different nature, since openness to trade itself changes sectoral composition. A number of empirical studies suggest
that openness reduces pollution (Wheeler and Martin, 1992; Birdsall and Wheeler, 1992), while others claim evidence to the
contrary (Rock, 1995). Theoretical models have a different flavor, with results depending on whether pollution problems are
national or transnational, and on the assumed regime for environmental management. Copeland and Taylor (1994) present a
model in which pollution problems are national and national pollution control is optimal in both countries. It is, thus, a model
with no coordination problem, emphasizing comparative advantage as in a traditional trade model. Then, one effect of
openness is that the poor country will be offered a higher premium for undertaking polluting activities, the effect that is
presumed in the pollution haven hypothesis. However, openness will also leave both countries wealthier, and thus more
interested in changing both techniques and composition in the direction of less pollution.
Concerns along the lines of openness and pollution also touch on concerns for competitiveness, and the introduction
of measures such as harmonization of environmental standards in trade negotiations. Kanbur, Keen and Wijnbergen show
that coordination of environmental standards may be justified to avoid damaging "environmental competition", but suggest
that (complete) harmonization would not be the preferred way of coordination. Extending such analysis with a supranational
body such as the European Community, Ulph (1995) shows that information asymmetries between the higher body and the
nations can lead to a greater harmonization than one would see in the case with full information. Markussen, Morey and
Olewiler extend the open-economy analysis to include endogenous market structure.
3