NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MIDDLEMEN VERSUS MARKET MAKERS:
A THEORY OF COMPETITIVE EXCHANGE
John Rust
George Hall
Working Paper 8883
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8883
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2002
We received helpful feedback from Ian Domowitz, Bruno Jullien, Deborah Minehart, Daniel Spulber, the
editor John Cochrane, three anonymous referees, participants at the 2001 Summer Meetings of the
Econometric Society, and seminar participants at Harvard Business School, the University of Maryland,
CEMFI, U.S. Justice Department, the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, Universidad Torcuato di Tella, Victoria University, and Yale University. We are
especially grateful to an anonymous contact at a U.S. steel service center (i.e., a steel “middleman”) who
gave us access to confidential data on steel prices and inventories that initiated our inquiry into this topic.
We are grateful for financial support from National Science Foundation grant 9905145. Any opinions,
findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by John Rust and George Hall. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Middlemen versus Market Makers: A Theory of Competitive Exchange
John Rust and George Hall
NBER Working Paper No. 8883
April 2002
JEL No. D4, D5, D6, D8
ABSTRACT
We present a model in which the microstructure of trade in a commodity or asset is endogenously
determined. Producers and consumers of a commodity (or buyers and sellers of an asset) who wish to
trade can choose between two competing types of intermediaries: “middlemen” (dealer/brokers) and
“market makers” (specialists). Market makers post publicly observable bid and ask prices, whereas the
prices quoted by different middlemen are private information that can only be obtained through a costly
search process. We consider an initial equilibrium where there are no market makers but there is free
entry of middlemen with heterogeneous transactions costs. We characterize conditions under which entry
of a single market maker can be profitable even though it is common knowledge that all surviving
middlemen will undercut the market maker’s publicly posted bid and ask prices in the post-entry
equilibrium. The market maker’s entry induces the surviving middlemen to reduce their bid-ask spreads,
and as a result, all producers and consumers who choose to participate in the market enjoy a strict increase
in their expected gains from trade. We show that strict Pareto improvements occur even in cases where
the market maker’s entry drives all middlemen out of business, monopolizing the intermediation of trade
in the market.
John Rust George Hall
Department of Economics Department of Economics
University of Maryland Yale University
College Park, MD 20742 P.O. Box 208268
and NBER New Haven, CT 06520-8268
Tel: 301-405-3489 and NBER
Fax: 301-405-3542 Tel: 203-432-3566
Email: jrust@gemini.econ.umd.edu Fax: 203-432-6248
Web: http://gemini.econ.umd.edu/jrust Email: george.hall@yale.edu
Web: http://www.econ.yale.edu/~gjh9

Intheearly1970s,thefirm[CantorFitzgerald]vaultedtonearlymonopolisticpre-eminence
in the bond market by doing something no one else had done before: Cantor began posting
government bond prices on computer screens for clients, mainly Wall Street bond dealers,
bringingtransparencytoamarketwhereopacityandrumorhadbeenthenorm.1
WhywouldIwanttopostmypricesontheweb? IfIdidthat,mycompetitorscouldseewhat
I am charging and would undercut my prices by a few pennies, and I would lose most of my
business.2
1 Introduction
We observe significant differences in the microstructure of trade in various commodities and assets. A
significant share of trade in commodities such as wheat and pork bellies and in financial assets such as
common stocksand Treasury securities is intermediated by market makers(also knownasspecialists),at
publicly posted bid and ask prices. Market makers typically either own or are members of an exchange
such as the New York Stock Exchange or the Chicago Board of Trade. However for other commodities
such as steel, virtually all trade is conducted by middlemen (also known as dealerbrokers in financial
marketsor“steelservicecenters”inthesteelmarket),atindividuallynegotiatedprices. Inthesteelmarket
there are no market makers or exchanges where valid current bid and ask prices are publicly posted.
Instead, transaction prices are private information, forcing traders in the steel market to engage in search
andbargainingtofindagoodprice.
It is commonly believed that market makers and exchanges are appropriate for trading highly stan-
dardizedcommoditiesandassetsforwhichthevolumeissufficientlylargetoproduce“thick”and“active”
markets. However,most types ofsteel coil and plateare atleast as standardizedaswheat or pork bellies,
andthevolumeoftradeintheseparticularsteelproductsisatleastaslarge. Anumberofpotentialmarket
makers such as MetalSite, e-STEEL, and Enron have recently attempted to enter the steel market, but so
farwithoutsuccess. EnronwentbankruptinDecember2001,MetalSite’swebsitewasclosedinJune2001
(althoughitwasreopenedinNovember2001),ande-STEELchangeditsnametoNewViewTechnologies
in November 2001, reflecting a new focus away from steel. Thus, at present no market makers handle
a significant share of trade in steel. So the first puzzle is to explain why market makers such as Cantor
Fitzgeraldhavebeensuccessfulinenteringandtransformingthetradeinbonds,butnotinsteel.
1Zuckerman, Gregory, Ann Davis,and Suzanne McGee, “Beforeand After: WhyCantorFitzgeraldCanNeverRe-Create
WhatItOnceWas,”WallStreetJournal,October26,2001,pageA1.
2Aprivatecommunicationtotheauthorsbyamiddlemaninthesteelservicecenterindustry.
2

The second quotation above suggests that even though new information technologies such as the In-
ternetmake itnearly costless to post and update bid and ask prices publicly, itmight still be unprofitable
forpotentialmarketmakerstoentermarketssuchassteel. Ifbuyersofsteelareaccustomedtosearching,
then middlemen can easily respond to the entry of a market maker by slightly undercutting the market
maker’sprices,stealingmostofhisbusiness. Sothesecondpuzzleistoexplainhowamarketmakersuch
as Cantor Fitzgerald can successfully enter a market such as the bond market if the existing middlemen
canrespondbyundercuttingthemarketmaker’spubliclypostedbidandaskprices.
As a step toward answering these puzzles and understanding the differences in the microstructure of
trade that we observe across various markets, we present a simple model in which the share of trade
intermediated by middlemen and market makers is endogenously determined. Our model also provides
insights into the likely effects of the huge reduction in search and transactions costs resulting from the
information revolution and the advent of the World Wide Web. These technologies have facilitated the
rapid emergence of market makers operating web-based “B2B exchanges” that intermediate business-to-
businesstrade,threateningtheexistenceoftraditionalmiddlemeninthesemarkets3.
Ourmodel isanextensionofamodelofintermediationandsearchduetoSpulber(1996a). Spulber’s
model has three types of agents: buyers (consumers), sellers (producers), and price-setting middlemen.
Since middlemen are often called dealers, we refer to Spulber’s model as an analysis of the dealer mar-
ket. Ourmain extension is toconsider the effect of introducingafourthtype of agent,market makers. In
Spulber’smodel,middlemenareassumedtobetheexclusiveavenueofexchange: everyproducerwishing
to sell a commodity (or asset) and every consumer wishing to purchase it is required to transact via mid-
dlemen rather thantradedirectlywitheach other. Transactions inthedealer marketoccuroverarangeof
individuallynegotiatedprices—theoutcomeofacostlysequentialsearchprocess.
Westudytheeffectofintroducingamonopolist marketmakeronthesearchequilibriuminthedealer
market. Themarketmakercanbeconceptualizedasoperatinganexchangeonwhichpubliclyobservable
bid and ask prices are posted. Producers and consumers now have the option of trading on the exchange
at the publicly posted bid and ask prices, or searching for a better price in the dealer market. Since the
pricesquotedbymiddlemenarenotpubliclyposted,producersandconsumersmustobtainthembydirect
3TherateofgrowthofB2Bmarketsisnothingshortofphenomenal:ForresterResearchpredictsthatsalesviacomputerized
marketmakerswillexpandfivefoldinthenexttwoyearsandwillaccountforatleast25percentofallsalesin2002,andatotal
volumeof$1.4trillionintransactionsby2004. Theseestimatesmaybeconservative: alternativeforecastsquotedinarecent
symposium on B2B e-commerce published in the Journal ofEconomic Literatureare substantially higher. See, forexample,
Lucking-ReileyandSpulber(2001)andBakos(2001)forevenmoreoptimisticforecastsofrapidgrowthinretaile-commerce.
3