NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
IS FOREIGN EXCHANGE INTERVENTION EFFECTIVE?:
THE JAPANESE EXPERIENCES IN THE 1990S
Takatoshi Ito
Working Paper 8914
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8914
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2002
An earlier version of this paper was written for and presented at the the Goodhart Festschrift conference, held
at the Bank of England on 15-16 November 2001. Comments by Marcus Miller and other participants in the
conference were quite helpful. Later versions were presented at Victoria University in Wellington and the
Reserve Bank of New Zealand. The author benefited from comments and discussions with Peter Kenen,
Christie Smith, and Kelly Eckhold. The author gratefully acknowledges research assistance by Tomoyoshi
Yabu. All the data used in this paper are publicly available. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Takatoshi Ito. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Is Foreign Exchange Intervention Effective?:
The Japanese Experiences in the 1990s
Takatoshi Ito
NBER Working Paper No. 8914
April 2002
JEL No. F31, E58, G15
ABSTRACT
This paper examines Japanese foreign exchanges interventions from April 1991 to March 2001
based on newly disclosed official data. All the yen-selling (dollar-purchasing) interventions were carried
out when the yen/dollar rate was below 125, while all the yen-purchasing (dollar-selling) interventions
were carried out when the yen/dollar was above 125. The Japanese monetary authorities, by buying the
dollar low and selling it high, have produced large profits, in terms of realized capital gains, unrealized
capital gains, and carrying (interest rate differential) profits, from interventions during the ten years.
Profits amounted to 9 trillion yen (2% of GDP) in 10 years. Interventions are found to be effective in the
second half of the 1990s, when daily yen/dollar exchange rate changes were regressed on various factors
including interventions. The US interventions in the 1990s were always accompanied by the Japanese
interventions. The joint interventions were found to be 20-50 times more effective than the Japanese
unilateral interventions. Japanese interventions were found to be prompted by rapid changes in the
yen/dollar rate and the deviation from the long-run mean (say, 125 yen). The interventions in the second
half were less predictable than the first half.
Takatoshi Ito
Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology
University of Tokyo
and NBER
itointokyo@aol.com

1. Introduction
Foreign Exchange Interventions have been one of the most secretive activities of monetary
authorities around the world. They have been always a source of controversy, both in the academic
literature and in practice. Some have believed that intervention cannot be effective based on a popular
monetary model of determining the exchange rate, and also argued that the size of intervention tends to
be overwhelmed by the market size, especially for major currencies. Others have argued that in some
instances, interventions seemed to be effective by changing the sentiment of the market through
signaling policy intentions. Some models, they also argue, that take into account the risk difference
between domestic and foreign bonds would show some influences of intervention through portfolio
shifts among the private sector. A dominant view on effectiveness of intervention has changed the side
a few times in the past decades. The monetary authorities tended to intervene heavily in the foreign
exchange market during the transition from the Bretton Woods system, that collapsed in August 1971
to the floating of major currencies in the beginning of 1973. Even after the floating began, some
monetary authorities in among large economies were believed to be intervening heavily in the foreign
exchange market.
In the early 1980s, the Jurgensen study (Jurgensen (1983) and also Edison (1993)), which
benefited from obtaining data from the participating authorities as a part of official-sector study,
concluded that interventions, especially sterilized interventions, did not have much impact on the
1
exchange rate. Nonsterilized interventions have some effects, but only temporarily. However,
apparent success of concerted interventions following the Plaza Accord of September 1985 in driving
down the overvalued US dollar renewed academic interest. A series of papers by Dominguez and
Frankel showed some effects of interventions on the level, volatility, and risk premium of exchange
rates. (See Dominguez(1990), Dominguez and Frankel (1993a, b, c)). They have emphasized the
2

signaling effect of intervention that would work on expectation of institutional investors. Although
effects of interventions have been debated extensively, no conclusive consensus has emerged. (See
Sarno and Taylor (2001) for a most recent survey, and Ramana and Samiei (2000) for the work on the
effectiveness of intervention on the yen-dollar exchange rate before the data disclosure.)
Except for the United States, intervention data have not been disclosed publicly among the
G7 countries. Although the authorities could exchange information for internal studies on intervention
through G10 or BIS, outside researchers could not obtain intervention data freely. In some cases, data
were released to selected researchers for academic purposes only, with condition that data would be
destroyed after the research was concluded. Empirical studies of intervention have become a popular
exercise as data on intervention have become available to researchers. The past empirical studies have
mixed results on the effectiveness of foreign exchange interventions.
The Japanese authorities had not released intervention data to non-officials, even for
academic research, although reported data to international organizations were occasionally used for
internal studies among official circles, including Group of 10 (G10) and the Bank of International
Settlements (BIS). Some researchers in the academic and private sector had to go to newspaper or wire
service to create proxies (mostly zero-one dummy variables) for Japanese interventions.
In July 2001, the Japanese Ministry of Finance disclosed daily intervention records from
April 1991 to March 2001. The intervention record in the future will be disclosed in the same format
four times a year. (MOF home page: www.mof.go.jp/english/e1c021.htm).
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 will describe some institutional
details of intervention operations in Japan. Section 3 will describe the yen-dollar rate movement and
intervention phases in the 1990s. Section 4 estimates profits/losses from intervention operations.
Realized gains/losses from buying and selling the US dollars, the carrying profits/losses of large
foreign reserves, and unrealized gains/losses at the end of sample period are estimated. Section 5
3