NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE GOVERNANCE OF NOT-FOR-PROFIT FIRMS
Edward L. Glaeser
Working Paper 8921
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8921
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2002
The NSF provided helpful funding. David Cutler, Martin Feldstein and Andrei Shleifer provided enormously
helpful conversations. This research comes out of the NBER’s Nonprofits project and will be the introduction
of a volume of governance in the non-profit sector. All of the participants in the Non-profits project provided
helpful insights into these issues. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Edward L. Glaeser. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Governance of Not-For-Profit Firms
Edward L. Glaeser
NBER Working Paper No. 8921
May 2002
JEL No. G3, H4
ABSTRACT
Many factors including incentive-pay, powerful shareholders, and takeover threats push for-profits
managers towards maximizing shareholder value. One of the most striking factors about non-profit firms
is that they have no comparable governance institutions, and the only check on managers are boards that
are themselves rarely responsible to anyone outside the firm. This essay discusses the implications of
these weak governance institutions on non-profit behavior. A primary implication is that non-profits will
often evolve into organizations that resemble workers’ cooperatives. The primary check on this tendency
is the need of the organizations to compete in outside markets. After presenting a model of non-profit
behavior, I look at four different sectors (hospitals, museums, universities and the church). All display
significant signs of capture by elite workers, but all still perform their basic missions reasonably, probably
because of market competition.
Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
Harvard University
327 Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@kuznets.harvard.edu

I. Introduction
What makes not-for-profit firms different from their for-profit alternatives? Non-profit
firms have tax privileges: donations to them are tax deductible and non-profit firms are
themselves free from many tax burdens. These tax advantages lie at the heart of many
non-profits and it is hard to imagine that America would have its thriving non-profit
sector without tax deductibility. A second difference is the non-distribution constraint.
Non-profit firms are not allowed to disburse profits to owners or employees and this
impacts the nature of non-profits in important ways; for example, in some cases it enables
non-profits to better commit not to cheat donors, customers and workers (see Hansmann,
1980, 1996, Weisbrod, 1988 and Glaeser and Shleifer, 2001). Indeed, the non-
distribution constraint is the defining element of non-profits. Some non-profits don’t
have tax advantages, but all of them face a non-distribution constraint.
As striking as these differences are, a third difference between non-profit and for-profit
firms may be as important in explaining the behavior of non-profit firms: non-profit firms
do not have owners. The non-distribution constraint ensures that the people who fund
non-profits are not residual claimants to the revenues and assets of the non-profit, but the
limits on the powers of donors goes beyond limiting the ability of donors to collect rents.
The people who fund non-profits, through donations, often don’t have control rights over
the firm at all. Non-profit firms do have boards, which ultimately do have control rights,
and these boards are often partially composed of donors and their representatives, but
non-profit boards are ultimately not accountable to shareholders or donors and they are
generally self-perpetuating.
Non-profit boards and managers are never subject to takeovers and often they are not
elected.1 Board members cannot sell or transfer their control rights, so board members
don’t own an asset the value of which is tied to the firm’s success. Moreover, there is
certainly no legal rule requiring boards to act as custodians of the interests of past
1 There are certainly minor exceptions to this claim. Many churches and synagogues have boards elected
by Parishioners. Alumni groups are frequently entitled to elect some members of university boards.
2

investors/donors. The law constrains itself to generally vaguely worded requirements
about the non-profits mission. Moreover, given the murky missions of many non-profits,
their managers are inherently harder to incentivize. A for-profit manager’s income can
be tied to the stock price of his firm, but no similar benchmarks exist for most non-
profits. Indeed, many forms of incentive pay are illegal for non-profit firms.
The result of these factors is that the managers of non-profit firms— the Chief Executive
Officer (CEO) and his board— have a degree of autonomy that is almost unparalleled in
the economy. Moreover, there is every reason to believe that, as in all other sectors of the
economy, management does not inherently maximize the objectives of either investors
(donors) or society as a whole. What non-profits do maximize is a significant and
difficult question. This essay, and the book that it introduces, represent an attempt to add
something to the literature on this question. The goal of the paper and the book is to
understand something of the motives of the major actors in the non-profit sector and how
the interactions of these actors influence the actions of non-profit firms.
Indeed, given the weak nature of corporate control in non-profits, perhaps the most
surprising thing about non-profits is that they function as well as they do. Widespread
looting of endowments is almost unheard of. Non-profit universities and hospitals seem
to do a quite credible job of educating students and curing the sick. While I will argue
that workers do tend to subvert the mission of non-profits, I also think that this
subversion is ultimately modest, and in some cases the subversion itself may create social
benefits.2 Perhaps the right view is that competition in the market for customers and
donors is ultimately more important than corporate control, and ultimately serves to keep
non-profit firms reasonably honest.
This introductory essay begins with a simple model of the choices made by non-profit
firms. I consider a model with four types of actors: a manager (meant to represent the
CEO and the board), workers, donors and customers. Each of these actors has different
2 A cynical reader might thin that since I am an employee of a non-profit, I have a vested interest in
claiming that employee subversion isn’t a terrible thing.
3