NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RISK REDUCTION IN LARGE PORTFOLIOS:
WHY IMPOSING THE WRONG CONSTRAINTS HELPS
Ravi Jagannathan
Tongshu Ma
Working Paper 8922
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8922
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2002
We thank Torben Andersen, Gopal Basak, Louis Chan, Gregory Connor, Kent Daniel, Bernard Dumas,
Ludger Hentschel, Philippe Henrotte, Ioulia Io .e, Andrew Lo, Jesper Lund, Robert McDonald, Steve Ross,
Jay Shanken and seminar participants at Copenhagen Business School, Emory University, HEC, Insead, MIT,
Norwegian School of Management, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign, University of Iowa, University of Rochester, and University of Utah for helpful
comments. We thank the editor, Richard Green, and two anonymous referees, for a number of suggestions
that have helped us sharpen the focus of the article. We are responsible for any errors or omissions. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2002 by Ravi Jagannathan and Tongshu Ma. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Risk Reduction in Large Portfolios: Why Imposing the Wrong Constraints Helps
Ravi Jagannathan and Tongshu Ma
NBER Working Paper No. 8922
May 2002
JEL No. C49, G11, G12
ABSTRACT
Mean-variance efficient portfolios constructed using sample moments often involve taking
extreme long and short positions. Hence practitioners often impose portfolio weight constraints when
constructing efficient portfolios. Green and Hollifield (1992) argue that the presence of a single dominant
factor in the covariance matrix of returns is why we observe extreme positive and negative weights. If
this were the case then imposing the weight constraint should hurt whereas the empirical evidence is often
to the contrary. We reconcile this apparent contradiction. We show that constraining portfolio weights
to be nonnegative is equivalent to using the sample covariance matrix after reducing its large elements
and then form the optimal portfolio without any restrictions on portfolio weights. This shrinkage helps
reduce the risk in estimated optimal portfolios even when they have negative weights in the population.
Surprisingly, we also find that once the nonnegativity constraint is imposed, minimum variance
portfolios constructed using the monthly sample covariance matrix perform as well as those constructed
using covariance matrices estimated using factor models, shrinkage estimators, and daily data. When
minimizing tracking error is the criterion, using daily data instead of monthly data helps. However, the
sample covariance matrix without any correction for microstructure effects performs the best.
Ravi Jagannathan Tongshu Ma
Department of Finance Department of Finance
Kellogg Graduate School of Management David Eccles School of Business
Northwestern University University of Utah
Evanston, IL 60208 Salt Lake City, UT 84112
and NBER 801-581-7506
847-491-8338 fintsm@business.utah.edu
rjaganna@nwu.edu

I Introduction
Markowitz’s (1952, 1959) portfolio theory is one of the most important the-
oretical developments in finance. Mean-variance efficient portfolios play an
important role in this theory. Such portfolios constructed using sample mo-
ments often involve taking large short positions in a number of assets and
large long positions in some other assets. Since negative portfolio weights
(short positions) are difficult to implement in practice, most investors impose
the constraint that portfolio weights should be nonnegative when construct-
ing mean-variance efficient portfolios.
GreenandHollifield(1992)arguethatitisdifficulttodismisstheobserved
extreme negative and positive weights as entirely due to imprecise estimation
of the inputs used to construct mean-variance efficient portfolios. According
tothemtheextremeweightsinsampleefficientportfoliosaretoalargeextent
due to the existence of a single dominance factor in the covariance structure
of stock returns and the small amount of cross-sectional diversity in asset
betas. To understand the Green and Hollifield argument, note that minimum
variance portfolios can be constructed in two steps. First we naively diversify
over the set of high beta stocks and the set of low beta stocks separately.
The resulting two portfolios will have very low residual risk and different
betas. Next we short the high beta portfolio and long the low beta portfolio
to get rid of the systematic risk. Clearly, the second step involves taking
extremelongandshortpositionswhenthereislittledispersioninthebetasof
different assets. This is why minimum variance portfolios take large positive
and negative positions in the underlying assets.
If extreme negative weights in efficient portfolios arise due to the pres-
ence of a single dominant factor then it would appear that imposing the
nonnegativity constraints would lead to a loss in efficiency. However, empir-
ical findings suggest that imposing these constraints improves the efficiency
1

of optimal portfolios constructed using sample moments1. Does this mean
that the evidence does not support the Green and Hollifield (1992) view?
In this paper we provide an answer to this question. We show that im-
posing the nonnegativity constraint on portfolio weights can help even when
Green and Hollifield are right – i.e., the true covariance matrix is such that
efficient portfolios involve taking large negative positions in a number of as-
sets. We show that each of the no-shortsales constraints is equivalent to
reducing the sample covariances of the corresponding asset with other assets
by a certain amount. Stocks that have high covariances with other stocks
tend to receive negative portfolio weights. Hence, to the extent that high
estimated covariances are more likely to be caused by upward-biased estima-
tion error, imposing the nonnegativity constraint can reduce the sampling
error. It follows from the theory of shrinkage estimators that imposing the
no-shortsales constraint can help even when the constraints do not hold in
the population.
We also study the impact of upper bounds on portfolio weights since
they are also commonly imposed by practitioners. We show that each up-
per bound constraint is equivalent to increasing the sample covariances of
the corresponding asset with other assets by a certain amount. Since stocks
that have low covariances with other stocks tend to get extreme high port-
folio weights, and these extreme low estimated covariances are more likely
to be caused by downward-biased estimation error, this adjustment in esti-
mated covariances could reduce sampling error and help the out-of-sample
performance of the optimal portfolios. Our empirical evidence suggests that
imposing upperbounds on portfolio weights does not lead to a significant
improvement in the out-of-sample performance of minimum risk portfolios
when no-shortsales restrictions are already in place. Therefore the role of
upperbounds is more to ensure that the minimum risk portfolios that come
out of the optimization exercise can be constructed in practice.
1See Frost and Savarino (1988) for an excellent discussion.
2