NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DOES LOCAL FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENT MATTER?
Luigi Guiso
Paola Sapienza
Luigi Zingales
Working Paper 8923
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8923
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2002
We thank Orazio Attanasio, Mitchell Petersen, Raghuram Rajan, Andrei Shleifer, and Nick Souleles for very
helpful comments. We also benefited from the comments of participants to seminars at Duke University,
NBER Summer Institute 2001 Capital Markets in the Economy Meeting, NBER Corporate Finance Meeting,
the University of Chicago Brown Bag lunch, the World Bank, "Macro and Micro Aspects of Economic
Geography" Conference (CREI, Pompeu Fabra), "Evolving credit markets and business cycle dynamics”
Conference (European University Institute). Luigi Guiso also thanks the EEC and MURST for financial
support. Luigi Zingales also thanks the Center for Security Prices and the Stigler Center at the University
of Chicago for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Luigi Guiso, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Does Local Financial Development Matter?
Luigi Guiso, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales
NBER Working Paper No. 8923
May 2002
JEL No. G0, G2, E0, O4
ABSTRACT
We study the effects of differences in local financial development within an integrated financial
market. To do so, we construct a new indicator of financial development by estimating a regional effect
on the probability that, ceteris paribus, a household is shut off from the credit market. By using this
indicator we find that financial development enhances the probability an individual starts his own
business, favors entry, increases competition, and promotes growth of firms. As predicted by theory, these
effects are weaker for larger firms, which can more easily raise funds outside of the local area. Overall,
the results suggest local financial development is an important determinant of the economic success of
an area even in an environment where there are no frictions to capital movements.
Luigi Guiso Paola Sapienza Luigi Zingales
Ente Per Gli Studi Bancari Kellogg Graduate School University of Chicago
Luigi Einaudi of Management 1101 E. 58th Street
Via Due Macelli 73 Finance Department Chicago, IL 60637
00187 Rome Northwestern University and NBER and CEPR
Italy 2001 Sheridan Road luigi.zingales@gsb.uchicago.edu
guiso@tin.it Evanston, IL 60208-2001
paola_sapienza@kellogg.nwu.edu

Since the seminal work of King and Levine (1993), a large body of empirical evidence
has shown that a country’s level of financial development impacts its ability to grow1. Much of
this evidence, however, comes from a period when cross-border capital movements were very
limited. In the last decade, international capital mobility has exploded. Private capital flow to
emerging market economies have grown from close to nothing in the 1970s, to 170 billion in the
1980s, to 1.3 trillions in the 1990s.2 During the same period the amount of U.S. private equity
money invested abroad and the number of foreign firms listed in the United States have
experienced a similar growth rate. The phenomenon is so dramatic that many countries have
started wondering whether they need a national stock market once their firms can list on
NASDAQ.
In light of these dramatic changes, the question of whether national financial institutions
and markets still matter for growth once domestic agents have access to foreign markets has
become very important from a policy perspective. Unfortunately, it is a difficult question to
answer empirically. The integration of national financial markets is so recent that we lack a
sufficiently long time series to estimate its impact in the data. At the same time, the pace of
integration is so fast that if we were to establish that national financial development mattered for
national growth during the last decade, we could not confidently extrapolate this result to the
current decade.
To try and assess the relevance for growth of national financial institutions and markets
in an increasingly integrated capital market we follow a different approach. Rather than studying
the effect of financial development across countries we study the effect of local financial
development within a single country, which has being unified, from both a political and a
regulatory point of view, for the last 140 years: Italy. The level of integration reached within Italy
1 See for instance, Jayaratne and Strahan (1996), Rajan and Zingales (1998), Beckert and Harvey (2001)
etc. and Levine et al.
2

probably represents an upper bound for the level of integration international financial markets can
reach. Hence, if we find that local financial development matters for growth within Italy, we can
safely conclude national financial development will continue to matter for national growth in the
foreseeable future. Of course, the converse is not true. If we do not find the effect within Italy, it
is still possible that the effect is present across countries.
Moving the focus from cross-country comparisons to within country analysis exacerbates
some of the problems also present in the cross-country analysis. First, how to properly measure
financial development. Measures such as stock market capitalization to GDP or stock market
turnover to GDP make no sense when applied at the local level. We address this problem by
developing a new indicator, which enables us to measure financial development at the local level,
relying on the theoretically-sound notion that developed financial markets grant individuals and
firms an easier access to external funds.
Second, cross-country comparisons assume that differences in financial development are
exogenously determined. This assumption becomes more questionable when we move to within
country differences: across countries one can hope that exogenous differences in history, culture,
and regulation drive differences in financial development. This is harder to imagine within a
country (although not necessarily in Italy, where different regions experienced a very different
history). We address this problem by instrumenting our indicator with exogenous factors that in
previous work (see Guiso et al., 2001) have been demonstrated to have an impact on financial
development.
But moving the focus from cross-country comparisons to within country analysis also
provides new opportunities. Rather than restricting our analysis to the macro effect of financial
development we also study its micro effects, showing its impact on individual households and
firms. We then study how this micro effect translates into a macro effect. If financial
development affects economic growth by facilitating the creation of new firms, it must be the
2 See for example Friedman (1999).
3