NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LIQUIDITY SHORTAGES AND BANKING CRISES
Douglas W. Diamond
Raghuram G. Rajan
Working Paper 8937
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8937
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2002
We are grateful to Isabel Gödde and Nobu Kiyotaki for very helpful comments on an earlier draft, and to
Steve Ross and participants at the NBER Economic Fluctuations meetings in February 2001 for helpful
suggestions. We are grateful for financial support from the National Science Foundation and the Center for
Research on Security Prices. Rajan also thanks the Center for the Study of the State and the Economy for
financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Douglas W. Diamond and Raghuram G. Rajan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Liquidity Shortages and Banking Crises
Douglas W. Diamond and Raghuram G. Rajan
NBER Working Paper No. 8937
May 2002
ABSTRACT
Banks can fail either because they are insolvent or because an aggregate shortage of liquidity can
render them insolvent. We show that bank failures can themselves cause liquidity shortages. The failure
of some banks can then lead to a cascade of failures and a possible total meltdown of the system.
Contagion here is not caused by contractual or informational links between banks but because bank
failure could lead to a contraction in the common pool of liquidity. There is a possible role for
government intervention. Unfortunately, liquidity problems and solvency problems interact, and can each
cause the other. It is therefore hard to determine the root cause of a crisis from observable factors. The
practical difficulty of determining the most appropriate intervention, as well as the costs of the wrong kind
of intervention (such as infusing capital when the need is for liquidity) have to be traded off against the
costs of a meltdown, which can be substantial. We propose a robust sequence of intervention.
Douglas W. Diamond Raghuram G. Rajan
Graduate School of Business Graduate School of Business
The University of Chicago The University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street 1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637 Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER and NBER
d-diamond@uchicago.edu raghuram.rajan@gsb.uchicago.edu

Many economists would agree that an important role of a central bank is to alleviate a
liquidity shortage, because, if not addressed, it could lead to bank failures and perhaps even a
banking crisis. For example, in his classic, Lombard Street, Bagehot (1873, p196-197) argued that
in a
“time of panic [the Bank of England] must advance freely and vigorously to the public out of the
reserve…And for this purpose there are two rules:- First. That these loans should be made at a
very high rate of interest. …Secondly. That at this rate these advances should be made on all
good banking securities, and as largely as the public ask for them.”
In contrast to this general acquiescence to liquidity support, few would advocate bailing out
specific banks through capital infusions – witness Bagehot’s view that liquidity loans should be
made at high rates and against good collateral so that there is not even a hint of a subsidy. There
appear to be at least two reasons for the difference in approach to a liquidity shortage and a
solvency problem. First, when a bank fails because it is insolvent, it is felt that it has got its just
deserts. A bailout might encourage moral hazard. Second, and perhaps more important, it is
thought (perhaps more by academics than by practitioners) that a bank failure has no systemic
consequences – the costs of failure are borne by its borrowers, depositors, investors, and
managers alone.
It is this second point that we would like to dispute in this paper. For while it is well
known that systemic illiquidity can cause bank failures, we show that the reverse phenomenon is
also possible – bank failures can cause systemic illiquidity. This then suggests the possibility of a
contagion of bank failures where a bank’s failure subtracts liquidity from the system, and this
negative spillover effect raises the likelihood of failure of other banks. It is possible that the entire
system melts down making everyone worse off, even though it would survive intact if a few
banks were recapitalized.
Let us describe the model to sketch how this happens. There is a single consumption
good (we will also call this “cash”) owned by potential investors. In addition, entrepreneurs have
project ideas. Projects require an investment of consumption goods up front, and will pay off a
1

larger amount of consumption goods, either quickly or after considerable delay. 1 Projects are
thus risky, but only in that the timing of when they pay off is uncertain. Projects also are illiquid
in that only a specific entrepreneur can produce consumption goods from a specific project, and
loans are illiquid in that only the initial lender has the specific collection skills to extract a
repayment from the entrepreneur. Given our assumptions, the entrepreneur will need to borrow
indirectly, through a bank. The bank will have to issue investors demand deposits so that they are
confident they will get repaid even though the bank loans to entrepreneurs are illiquid – demand
deposits are a commitment to repay (as in Diamond and Rajan (2001)). We now ask what
happens if a number of projects are delayed so that the natural supply of consumption goods at
the interim date is small, even though many depositors want to withdraw to consume.
If the number of delayed projects is not too large, banks and investors will not suffer
greatly. A bank can raise new financing against delayed projects and pass that along to those who
want to consume. The new financing will be available from entrepreneurs whose projects are
timely, because they will have sufficient spare cash after repaying their debts. The bank’s ability
to commit to repay these new depositors will enables it to raise cash which it will use to repay old
depositors. Thus existing consumption goods will be allocated efficiently via the bank.
Problems arise if too many projects are delayed. In that case, not only does the bank get
paid less immediately, but also it may be able to borrow only a fraction of the future value of
delayed projects (we explain why in the paper). As a result, the funds the bank can raise today
against future cash inflows may be smaller than its immediate net liabilities - which we term a
“solvency problem”. In this case, potential new depositors (timely entrepreneurs with spare cash)
will be unwilling to lend to the bank. At the same time, because few entrepreneurs are timely,
there may also be fewer consumption goods in the economy than needed to pay existing
depositors (and other claimants on the bank). This is a “liquidity problem”.
1 This could be thought of as a model of delays in harvest, or crop failure, that so plagued banking systems
in the 19th century. If the consumption good is commodity money or foreign exchange, the delay could be
thought of as a postponement of exports.
2