NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
GROWING BY LEAPS AND INCHES:
CREATIVE DESTRUCTION, REAL COST REDUCTION, AND INCHING UP
Michael R. Darby
Lynne G. Zucker
Working Paper 8947
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8947
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2002
An earlier version of this paper was delivered as Michael R. Darby’s Presidential Address at the Western
Economic Association International Meetings, San Francisco, CA, July 6, 2001. The research has been
supported by grants from the University of California's Industry-University Cooperative Research Program,
the University of California Systemwide Biotechnology Research and Education Program, and the Alfred
P. Sloan Foundation through the NBER Research Program on Industrial Technology and Productivity. We
are indebted to many co-authors, postdoctoral fellows, and graduate and undergraduate research assistants
who have contributed to the development of these ideas over the last decade. This paper is a part of the
NBER's research program in Productivity. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Michael R. Darby and Lynne G. Zucker. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Growing by Leaps and Inches: Creative Destruction, Real Cost Reduction, and Inching Up
Michael R. Darby and Lynne G. Zucker
NBER Working Paper No. 8947
May 2002
JEL No. O30, L11, M13
ABSTRACT
Most firms achieve perfective progress, incrementally improving commodities or productivity.
But technological progress is concentrated in a few firms achieving metamorphic progress: forming or
transforming industries with technological breakthroughs (e.g., biotechnology, lasers, semiconductors,
nanotechnology). Unless congruent with incumbents' science and technology base, metamorphic progress
promotes entry. Scientific breakthroughs embodied in discovering scientists, protected by natural
excludability, and transferred by learning-by-doing-with at the bench generally drive metamorphic
progress. Embodied knowledge is rivalrous and leads to entry and industry dominance by
star-scientist-linked firms. Incorporating this scientific-entrepreneurial process is essential to improving
- if not transforming - endogenous growth models.
Michael R. Darby Lynne G. Zucker
Cordner Professor of Money & Financial Markets Professor of Sociology &
Depts. of Management, Economics & Policy Studies Director, Center for International Science,
Anderson Graduate School of Management Technology, and Cultural Policy
University of California, Los Angeles School of Public Policy & Social Research
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481 University of California, Los Angeles
and NBER Los Angeles, CA 90095-1551
darby@ucla.edu and NBER
zucker@ucla.edu

Growing by Leaps and Inches:
Creative Destruction, Real Cost Reduction, and Inching Up
by Michael R. Darby and Lynne G. Zucker
Drunk: Can you help me find my keys?
Passerby: Sure, where exactly did you drop them?
Drunk: Way over there by the trash can.
Passerby: Then why are you searching over here?
Drunk: The light’s much better under the lamppost.
Milton Friedman, Economics 331, Fall 1967
The class laughed on hearing this joke, not yet realizing how well it described the profession
for which they were preparing. Even those present who cannot carry memory of a joke home from
the barbershop still remember the day they first heard that little joke. The thesis of this paper is that
the economics profession has spent years looking for technological progress under the familiar
lamppost of research and development (R&D) by incumbent firms aimed at improvement in
existing commodities or productive methods. Such perfective progress (as we term it) is
amenable to hedonic measurement and analysis of firm behavior and market equilibrium in terms
of return on investment, public goods, and positive externalities. We show here that metamorphic
progress associated with creation of new industries or technological transformation of existing
industries is of the same or higher order of magnitude as a source of technological progress.
We believe that our approach complements Arnold C. Harberger’s recent emphasis on the
concentration of growth in a few companies in a few industries which are achieving dramatic real
cost reductions. He began to formulate his own schema in his 1990 W.E.A. presidential address and
by his 1998 A.E.A. presidential address could report considerable empirical evidence in support of
1

this concentration (Harberger 1998). Harberger distinguishes between yeast which makes bread rise
evenly and mushrooms which pop up unexpectedly in the back yard. In titling this paper, we had in
mind the Japanese picture of progress by inching up – or earlier Frank Knight’s (1944) Crusonia
plant which grows proportionately except as parts are cut off and eaten.1 In contrast, we emphasize
the process of this or that industry leaping forward at any given time – a process which may have
prompted Schumpeter’s (1934) model of creative destruction.
Breakthrough discoveries in science and engineering – particularly invention of a new way
of inventing such as corn hybridization, integrated circuits, and recombinant DNA – typically drive
metamorphic progress. These discoveries are rarely well understood in the early years following
their discovery. As a result, natural excludability is characteristic of these radical technologies due
to the extensive tacit knowledge required to practice them and the length period of learning-by-
doing-with at the lab bench required to transfer them. Thus, metamorphic progress cannot be
analyzed following Arrow’s information as a public good paradigm.
The importance of metamorphic progress based on naturally excludable technologies
motivates a challenging and exciting research agenda to remove the black box covering the linkages
among scientific breakthroughs, high technologies, entry and success in nascent industries, and the
movement toward industrial maturity where government statistics and economic research are most
likely – coincidentally – to begin. There are real data problems in studying hundreds of private
start-up companies in industries still lumped into one or another classification ending in “n.e.c.” (not
elsewhere classified). They are manageable, however, if economists are willing to exploit
unconventional sources and methods more familiar to organizational theorists such as industry
directories, financial practitioners’ on-line services, the ISI and other scientific literature databases,
and sophisticated matching methods for linking firms and individuals across databases.
2