NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
GOING PUBLIC WHEN YOU CAN IN BIOTECHNOLOGY
Michael R. Darby
Lynne G. Zucker
Working Paper 8954
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8954
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2002
This research has been supported by grants from the University of California Systemwide Biotechnology
Research and Education Program, the University of California President's Initiative for Industry-University
Cooperative Research, and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation through the NBER Research Program on
Industrial Technology and Productivity. Ivo I. Welch provided comments and advice far above and beyond
collegial standards, for which the authors are truly grateful. Qiao Liu was primarily responsible for
integrating the new variables into the Zucker-Darby high-technology relational data base and conducting the
analysis. Marc Junkunc, Stephanie Hwang, and Andrew Jing did substantial work in developing the new
variables. Jeff Armstrong did a preliminary analysis which helped us to better understand the issues. This
paper is a part of the NBER's research program in Productivity. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Michael R. Darby and Lynne G. Zucker. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Going Public When You Can in Biotechnology
Michael R. Darby and Lynne G. Zucker
NBER Working Paper No. 8954
May 2002
JEL No. O31, G32, L21, L65, M13
ABSTRACT
Scientist-entrepreneurs prominent in biotech and other high-technology industries view going
public not as a cost-effective source of capital but as a cross between selling a now-proven innovation
and winning a lottery. Unlike most empirical IPO analyses confined to those firms that go public, we
study substantially all the non-public biotech firms founded up through 1989. The probability that one
of these firms goes public in any given year increases with the quality of the firm's science base (use of
recombinant DNA technology, number of articles by star scientists as or with firm employees, number
of biotech patents), the percentage of eligible firms going public the year the firm was founded as a
strategy indicator, recent biotech returns as an indicator of a hot market, and whether or how many rounds
of venture capital has been obtained. The same key factors increase the expected proceeds raised from
IPOs, but the quality of the firm's science base plays a more dominant role. All firms going public try to
look like the next Genentech, but only those with the strong science base necessary for success attract
large investments.
Michael R. Darby Lynne G. Zucker
Cordner Professor of Money & Financial Markets Professor of Sociology &
Depts. of Management, Economics & Policy Studies Director, Center for International Science,
Anderson Graduate School of Management Technology, and Cultural Policy
University of California, Los Angeles School of Public Policy & Social Research
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481 University of California, Los Angeles
and NBER Los Angeles, CA 90095-1551
darby@ucla.edu and NBER
zucker@ucla.edu

Going Public When You Can in Biotechnology
by Michael R. Darby and Lynne G. Zucker
Finance Professor: What were the factors which made it optimal to
raise money through an initial public offering at this time?
New Biotech Millionaire: Because I could.
This joke sums up a disconnect between the academic literature on the one hand and both
Main and Wall Streets on the other. The scientist-entrepreneurs prominent in the biotech and other
high-technology industries view going public not so much as a sometimes reasonably priced
alternative source of working capital as a cross between a well-earned sale of a now-proven
innovation embodied in a firm and the winning of a lottery.
The use of modern biotechnology mushroomed from nonexistent in 1975 to over 700 firms
by 1990 in the United States alone. Of those firms, some 512 were new entrants, most of which
were attempting both to successfully apply the new bioscience breakthroughs to create
commercially valuable products and to go public insuring the survival of the firm and wealthy
founders and early investors. By 1992, 162 of these firms had traded publicly including 156 (30.5
percent of the 512 entrants) which made an initial public offering (IPO).1 These firms are an
attractive natural experiment for understanding the IPO process.
This paper is unique in beginning with a universe of non-public firms and analyzing the
determinants of the probability a firm will go public in a given year and, if it does, the amount of
capital which it raises in the IPO. Deeds, Decarolis, and Coombs (1997) and Stephan and Everhart
(1998) have previously examined the amount raised in biotech IPOs for those firms that go public
during their time frame, but we are able to add to and improve on their analyses in several ways.
1

First, because of our rich data resources from the larger biotechnology project, we are to examine all
IPOs occurring over a much longer period than could either of those research teams. Second,
because we have the universe of private firms, we are able to apply the Tobit technique to properly
estimate the funding amounts conditional on the probability that a firm goes public.
Finally, and most important, we have much more information on the scientists involved in
firms and are able specifically to identify publications with star scientists that are joint with the
firms. These joint publications identify the labor effort that has been moved over to the firm by top
scientists, those scientists who have made breakthrough discoveries in genetic sequencing.2 The
importance of this labor effort has been documented in a series of substantive analyses, predicting a
wide variety of performance measures from patents and products to employment growth. In our
most recent analyses, we examine publications joint with firm scientists by all scientists in the
relevant science areas and by the stars (Zucker, Darby, and Armstrong 2002). We find that stars’
joint publications provide a significant increment above the significant positive effect of all
scientists that are co-publishing with firm scientists on a variety of performance measures,
especially strong and consistent in panel analyses.
Our story, then, is that access to tacit knowledge held by the discovering scientists has a
strong and consistent impact on firms’ performance. Such tacit knowledge is best communicated
from discovering to firm scientists by working jointly at the lab bench. Learning-by-doing-with
limits the speed of diffusion of the knowledge, conferring natural excludability. We find traces of
this process and its strong impact in both biotechnology and semiconductors (on semiconductors,
see Torero, Darby, and Zucker 2001). Number of articles or citations measures of their quality fail
to capture the process of transmitting tacit knowledge held by the discovering scientists that our co-
publication measured has been designed to uncover.
2