NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PAPER MILLIONAIRES: HOW VALUABLE IS STOCK TO A
STOCKHOLDER WHO IS RESTRICTED FROM SELLING IT?
Matthias Kahl
Jun Liu
Francis A. Longstaff
Working Paper 8969
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8969
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2002
We are grateful for helpful discussions with David Aboody, Mark Garmaise, Robert Geske, Mark Grinblatt,
Robert Merton, Lisa Meulbroek, and Richard Roll, and for the comments of seminar participants at the
University of California at Berkeley and California State University at Fullerton. We are also grateful to
Brent Longsta .and Eric Neis for research assistance. We are particularly grateful for the comments and
suggestions of the editor Bill Schwert and an anonymous referee. All errors are our responsibility. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2002 by Matthias Kahl, Jun Liu and Francis A. Longstaff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Paper millionaires: How valuable is stock to a stockholder
who is restricted from selling it?
Matthias Kahl, Jun Liu and Francis A. Longstaff
NBER Working Paper No. 8969
June 2002
JEL No. G11
ABSTRACT
Many firms have stockholders who face severe restrictions on their ability to sell their shares and
diversify the risk of their personal wealth. We study the costs of these liquidity restrictions on
stockholders using a continuous-time portfolio choice framework. These restrictions have major effects
on the optimal investment and consumption strategies because of the need to hedge the illiquid stock
position and smooth consumption in anticipation of the eventual lapse of the restrictions. These results
provide a number of important insights about the effects of illiquidity in financial markets.
Matthias Kahl Jun Liu Francis A. Longstaff
The Anderson School The Anderson School The Anderson School
UCLA UCLA UCLA
Box 951481 Box 951481 Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481 Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481 Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
francis.longstaff@anderson.ucla.edu

1. Introduction
In recent years, the number of stockholders suffering huge losses during market
downturns while liquidity restrictions prohibited them from selling their shares has
skyrocketed.1 These types of restrictions are widespread, affecting entrepreneurs,
venture capitalists, private equityholders, corporate officers, managers, and many
others. For example, lockup restrictions are often imposed as part of the initial
public offering (IPO) process. More broadly, however, selling restrictions are usually
included in executive stock or stock-option based compensation contracts. In addi-
tion, Rule 144 of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) places severe
restrictions on the ability of most corporate insiders and affiliates to sell shares in
their firm. Because of these restrictions, some stockholders bear the costs of holding
an illiquid undiversified portfolio for many years.
Although the benefits of liquidity restrictions in retaining key employees and
managers and in reducing agency conflicts are well understood, the costs imposed by
these restrictions have been largely unexplored. Accordingly, the goal of this paper
is to examine how selling or liquidity restrictions affect the welfare of stockholders.
Since these stockholders often have a substantial stake in their venture, we will refer
to them simply as entrepreneurs throughout the paper to make the intuition more
clear. Tostudytheeffectsofliquidityrestrictions,wemodeltheoptimalconsumption
and portfolio choice problem of an entrepreneur who owns stock in a firm, but is
unable to sell this stock for a given period of time. In addition to this restricted
stock, the entrepreneur has liquid wealth which he can allocate between the stock
and bond markets. This feature is important since it allows the entrepreneur to take
a stock market position that offsets some of the risk of his illiquid stockholdings and
reduces the cost of the restrictions. Note that allowing the entrepreneur to invest
in other markets differentiates this paper from earlier work (primarily focusing on
executive stock options rather than restricted stock) in which agents are not allowed
to hedge their undiversified positions in other markets (for example, see Hall and
Murphy, 2000b). This framework also allows us to study how the consumption level
(or lifestyle) of an entrepreneur is affected by liquidity restrictions. The welfare
loss due to the liquidity restrictions is calculated by comparing the maximal utility
achieved by the entrepreneur with that achievable if the stockholdings were fully
liquid.
1There are many examples of entrepreneurs, managers, and others with significant
stockholdings, initially worth millions on paper, who lost most of their wealth with-
out ever being allowed to sell any of their stockholdings. See the recent articles
on the effects of selling restrictions on inside stockholders in The Wall Street Jour-
nal on March 23, 2001, April 12, 2001, April 25, 2001, and May 17, 2001, and in
Businessweek on April 17, 2000, and April 16, 2001.
1

The results indicate that the cost of liquidity restrictions can be surprisingly
large. For example, when stock is restricted for five years and represents 50% of his
wealth, an entrepreneur would actually be better off if he could sell his restricted
stock for 30% to 80% of its unrestricted market value. Furthermore, these costs
can be significantly higher when nearly all of the entrepreneur’s wealth is tied up
in restricted shares and when the entrepreneur is not able to hedge his restricted
shares with offsetting stock market positions. These results contradict the widely
held practitioner view that restricted stock has only a minor cost to the recipient
(see Wall Street Journal, April 12, 2001, p. R1) and is a much more efficient form
of compensation than executive stock options. These costs are roughly on the same
order of magnitude as those reported in studies of the cost of awarding executive
stock options such as Hall and Murphy (2000a, 2000b) and Meulbroek (2001).2 The
results also indicate that the cost of liquidity restrictions tends to be higher for
agents who are more risk averse. If the ability to innovate is not the same as the
ability to bear risk, however, this implies that liquidity restrictions may discourage
risk averse (but potentially highly productive) agents from entrepreneurial ventures.
Furthermore, these results suggest a possible basis for explaining the large valuation
discounts associated with private equity placements (see Wruck, 1989; and Silber
1992) and contribute to the growing literature on the effects of illiquidity on security
values.3
We find that owning restricted shares can have a dramatic effect on the optimal
portfolio strategy for the liquid portion of the entrepreneur’s portfolio. Depending
on the firm’s correlation with the stock market, the entrepreneur can significantly
increase or decrease his stock market holdings. This effect is largest when the re-
stricted shares represent an intermediate fraction of the entrepreneur’s wealth. In-
terestingly, even when the correlation between the firm and the stock market is zero,
the entrepreneur can hold more of the stock market than he would in the absence
of liquidity restrictions. Intuitively, this is because taking additional stock market
risk helps smooth consumption variability caused by the temporary liquidity restric-
tions. Finally, we show that even though the entrepreneur can borrow against his
illiquid position, he chooses to consume at a much lower rate than he would without
liquidity restrictions.
This analysis also has implications for several areas in corporate finance. The
2Meulbroek (2001) uses an approach based on equalizing the Sharpe ratio between
the market and the illiquid stock to compute the discount. This preference-free
approach is easily applied and can be viewed as providing a lower bound on the
discount for the illiquid stock. We are grateful to Robert Merton for this insight.
3For example, see Mayers (1972, 1973), Grossman and Laroque (1990), Amihud and
Mendelson (1991), Boudoukh and Whitelaw (1991, 1993), Kamara (1994), Longstaff
(1995, 2001a, 2001b), Vayanos (1998), Huang (1998), and Brenner, Eldor, and
Hauser (2001).
2