NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A POLLUTION THEORY OF DISCRIMINATION:
MALE AND FEMALE DIFFERENCES IN OCCUPATIONS AND EARNINGS
Claudia Goldin
Working Paper 8985
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8985
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2002
At its inception, about a decade ago, this paper benefited from the comments of seminar participants at
Columbia University, Indiana University, University of Michigan, and Princeton University and from
suggestions made by Becky Blank, Nancy Folbre, Alan Krueger, Peter Kuhn, and Gavin Wright. In its more
recent incarnation, it has benefited from comments by Francine Blau and Larry Katz. This paper was an
integral part of my Marshall Lectures, University of Cambridge, April 30 and May 1, 2002. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2002 by Claudia Goldin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Pollution Theory of Discrimination:
Male and Female Differences in Occupations and Earnings
Claudia Goldin
NBER Working Paper No. 8985
June 2002
JEL No. J7, N3, J2
ABSTRACT
Occupations are segregated by sex today, but were far more segregated in the early to mid-
twentieth century when married women began to enter the labor force in large numbers. It is difficult to
rationalize sex segregation and “wage discrimination” on the basis of men’s taste for distance from
women in the same way differences between other groups in work and housing have been explained.
Rather, this paper constructs a “pollution” theory model of discrimination in which new female hires may
reduce the prestige of a previously all-male occupation. The predictions of the model concern the range
of segregated and integrated occupations with respect to a productivity characteristic and how
occupational segregation changes as the characteristic distributions become more similar by sex. The
historical record reveals numerous cases of the model’s predictions. Occupations that were more
segregated by sex, for both men and women, contained individuals with higher levels of the productivity
characteristic. “Credentialization,” the shattering of old stereotypes, and information about individual
women’s productivities can help expunge “pollution.”
Claudia Goldin
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
cgoldin@harvard.edu

“It is not difficult to see how pollution beliefs can be used in a dialogue of claims and
counter-claims to status.”
Mary Douglas, Purity and Danger (1966, p. 3)
Women work in occupations that are different from those of men and get paid less for
apparently the same personal and job characteristics.1 These differences have, in part, been
attributed to economic discrimination that some have attributed to “tastes.” The most cited
treatise on the subject posits that some persons desire to work and live apart from others and
would require a premium to interact with them.2
Yet men and women seem to get along under a wide variety of circumstances. Men often
have wives, sometimes daughters and sisters, and by necessity mothers. One cannot attribute to
most men a desire for distance from women the same way one might interpret current or past
discrimination between other groups, such as blacks and whites, Catholics and Protestants, Arabs
and Israelis. One might, however, attribute to men a desire for distance from women to protect
their status as members of an occupational group.
The model developed here treats discrimination as the consequence of a desire by men to
maintain their occupational status or prestige, distinct from the desire to maintain their earnings.
(The reason for focusing on prestige rather than wages is later defended.) Prestige, in this
setting, is conferred by some portion of “society,” the bounds of which will be discussed, and is
1
The ratio of the (full-time, year-round) wage of white women to that of white men increased from 0.605
to 0.739 between 1980 and 2000, and that for all 25- to 34-year olds with four years of college increased
from 0.739 to 0.833 between 1980 and 1995. Source: Current Population Survey, Outgoing Rotation
Groups. A standard measure of occupational segregation (the dissimilarity index) decreased from 0.64 in
1960 to 0.51 in 1990 using a consistent set of 238 occupations and from 0.73 in 1960 to 0.62 in 1980
using 12,850 occupation-industry cells (Jacobsen 1994, table 1). Despite these large gains, most studies
of wage and occupational differences still find an unexplained gap, although the differential and the
unexplained portion have both decreased over time. See, for example, the literature review provided by
Altonji and Blank (1999) and, for long-term trends, Goldin (1990).
2
The earliest treatment, as well as the most cited, is Becker (1957).

based on the level of a productivity-related characteristic (e.g., strength, skill, education, ability)
that originally defines the minimum needed to enter a particular occupation. But prestige can be
“polluted” by the entry of an individual who belongs to a group whose members are judged on
the basis of the group’s average and not by their individual merits.3 Men in an all-male
occupation might be hostile to allowing a woman to enter their occupation even if the woman
meets the qualifications for entry. The reason is that those in the wider society will not know
that the woman was qualified and might, instead, view her entry as signaling that the occupation
had been altered. She will be seen as “polluting” the occupation.4
The reason that her entry might be a signal of change in the standards for admission is
because the economy is dynamic. Technological change can reduce the minimum level of the
characteristic required for entry. For example, firefighters once had to be strong enough to carry
extremely heavy and unwieldy equipment. The advent of lighter hoses diminished the actual
physical strength required (although it remains far higher than that for most jobs). Society has
imperfect information regarding changes in technology and infers change from observables. One
of these observables is the sex (or any group descriptor, such as race) of new entrants. Thus men
might want women barred from their occupation to protect their status even if no skill-reducing
technological change affected their occupation. Whether or not men in a previously all-male
occupation will want to bar the entry of women will depend on the distribution of the
productivity-enhancing characteristic in the male and female populations and the minimum level
3
The term “pollution,” in this context, is from the anthropological literature and originates in the works
of Mary Douglas (Douglas 1966). Women, across many cultures, are separated from men during
menstruation, and sexual intercourse is thought to pollute men. These beliefs enforce, and perhaps
reinforce, the separation of the sexes in production and consumption.
Pollution Theory 2