NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
STOCKS AS MONEY:
CONVENIENCE YIELD AND THE TECH-STOCK BUBBLE
John H. Cochrane
Working Paper 8987
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8987
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2002
This paper was prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Conference on Asset Price Bubbles, April
22-24, 2002. I thank Thomas Chevrier for research assistance, Owen Lamont for data, extensive comments,
and many helpful discussions, and Matthew Richardson for data. Revised versions of this paper (and this
version with color graphs) can be found at http://gsbwww.uchicago.edu/fac/john.cochrane/research/Papers/.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2002 by John H. Cochrane. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Stocks as Money: Convenience Yield and the Tech-Stock Bubble
John H. Cochrane
NBER Working Paper No. 8987
June 2002
JEL No. G1
ABSTRACT
What caused the rise and fall of tech stocks? I argue that a mechanism much like the transactions
demand for money drove many stock prices above the ``fundamental value'' they would have had in a
frictionless market. I start with the Palm/3Com microcosm and then look at tech stocks in general. High
prices are associated with high volume, high volatility, low supply of shares, wide dispersion of opinion,
and restrictions on long-term short selling. I review competing theories, and only the convenience yield
view makes all these connections.
John H. Cochrane
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 E. 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
john.cochrane@gsb.uchicago.edu

1 Introduction
What caused the rise and fall of tech stocks in the late 1990s? I suggest that a
mechanism much like the transactions demand for money drove many stock prices
above the “fundamental value” they would have had in a frictionless market.
During the boom, there was an intense demand for short-term trading in tech
stocks. As a result of market frictions, such trading requires shares of the stock — if
no shares are outstanding, there’s no way to bet one way or the other on the future
of a company. Few shares were available for trading, so the available shares gave
a convenience yield: People were willing to hold them for a little while for short-
term trading, even though they knew that the shares were overvalued as a long-term
investment, just as people will briefly hold money even though it depreciates rapidly
in a hyperinflation.
AsOfekandRichardson(2001)document, techstocksfellwhenmanymoreshares
became available, due to a combination of IPOs, expiration of lockup periods, and
increasing ability to sell short, while at the same time the speculative demand for
shares mirrored in share volume declined dramatically. As increasing money supply
anddecliningtransactionsdemandleadtolowerinterestrates—moneylessoverpriced
relative to bonds — these events sharply reduced the convenience yield of shares.
This paper simply documents the analogy between tech stocks and conventional
money demand. I start with a microcosm, the 3Com/Palm event, and then I extend
the lessons of that microcosm to the Nasdaq / tech stock experience as a whole. I
verify that the elements of a trading-related convenience yield are there in each case,
in particular that high prices are associated with high volume and low share supply.
I conclude with a review of various theories. The key point is that in the tech stock
boom and bust, as in the famous historical “bubbles,” high prices come along with
a trading frenzy. None of the alternative theories says anything about this linkage
— they can predict high prices just as easily with no volume. The convenience yield
inextricably links the price rise and decline with the rise and decline of trading.
This paper is an interpretive review. Most of the empirical work is either taken
directly from or closely inspired by the work of Lamont and Thaler (2001) and Ofek
and Richardson (2001, 2002). My interpretation of the evidence is quite different.
2 3Com, Palm and Convenience Yield
3Com and Palm
On March 2, 2000, 3Comsold5%of its shares of Palminaninitial public offering.
It retained 95%of the shares, and announced that it would give those shares to 3Com
shareholders by the end of the year. Each 3Com share would get approximately 1.5
shares of Palm. (Most of the data and facts about this event come from Lamont and
1

Thaler 2001.)
There were two ways to end up with a share of Palm at the end of 2000: you could
buy one share of Palm directly, or you could buy 1/1.5 shares of 3Com. At the end
of trading on March 2, a share of Palm bought directly cost $95.06. 3Com closed
at $81.81, so a share of Palm bought by buying 3Com cost $81.81/1.5 = $54.54 — a
much lower price for an apparently identical security, and you get the rest of 3Com
for free.
Figure 1 plots daily data on the price of Palm stock and 1/1.5 times the price of
3Com stock. As Figure 1 shows, it was cheaper to buy Palm “implicitly” by buying
3Com than it was to buy it directly through mid-May. The prices in Figure 1 imply
that the rest of 3Com (the “stub”) was valued by the market at a negative amount
— minus 22 billion dollars at the end of the day on March 2. (The sharp drop in
3Com in late July seen in Figure 1 comes on the day that it spun off its remaining
Palm shares. The market apparently had no problems adding and subtracting on
that day!)
Palm and 3Com/1.5
100
90
80 Palm
70
60
50
40 3Com/1.5
30
20
10
0
Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug
Figure 1: Price of Palm and price of 3Com/1.5 from Palm’s IPO to the eventual
spinoff.
This event seems a clear violation of the law of one price. 3Com should always be
worth at least as much as its holdings of Palm.
This event is an interesting microcosm in which to start thinking about the stock
2