NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RISK SHARING AND ASSET PRICES:
EVIDENCE FROM A NATURAL EXPERIMENT
Anusha Chari
Peter Blair Henry
Working Paper 8988
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8988
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2002
Henry gratefully acknowledges the financial support of an NSF CAREER award and the Stanford Institute
of Economic Policy Research (SIEPR). This is a revised version of NBER WP 8265. We thank Geert
Bekaert, and Campbell Harvey for extensive comments on previous versions of this paper. We also thank
Michael Brennan, Steve Buser, Kalok Chan, Judy Chevalier, Eugene Fama, Harrison Hong, Michael Melvin,
Rich Lyons, Lubos Pastor, Paul Romer and seminar participants at the AFA, Chicago, Kansas, Michigan,
NBER, North Carolina, Ohio State, Stanford, Virginia, and WFA for comments. Any remaining errors are
our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Anusha Chari and Peter Blair Henry. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Risk Sharing and Asset Prices: Evidence From a Natural Experiment
Anusha Chari and Peter Blair Henry
NBER Working Paper No. 8988
June 2002
JEL No. F3, F4, G12
ABSTRACT
When countries liberalize their stock markets, firms that become eligible for purchase by
foreigners (investible), experience an average stock price revaluation of 10.4 percent. Since the
covariance of the median investible firm’s stock return with the local market is 30 times larger than its
covariance with the world market, liberalization reduces the systematic risk associated with holding
investible securities. Consistent with this fact: 1) the average effect of the reduction in systematic risk
is 3.4 percentage points, or roughly one third of the total effect; and 2) variation in the firm-specific
response is directly proportional to the firm-specific change in systematic risk. The statistical significance
of this proportionality persists after controlling for changes in expected future profits and index inclusion
criteria such as size and liquidity.
Anusha Chari Peter Blair Henry
University of Michigan Business School Stanford University
701 Tappan Street Graduate School of Business
Ann Arbor, MI 48109 Stanford, CA 94305-5015
achari@umich.edu and NBER
pbhenry@stanford.edu

1. Introduction
A central tenet of asset pricing theory is that capital will be allocated in such a
way that risk-adjusted returns are equalized across assets. The level of expected stock
returns should vary cross-sectionally according to the level of firms' exposure to
systematic risks. Implications for changes in expected returns follow directly from the
theory in levels. Whenever there is a change in the level of systematic risk, stock prices
should change in such a way that risk-adjusted returns are equalized once again.
This prediction is testable empirically. In recent years a number of countries have
undertaken stock market liberalizations. A stock market liberalization is a decision by a
country’s government to allow foreigners to purchase shares in that country’s stock
market. Opening the stock market to foreign investors enables domestic agents in a small
open economy to share risk with the rest of the world. Since liberalizations alter the set
of non-diversifiable risks for the representative investor, stock prices should move in line
with the change in systematic risk.
It is important to understand whether stock prices respond to changes in
systematic risk, because stock prices provide public signals of real investment
opportunities (Fischer and Merton, 1984; Morck, 2000; Stulz, 1999a; Tobin and
Brainard, 1977; Summers, 1985). If liberalization decreases the riskiness of a firm, then,
all else equal, its stock price should increase. This price increase signals to managers that
they can increase shareholder welfare by investing in physical capital. On the other hand,
if liberalizations are associated with stock price increases that are unrelated to changes in
risk, then the optimal investment response is less clear (Blanchard, Rhee and Summers,
1993; Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1990). Therefore, an empirical analysis of whether
1

stock prices move in line with changes in systematic risk also provides a first step toward
understanding whether physical investment is efficiently reallocated when barriers to
capital movements are removed.
This paper focuses on an experiment in which the level of systematic risk changes
unexpectedly and examines whether expected returns move in a direction that is
consistent with the theory. Specifically, firm-level, cross-country data are used to
evaluate whether the stock price revaluations that occur when emerging economies open
their stock markets to foreign investors are driven by changes in risk. The capital asset
pricing model (CAPM) predicts that two effects will drive the stock price revaluation of
each publicly traded firm within a given country (Stulz, 1999a, b, c). The first effect is
common to all firms: a fall in the risk-free rate as the country moves from financial
autarky to financial integration with the rest of the world (Lucas, 1990). The second
effect is specific to any given firm. The greater the covariance of a firm’s stock return
with the local market relative to the covariance of its returns with the world market, the
larger the firm-specific component of that firm’s stock price revaluation.
When countries liberalize their stock markets, some publicly listed firms become
eligible for foreign ownership (investible firms), while others remain off limits (non-
investible firms). This investible/non-investible aspect of the data generates two testable
implications of the theory. First, take two firms that are identical except that one is
investible and the other is non-investible. Theory predicts that the revaluation effect for
the investible firm should be more strongly related to its covariance structure of returns
than in the case of the non-investible firm. Second, the fall in the risk-free rate effect is a
common shock to all firms in the economy. Therefore, this effect should be the same
2