NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ARE FINANCIAL ASSETS PRICED LOCALLY OR GLOBALLY?
G. Andrew Karolyi
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 8994
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8994
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2002
Prepared for the Handbook of the Economics of Finance, George Constantinides, Milton Harris, and René
M. Stulz, eds., North-Holland. We are grateful to Dong Lee and Boyce Watkins for research assistance, and
to Michael Adler, Kee-Hong Bae, Warren Bailey, Soehnke Bartram, Laura Bottazzi, Magnus Dahlquist,
Craig Doidge, Cheol Eun, Vihang Errunza, Jeff Frankel, Thomas Gehrig, John Griffin, Cam Harvey, Mervyn
King, Paul O’Connell, Sergio Schmukler, Ravi Schukla, Enrique Sentana, Bruno Solnik, Christof Stahel,
Lars Svensson, Linda Tesar, Frank Warnock, and Simon Wheatley for comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by G. Andrew Karolyi and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Are Financial Assets Priced Locally or Globally?
G. Andrew Karolyi and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 8994
June 2002
JEL No. G11, G12, G15
ABSTRACT
We review the international finance literature to assess the extent to which international factors
affect financial asset demands and prices. International asset pricing models with mean-variance investors
predict that an asset’s risk premium depends on its covariance with the world market portfolio and,
possibly, with exchange rate changes. The existing empirical evidence shows that a country’s risk
premium depends on its covariance with the world market portfolio and that there is some evidence that
exchange rate risk affects expected returns. However, the theoretical asset pricing literature relying on
mean-variance optimizing investors fails in explaining the portfolio holdings of investors, equity flows,
and the time-varying properties of correlations across countries. The home bias has the effect of
increasing local influences on asset prices, while equity flows and cross-country correlations increase
global influences on asset prices.
G. Andrew Karolyi René M. Stulz
Fisher College of Business Fisher College of Business
Ohio State University Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue 2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144 Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz_1@cob.osu.edu

1. Introduction
Over the last forty years, financial markets throughout the world have steadily become more
open to foreign investors. Yet, most academic research on portfolio choice and asset pricing
focuses only on local factors when investigating the determinants of portfolio choice and of
expected returns on risky assets. For instance, a vast literature looks at the relation between the
U.S. risk premium and the volatility of the U.S. stock market even though in global markets the
U.S. risk premium ought to depend at least on the relation between U.S. stocks, a global market
portfolio, and possibly exchange rates. In this paper, we examine the lessons from the theoretical
and empirical finance literature on the extent to which global factors -- i.e., foreign stock markets
and exchange rates -- affect asset demands and prices, and on when these factors can be ignored
or have to be taken seriously.
We start this paper by examining how portfolios would be chosen and asset prices determined
in a world where financial markets are assumed to be internationally perfect. In such a world, an
asset has the same price regardless of where it is traded and no finance is local. Markets where
assets have the same price regardless of where they are traded are said to be integrated, while
markets where the price of an asset depends on where it is traded are said to be segmented. In
examining the empirical evidence on asset pricing models that assume financial markets to be
internationally integrated, a case can be made for studying the cross-section of expected returns
without regard for international influences, at least for large markets like the U.S. But, the case
for ignoring international determinants of national stock market risk premiums and how they
evolve over time has no basis.
Models with internationally perfect financial markets have severe limitations in explaining
portfolio holdings and how portfolio holdings change over time. The home bias puzzle, which
refers to the phenomenon that investors overweight the securities of their country in their
portfolio, is inconsistent with models where investors have the same information across countries
and where financial markets are assumed to be perfect. Recent research provides a wealth of
1

empirical results on how foreign investors choose their asset holdings and on their performance.
The picture that emerges from this literature is that there are systematic patterns in ownership of
foreign stocks that are hard to reconcile with models assuming perfect financial markets. The
only way to rationalize these patterns would be to argue that the gains from international
diversification are too small to make holding foreign assets worthwhile. Though there is evidence
suggesting that the gains from international diversification have become weaker over time, only
investors with extremely strong priors against the hypothesis that assets are priced in
internationally integrated markets are likely to conclude that international diversification is not
worth it. The home bias decreases the relevance of international determinants of domestic stock
prices.
The 1990s showed that cross-country equity flows are highly volatile and raised important
questions about whether and how flows affect stock prices. In 1998, net equity flows to Latin
America amounted to $1.7 billion in contrast to $27.2 billion in 1993. Yet, at the same time, net
capital flows to Latin America in 1998 were more than twice their amount in 1993. In other
words, both the amounts of net equity flows and net equity flows in proportion to total capital
flows are highly variable. Further, from 1994 to 1995, net equity flows to Latin America fell by
roughly 40% while net equity flows to East Asia increased by a bit more than 40%.1
The growing importance of capital flows in the 1990s has led to concerns about contagion.
Since national stock markets are correlated because of interdependence among countries, one
would naturally expect a shock in one country to affect other countries. Some have called this
transmission of shocks contagion, even though it has little to do with the traditional definition of
contagion in epidemiology according to which a healthy individual is made sick by a disease
transmitted in some way from a stricken individual. Contagion that makes a healthy country sick
has been a source of concern in the 1990s, leading many to believe that such irrational or non-
1 See Edison and Warnock (2001), table 1.
2