NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE MARKET PRICE OF CREDIT RISK:
AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF INTEREST RATE SWAP SPREADS
Jun Liu
Francis A. Longstaff
Ravit E. Mandell
Working Paper 8990
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8990
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2002
We are grateful for the many helpful comments and contributions of Don Chin, Qiang Dai, Robert Goldstein,
Gary Gorton, Peter Hirsch, Antti Ilmanen, Deborah Lucas, Josh Mandell, Yoshihiro Mikami, Jun Pan,
Monica Piazzesi, Walter Robinson, Pedro Santa-Clara, Janet Showers, Ken Singleton, Suresh Sundaresan,
Abraham Thomas, Rossen Valkanov, Toshiki Yotsuzuka, and seminar participants at Barclays Global
Investors, Citigroup, Greenwich Capital Markets, Invesco, Mizuho Financial Group, Simplex Asset
Management, UCLA, the 2001 Western Finance Association meetings, the 2002 American Finance
Association meetings, and the Risk Conferences on Credit Risk in London and New York. We are
particularly grateful for the comments and suggestions of the editor William Schwert and an anonymous
referee. All errors are our responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Jun Liu, Francis A. Longstaff and Ravit E. Mandell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Market Price of Credit Risk: An Empirical Analysis of Interest Rate Swap Spreads
Jun Liu, Francis A. Longstaff and Ravit E. Mandell
NBER Working Paper No. 8990
June 2002
JEL No. E4
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the market price of credit risk incorporated into one of the most important
credit spreads in the financial markets: interest rate swap spreads. Our approach consists of jointly
modeling the swap and Treasury term structures using a general five-factor affine credit framework and
estimating the parameters by maximum likelihood. We solve for the implied special financing rate for
Treasury bonds and find that the liquidity component of on-the-run bond prices can be significant. We
also find that credit premia in swap spreads are positive on average. These premia, however, vary
significantly over time and were actually negative for much of the 1990s.
Jun Liu Francis A. Longstaff Ravit E. Mandell
UCLA UCLA Salomon Smith Barney
Anderson School Anderson School
110 Westwood Plaza, Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
francis.longstaff@anderson.ucla.edu

1. INTRODUCTION
Oneofthemostfundamentalissuesinfinanceishowthemarketcompensatesinvestors
for bearing credit risk. Events such the flight to quality that led to the hedge fund
crisis of 1998 demonstrate that changes in the willingness to bear credit risk can have
dramatic effects on the financial markets. Furthermore, these events indicate that
variation in credit spreads may reflect both changes in perceived default risk and in
the relative liquidity of bonds. Understanding the risk and return tradeoffs for these
types of securities may become even more important in the future if the supply of U.S.
Treasury securities available in the market decreases.
Thispaperstudiesthemarketpriceofcreditriskincorporatedintowhatisrapidly
becoming one of the most important credit spreads in the financial markets: interest
rate swap spreads. Since swap spreads represent the difference between swap rates
and Treasury bond yields, they reflect the difference in the default risk of the financial
sector quoting Libor rates and the U.S. Treasury. In addition, swap spreads may
include a significant liquidity component if the relevant Treasury bond trades special
in the repo market. Thus, swap spreads represent an important data set for examining
howbothdefaultandliquidityrisksinfluencesecurityreturns. Theimportanceofswap
spreads derives from the dramatic recent growth in the notional amount of interest
rate swaps outstanding relative to the size of the Treasury bond market. For example,
the total amount of Treasury debt outstanding at the end of June 2001 was $5.7
trillion. In contrast, the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) estimates that the
total notional amount of interest rate swaps outstanding at the end of June 2001 was
$57.2 trillion, representing ten times the amount of Treasury debt.
Since swap spreads are fundamentally credit spreads, our approach consists of
jointlymodelingtheinterestrateswapandTreasurytermstructuresusingthereduced-
form credit framework of Duffie and Singleton (1997, 1999). To capture the rich dy-
namics of the swap and Treasury curves, we use a five-factor affine term structure
model which allows the swap spread to be correlated with the riskless rate. In ad-
dition, our specification allows market prices of risk to vary over time to reflect the
possibilitythatthewillingnessofinvestorstobearcreditandliquidityriskmaychange.
We estimate the parameters of the model by maximum likelihood. The data for the
study spans nearly the full history of the swap market. We show that both the swap
and Treasury term structures are well described by the five-factor affine model.
A number of interesting results emerge from this analysis. First, we solve for the
short-term riskless rate implied by Treasury bond prices. We find that the implied
riskless rate can differ substantially from the Treasury-bill rate and is often much
higher. This is consistent with the widespread view on Wall Street that because of
1

the extreme liquidity of Treasury bills, their yields tend to underestimate the effective
riskless rate. Since the implied short-term riskless rate could also be interpreted as
special repo rate for the on-the-run Treasury bonds in the sample, we contrast them
with repo rates for generic or general Treasury collateral.1 We find that these implied
special repo rates are slightly less than the general repo rates on average, suggesting
that the prices of the on-the-run Treasury bonds in the sample include premia for their
liquidity or specialness relative to off-the-run Treasury securities. These specialness
premia can be large in economic terms. For example, the specialness premium for the
ten-year Treasury note can be as much as 0.57 percent of its notional amount. The
estimated specialness premia match closely those implied by a sample of market term
special repo rates provided to us.
We then solve for the implied spread process. We find that this spread varies
significantly over time, but is nearly zero for an extended period during the mid to
latter 1990s. Interestingly, much of the variation in the implied credit spread is related
to the difference between the general and implied special repo rates, suggesting that
changes in the liquidity of Treasury bonds may be one of the major driving factors of
swap spreads.
Finally, weexaminetheimplicationsofthemodelforthemarketpricesofinterest-
rate and credit-related risk. Consistent with previous research, we find that there are
significant time-varying term premia embedded in Treasury bond prices. We also find
that there are significant credit premia embedded in the swap curve. On average,
these premia are positive, ranging from 0.1 basis points for a one-year horizon to 45
basis points for a ten-year horizon. These credit premia also display substantial time
variation. Surprisingly, we find evidence that credit premia were often negative during
an extended period in the 1990s. These results suggest that there have been major
changes over time in the expected returns from bearing the default and liquidity risk
inherent in interest rate swaps.
This paper complements and extends the recent paper by Duffie and Singleton
(1997) who apply a reduced-form credit modeling approach to the swap curve and
examine the properties of swap spreads. Our results support their finding that both
default-risk and liquidity components are present in swap spreads. By modeling both
the swap and Treasury curves simultaneously, however, we are also able to address
the issue of how credit risk is priced in the market, which is the primary focus of
this paper. Another related paper is He (2000) who independently uses a multi-factor
affine term structure framework similar to ours in modeling swap spreads. While He
does not estimate the parameters of his model, our empirical results provide support
for both swap spread modeling frameworks. Grinblatt (2001) models the swap spread
1In a recent paper, Duffie (1996) studies the causes and effects of special repo rates
in the Treasury repo market. See also Sundaresan (1994), Jordan and Jordan (1997),
Buraschi and Menini (2001), and Krishnamurthy (2001).
2