NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
U.S. STOCK MARKET CRASHES AND THEIR AFTERMATH:
IMPLICATIONS FOR MONETARY POLICY
Frederic S. Mishkin
Eugene N. White
Working Paper 8992
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8992
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2002
This paper is based on a paper delivered to the Asset Price Bubbles Conference, sponsored by the Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago and The World Bank on April 23, 2002. We thank Michael Bordo, Hugh Rockoff
and participants in the Columbia macro lunch for their helpful comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research, Columbia
University or Rutgers University.
© 2002 by Frederic S. Mishkin and Eugene N. White. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

U.S. Stock Market Crashes and Their Aftermath: Implications for Monetary Policy
Frederic S. Mishkin and Eugene N. White
NBER Working Paper No. 8992
June 2002
JEL No. E58, E44, N22
ABSTRACT
This paper examines fifteen historical episodes of stock market crashes and their aftermath in the
United States over the last one hundred years. Our basic conclusion from studying these episodes is that
financial instability is the key problem facing monetary policy makers and not stock market crashes, even
if they reflect the possible bursting of a bubble. With a focus on financial stability rather than the stock
market, the response of central banks to stock market fluctuations is more likely to be optimal and
maintain support for the independence of the central bank.
Frederic S. Mishkin Eugene N. White
Graduate School of Business Department of Economics
Uris Hall 619 Rutgers University
Columbia University New Brunswick, NJ 08901
New York, NY 10027 and NBER
and NBER white@economics.rutgers.edu
fsm3@columbia.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, there has been increased concern about asset price bubbles and what
monetary policymakers should do about them. For example, the stock market collapse in Japan in
the early 1990s, which is seen as the bursting of a bubble, has been followed by a decade of
stagnation. Concerns about a stock market bubble in the United States were expressed by Alan
Greenspan in his December 5, 1996 speech when he raised the possibility that the stock market was
displaying "irrational exuberance".
To understand what the implications of stock market bubbles might be for monetary policy
we pursue a historical approach. Because it is far from obvious when the stock market is
undergoing a bubble, we look at historical episodes in the United States over the last one hundred
years of major stock market crashes. Although we cannot be sure that all these crashes were
bubbles, a bursting of a bubble surely results in a stock market crash and so analyzing the aftermath
of stock market crashes can provide some clues as to the impact of a bursting bubble and what
policymakers should do about it.
The paper is organized as follows. First we describe the data and the procedures we used to
identify the stock market crashes in the United States over the last one hundred years. Then we
pursue a narrative approach to discuss what happened in the aftermath of these crashes, and then
end by drawing out the implications for monetary policy.
II. THE DATA AND CHOOSING EPISODES OF STOCK MARKET CRASHES
Whether stock market crashes may be attributed to expectations of an economic decline
or a loss of “irrational exuberance”, they are believed to have an independent effect on economic
2

activity. The shock is transmitted via the effect that a large loss in wealth has on consumer
spending and through effects on the cost of capital on investment, both of which are standard
1
channels in the monetary transmission mechanism. Because stock price movements have an
important impact on economic activity through these standard transmission mechanisms, central
banks that are trying to conduct monetary policy in an optimal manner will necessarily react to
them. However, the question arises as to whether the monetary authorities should react to stock
market fluctuations over and above that indicated by their effect on the economy through the
standard transmission mechanisms. For example, Cecchetti, Genburg, Lipsky and Wadhwani
(2000) argue that central banks should at times react to stock prices in order to stop bubbles from
2
getting out of hand. Alternatively, the monetary authorities might want to try to prop up the
stock market after a crash, by pursuing expansionary policy greater than that which would be
indicated by simply looking at the standard transmission mechanisms of monetary policy. Such
strategies might be appropriate if stock market crashes produce additional stress on the economy
by creating financial instability.
As pointed out in Mishkin (1997), financial instability may arise when shocks to the
financial system increase information asymmetries so that it can no longer do its job of channeling
funds to those with productive investment opportunities. Whether this happens depends on the
initial condition of financial and non-financial firms' balance sheets. If balance sheets are initially
strong, then a stock market crash might not increase asymmetric information substantially because
the shock from the crash will still leave them in a healthy condition. On the other hand, if balance-
sheets start out in a weakened condition, then a stock market crash will leave balance-sheets in a
precarious state, which can lead to financial instability and a sharp decline in economic activity.
1
See Mishkin (1995).
3