NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BIDDER DISCOUNTS AND TARGET PREMIA IN TAKEOVERS
Boyan Jovanovic
Serguey Braguinsky
Working Paper 9009
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9009
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2002
We thank Luis Cabral, Masako Ueda, and the Finance Lunch group at the GSB of the University of Chicago
for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Boyan Jovanovic and Serguey Braguinsky. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Bidder Discounts and Target Premia in Takeovers
Boyan Jovanovic and Serguey Braguinsky
NBER Working Paper No. 9009
June 2002
JEL No. G3
ABSTRACT
When a takeover is announced, the sum of the stock-market values of the firms involved often
falls, and the value of the acquirer almost always does. Does this mean that takeovers do not raise the
values of the firms involved? Not necessarily. We set up a model in which the equilibrium number of
takeovers is constrained efficient. Yet, upon news of a takeover, a target's price rises, the bidder's price
falls, and, most of the time the joint value of the target and acquirer also falls.
Boyan Jovanovic Serguey Braguinsky
Department of Economics The George Stigler Center
University of Chicago Walker Hall
1126 E. 59th St. University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637 Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER serguey@uchicago.edu
bjovanov@uchicago.edu

Bidder Discounts and Target Premia in Takeovers
∗
Boyan Jovanovic and Serguey Braguinsky
† ‡
June 3, 2002
Abstract
When a takeover is announced, the sum of the stock-market values of the
firms involved often falls, and the value of the acquirer almost always does.
Doesthismeanthattakeoversdonotraisethevaluesofthefirmsinvolved? Not
necessarily. We set up a model in which the equilibrium number of takeovers
is constrained efficient. Yet, upon news of a takeover, a target’s price rises,
the bidder’s price falls, and, most of the time the joint value of the target and
acquirer also falls.
1 Introduction
On news of a takeover, the share price of the target firm usually rises sharply, while
thatoftheacquiringfirmusuallyfalls. Thejointvaluemayormaynotrise. Surveying
the field, Andrade, Mitchell and Stafford (2001) report that since 1973 target premia
were20or30percent, acquirerdiscountswereminus3or4percent, andthatthejoint
value shows no clear pattern. They conclude (p. 118) that “the fact that mergers
do not seem to benefit acquirers provides a reason to worry ...[that mergers do not
raise value].” To explain such evidence (Shleifer and Vishny 2001) have assumed that
investors are irrational and (Roll 1986) has assumed that managers use takeovers
to extend their empires at the expense of the shareholder. The evidence about the
bidder discount and joint discount has been taken to imply that takeovers often just
redistribute rents from acquirers to their targets or that they even destroy rents.
We show, however, that even when investors are rational, when agency problems
are absent, and when mergers do create value, the acquirer’s value and even the joint
value of the bidder and target may fall when a takeover is announced. The bidding
firm’s value falls because its bid reveals that its internal investment opportunities are
WethankLuisCabral,MasakoUeda,andtheFinanceLunchgroupattheGSBoftheUniversity
∗
of Chicago for helpful comments.
NYU and the University of Chicago.
†
The University of Chicago and SUNY Buffalo
‡
1

poor. The target’s value rises because an acquisition signals that the target’s internal
investment opportunities are good. A takeover benefits both parties, and the number
of takeovers is, in a sense, constrained-efficient. And yet the bidder discount usually
outweighs the target premium so that the joint value drops.
We discuss other related work later on in the paper; the highlights there are
HolmesandSchmitz(1990,1995),CampaandKedia(forthcoming),Villalonga(2001),
Gort, Grabowski, and McGuckin (1985), and Myers and Majluf (1984). But first we
present the model and then discuss its robustness.
2 Model
In the model that we are about to describe, takeovers are the mechanism that moves
good projects from bad managers to good managers. At the outset firms differ in the
quality, x, of their management.1 Each firm then draws a project and the quality, z,
of projects, too, differs over firms. Some good managers end up with bad projects
and vice versa. Takeovers then serve to shift the good projects from bad managers
to good managers. A firm’s output is
xz. (1)
Thus the quality of a project, z, and the firm’s ability to implement a project, x,
are complements. Among firms, x 0 is distributed according to the cumulative
≥
distributionfunctionF (x). Projectsareeithergoodoruseless: z 0,1 . Afraction
∈ { }
λ of projects is good, and the fraction 1 λ is useless.
−
A firm cannot change the quality of its management. It can, however, acquire
another firm and manage its project. A manager can handle only one project. If a
firm (x,z) buys firm (x,z ), it then uses its own management, x, and the project,
0 0
z , of the firm that it has acquired. It drops its own, useless project, and lets go the
0
manager of the target. The output of the merged entity will be2
xz . (2)
0
Toanacquirer, then, onlythetarget’sz matters. Thedepartingmanagerreceives
0
no severance payment and does not stand in the way of the takeover as long as it
1Andrade et al (2001) and Jovanovic and Rousseau (2002) report evidence that acquisitions are
disproportionately made by high-Q firms.
2This partially reflects findings by McGuckin and Ngyen (1995) and Schoar (2000) that the
productivityofthetarget’splantsrises(inthiscasefromx tox) whilethatof theacquirer’s plants
0
falls(inthiscasefromz tozeroastheplantis‘abandoned’). Were-visitthisissueinSection4. The
mergedfirmproduces moreoutput than the combined stand-alone outputs of thetwo firms. Hence,
productivity rises after a merger. Lichtenberg and Siegel (1987) find that plants changing owners
had lower initial levels of productivity and higher subsequent productivity growth than plants that
did not change hands.
2