NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANKRUPTCY AND SMALL FIRMS’ ACCESS TO CREDIT
Jeremy Berkowitz
Michelle J. White
Working Paper 9010
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9010
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2002
We are grateful to Emily Lin for research assistance and to Patrick Bolton, Ronald Mann, Mitchell Peterson,
Rob Porter, Katherine Samolyk, John Wolken, Mark Weinstein and two referees for very helpful comments.
Earlier versions of this paper were presented at the N.B.E.R. Corporate Finance Meeting, the Federal Reserve
System Conference on Small Business Access to Capital and Credit, Washington, D.C., March 1999, and
the ASSA Meetings, Boston, January 2000. The Federal Reserve System and the N.S.F., under grant number
SBR-9617712, provided financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Jeremy Berkowitz and Michelle J. White. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Bankruptcy and Small Firms’ Access to Credit
Jeremy Berkowitz and Michelle J. White
NBER Working Paper No. 9010
June 2002
JEL No. K2, E5
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we investigate how personal bankruptcy law affects small firms’ access to credit.
When a firm is unincorporated, its debts are personal liabilities of the firm’s owner, so that lending to the
firm is legally equivalent to lending to its owner. If the firm fails, the owner has an incentive to file for
personal bankruptcy, since the firm's debts will be discharged and the owner is only obliged to use assets
above an exemption level to repay creditors. The higher the exemption level, the greater is the incentive
to file for bankruptcy. We show that supply of credit falls and demand for credit rises when
non-corporate firms are located in states with higher bankruptcy exemptions. We test the model and find
that, if small firms are located in states with unlimited rather than low homestead exemptions, they are
more likely to be denied credit, they receive smaller loans and interest rates are higher. Results for
non-corporate versus corporate firms suggest that lenders often disregard small firms’ organizational
status in making loan decisions.
Jeremy Berkowitz Michelle J. White
Department of Finance Department of Economics
C.T. Bauer College of Business University of California, San Diego
University of Houston La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
4800 Calhoun and NBER
Houston, TX 77204-6021 miwhite@ucsd.edu

Introduction
Small businesses are the primary source of new jobs in the U.S. economy. From 1990 to
1995, businesses with fewer than 500 employees accounted for 76.5 percent of net new jobs.
But small businesses have a very high turnover rate compared to large businesses. Over 13
percent of U.S. jobs in 1995 were in firms that did not exist before 1990 and over 12 percent of
2
jobs in 1990 were in firms that had ceased to exist by 1995. Despite the importance and the
complexity of small business as a contributor to the U.S. economy, there has been surprisingly
little academic research on the economic environment faced by small business owners or the
effects of policy variables on small business success.
In this paper, we investigate how personal bankruptcy law affects small firms’ access to
credit. It is well known that the U.S. has separate bankruptcy procedures for individuals versus
corporations. What is less well known is that personal bankruptcy procedures also apply to small
firms. When a firm is non-corporate, its debts are personal liabilities of the firm’s owner, so that
lending to the firm is legally equivalent to lending to its owner. If the firm fails, the owner can
file for bankruptcy and his/her business and unsecured personal debts will be discharged. When
a firm is a corporation, limited liability implies that the owner is not legally responsible for the
firm’s debts. However, lenders to small corporations often require that the owner guarantee the
loan and may also require that the owner give the lender a second mortgage on his/her house.
This wipes out the owner’s limited liability for purposes of the particular loan and makes small
corporate firms into corporate/non-corporate hybrids. Thus personal bankruptcy law applies to
3
non-corporate firms and may also apply to small corporate firms.
We test whether variation in personal bankruptcy exemptions across U.S. states affects
small firms’ access to credit, using the 1993 National Survey of Small Business Finance
(NSSBF). We find that small businesses are more likely to be denied credit if they are located in
states with high rather than low homestead exemptions and that, if they receive loans, the loans
are smaller and interest rates are higher. We also find that bankruptcy exemption levels affect
2
See U.S. Small Business Administration (1998).
3
Sullivan, Warren and Westbrook (1989) surveyed a sample of individuals who filed for bankruptcy during the
1980’s and estimated that around 20% had debts from a failed business. This is nearly double the proportion of all
U.S. households that has self-employment income.
2

both non-corporate and corporate firms, suggesting that lenders often ignore small business’
organizational status in making their loan decisions.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. After a brief literature review, section
2 discusses personal bankruptcy law. Section 3 discusses a simple model of small business credit
markets. Section 4 presents the empirical results and Section 5 concludes.
1. Literature Review
We know of only one article that examines the effect of personal bankruptcy law on
business credit markets. Scott and Smith (1986) examined the effect of the new U.S. Bankruptcy
Code, adopted in 1978, on business credit markets. They argued that adoption of the Code
caused the cost of business loans to increase and that lenders raised interest rates in response.
They found support for this hypothesis in their empirical work. However their study examined
only the net effect on interest rates of many changes adopted simultaneously as part of the 1978
Code, all of which applied uniformly over the U.S. Our study, in contrast, uses cross-section
variation in bankruptcy exemption levels across U.S. states to examine whether exemption levels
affect the availability of small business credit.
On the personal bankruptcy side, Gropp, Scholz and White (1997) investigated how
varying bankruptcy exemption levels across states affect markets for non-business loans. They
found that in states with higher exemption levels, applicants were more likely to be turned down
for credit, but demand for loans increased. Overall they found that higher bankruptcy exemption
levels shift credit from households with low assets to those with high assets, since lenders are
willing to accommodate the increased demand of the latter group but not the former. Berkowitz
and Hynes (1999) and Lin and White (2001) re-examined this issue for mortgage loans.
Peterson and Rajan (1994, 1996) examine small business credit markets using earlier
versions of the NSSBF. They are mainly concerned with examining the effects of long term
relationships between firms and banks and the effects of concentration in local banking markets
on interest rates and availability of business credit. More recent research on banking
relationships, using a later version of the NSSBF, includes Cole (1998) and Cole, Goldberg, and
L. White (1999). Cavalluzzo, Cavalluzzo, and Wolken (1999) examine patterns of race
3