NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE BUSH TAX CUT AND NATIONAL SAVING
Alan J. Auerbach
Working Paper 9012
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9012
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2002
This paper was prepared for the May, 2002, Spring Symposium of the National Tax Association in
Washington DC. I am extremely grateful to Dan Feenberg for producing and helping to interpret marginal
tax rate estimates from the NBER TAXSIM model and to Bill Gale, Kevin Hassett, Kent Smetters, and
participants in the Canadian Public Economics Study Group for comments on previous drafts. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2002 by Alan J. Auerbach. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Bush Tax Cut and National Saving
Alan J. Auerbach
NBER Working Paper No. 9012
June 2002
JEL No. E62, D91
ABSTRACT
Following through on pledges made during his election campaign, President Bush proposed and
Congress passed a substantial tax cut in 2001, the Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act
(EGTRRA). Much has been written about the size of the tax cut, its impact on the federal budget, its
distributional consequences, and its short-run macroeconomic impact. There has been less focus on
EGTRRA’s incentive effects; one of the most important potential behavioral effects is on saving.
To analyze the behavioral effects of the Bush tax cut on saving and other macroeconomic
variables, I use the Auerbach-Kotlikoff (1987) model in conjunction with the NBER’s TAXSIM model.
An interesting by-product of this analysis is the “dynamic scoring” of the tax cut – the estimated feedback
effects of behavior on revenue. By comparing the revenue losses generated by the model with those that
would occur without any behavioral response, one can estimate how much of the static revenue loss
would be recouped by expanded economic activity. The simulations suggest that dynamic scoring has
a significant impact on estimated revenue losses, but that the tax cut’s impact on national saving is still
negative in the long run.
Alan J. Auerbach
Department of Economics
University of California
549 Evans Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
auerbach@econ.berkeley.edu

INTRODUCTION
Following through on pledges made during his election campaign, President Bush
proposed and Congress passed for his signature a substantial tax cut in 2001, forever linked to
the unwieldy acronym EGTRRA (the Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act).
Much has been written about the size of the tax cut, its impact on the federal budget, and its
distributional consequences. There has also been considerable debate over the politics and
economics of the tax cut’s “unfinished business.” These include, in particular, the growing
problem of the Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT), which was exacerbated by EGTRRA’s
reduction in ordinary income tax burdens, and the tax cut’s “sunset” after 2010. The tax cut’s
passage has also prompted a debate about its short-run macroeconomic consequences, with
respect to both its timing and whether its “back-loaded” structure undercut its ability to spur
economic activity during the recent economic downturn.
Throughout this debate, there has been less focus on EGTRRA’s incentive effects. This
lack of attention might be surprising, given that the lion’s share of the projected revenue losses
come from reductions in statutory marginal tax rates and through other provisions (such as the
phasing out of the estate tax) that would be expected to influence behavioral incentives. The
focus on other issues may relate to the complexity of the legislation, the various phase-ins and
phase-outs, and the difficulty of modeling the simultaneous effects of such a large number of
provisions. Yet, an important underlying motivation for many in pursuing this tax cut was the
notion that lower taxes can spur private activity and thereby make the economy more productive.
It seems, then, that efforts to evaluate the tax cut’s incentive effects are important, if challenging.
One of the most important potential behavioral effects is on saving, which affects future
productivity and living standards through capital deepening.

This paper focuses on the net national saving rate as a summary measure of the nation’s
rate of capital accumulation. The net national saving rate is the share of net output that is
consumed by neither government nor households. Unlike measures of saving based on the
behavior of the private sector or households alone, the net national saving rate accounts for
government saving and therefore is a comprehensive measure of the share of output put aside by
the economy as a whole for capital accumulation. This inclusion of government saving is
especially important in analyzing policies, such as tax cuts, under which resources are being
shifted from government to the private sector, because private and personal saving rates may rise
even as national saving falls.
To analyze the behavioral effects of the Bush tax cut, I use the Auerbach-Kotlikoff (1987,
hereafter AK) model, a dynamic general equilibrium simulation model that incorporates the
behavior of firms, government and forward-looking households. The AK model has been used
extensively over the years to evaluate fundamental tax reforms, such as replacing the federal
income tax with a consumption tax, but it is also capable of measuring the effects of more
incremental changes in the tax system like those adopted in 2001.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section describes the major
provisions of EGTRRA that will be evaluated, indicating their impact on marginal tax rates and
their potential effects on behavior. The following section describes the AK model and how the
model is used to study the effects of the tax cut. The remainder of the paper presents simulation
results of the effects of the tax cut on saving and output under a variety of assumptions. The
simulations suggest that the Bush tax cut may increase saving in the short run, depending on
assumptions, and that it is likely to increase output in the short run, due to its additional salutary
effects on labor supply. In the longer run, though, saving and output are likely to fall, once the
2