NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SALES AND CONSUMER INVENTORY
Igal Hendel
Aviv Nevo
Working Paper 9048
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9048
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2002
We wish to thank David Bell for the data, Iain Cockburn, Ken Hendricks, Chad Jones, John Kennan, Ariel
Pakes, Rob Porter, Joel Waldfogel and seminar participants in several seminars for comments and
suggestions. The second author wishes to thank the Center for the Study of Industrial Organization at
Northwestern University, for hospitality and support, and gratefully acknowledges support from the NSF
(SES-0093967). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Igal Hendel and Aviv Nevo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Sales and Consumer Inventory
Igal Hendel and Aviv Nevo
NBER Working Paper No. 9048
July 2002
JEL No. L0, L4, D1, D4
ABSTRACT
Temporary price reductions (sales) are common for many goods and naturally result in large
increase in the quantity sold. We explore whether the data support the hypothesis that these increases are,
at least partly, due to dynamic consumer behavior: at low prices consumers stockpile for future
consumption. This effect, if present, renders standard static demand estimates misleading, which has
broad economic implications. We construct a dynamic model of consumer choice, use it to derive testable
predictions and test these predictions using two years of scanner data on the purchasing behavior of a
panel of households. The results support the existence of household stockpiling behavior and suggest that
static demand estimates, which neglect dynamics, may overestimate price sensitiveness by up to a factor
of 2 to 6.
Igal Hendel Aviv Nevo
Department of Economics Department of Economics
Social Science Building University of California
University of Wisconsin 549 Evans Hall #3880
1180 Observatory Drive Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
Madison, WI 53706-1393 and NBER
and NBER nevo@econ.berkeley.edu
igal@ssc.wisc.edu

1. Introduction
For many non-durable consumer products prices tend to be at a modal level with occasional
short-lived price reductions, namely, sales. Unsurprisingly, during sales the quantity sold is higher.
Price reductions may have two effects on quantity bought: first, a consumption effect if consumption
is price sensitive, second, a stockpiling effect if dynamic considerations lead consumers to
accumulate inventory for future consumption. For example, in our sample the quantity of laundry
detergents sold is 4.7 times higher during sales than during non-sale periods (provided there was no
sale the previous week). Instead if there was a sale in the previous week, then the quantity sold is
only 2.0 times higher. This pattern suggests not only that demand increases during sales, but that
demand accumulates between sales. These effects, which have been documented in the economics
and marketing literature (see Section 1.1), are consistent with stockpiling. We want to analyze what
is behind these patterns of demand. Do consumers stockpile? Does stockpiling explain the observed
demand accumulation ? Is the observed behavior consistent with dynamic forward looking behavior?
In order to address these questions we derive and test the implications of a consumer inventory
model.
There are several reasons to study and quantify consumers’ stockpiling behavior. First,
suppose the data available for demand estimation presents frequent price reductions (as is the case
with scanner data). In principle, the presence of frequent sales is a blessing for demand estimation,
as they provide price variability needed to identify price sensitivities. However, when the good in
question is storable, there is a distinction between the short run and long run reactions to a price
change. Standard static demand estimation would capture short run reactions to prices, which reflect
both the consumption and stockpiling effects. In contrast, for most demand applications (e.g., merger
analysis or computation of welfare gains from introduction of new goods) we want to measure long
run responses.
Second, detailed data, such as the household-level sample we describe below, present an
opportunity to study whether a dynamic model of forward looking agents fits household behavior.
The pronounced price changes, observed in some of the products we study, create incentives for
2

consumers to stockpile. Our analysis will focus on grocery products, in particular, laundry detergents,
yogurt and soft-drinks. From our data we can compute the potential gains from dynamic behavior.
One such measure is given by comparing the actual amount paid by the household to what they
would have paid if the price was drawn at random from the distribution of prices for the same
product at the same location over time. This is a lower bound on the potential gross gains from
optimizing behavior. In our data the average household pays 12.7 percent less than if they were to
buy the exact same bundle at the average price for each product.2 Some households save little, i.e.,
they are essentially drawing prices at random, while others save more (the 90th percentile save 23
percent). Assuming savings in these 24 categories represent saving in groceries in general, the total
amount saved by the average household, over two years in the stores we observe, is 500 dollars (with
10th and 90th percentiles of 150 and 860 dollars, respectively). Hence, the price movements provide
incentives for storage and dynamic behavior.
Third, consumer stockpiling has implications for how sales should be treated in the consumer
price index. If consumers stockpile, then ignoring the fact that consumers can substitute over time
will yield a bias similar to the bias generated by ignoring substitution between goods as relative
prices change (Feenstra and Shapiro, 2001).
A final motivation to study stockpiling behavior, is to understand sellers' incentives when
products are storable. Although this paper does not answer this question, our findings provide some
guidance on how to model the problem.3
If we observed the consumers’ inventories then determining whether consumers stockpile
in response to price movements would be straightforward. For instance, we could test if after a sale
end-of-period inventories are higher. However, consumption and therefore inventory, is
unobservable. We could make an assumption about consumption, for example, that it is constant.
2
This is for the 24 products we have in our data set. For the households we observe these products account
for 22 percent of their total grocery expenditure.
3
In ongoing work we study the behavior of a storable good monopolist. Most of the literature on sales is based
on the Sobel (1984, 1991) model, which is a model of durable goods. Preliminary results show the main forces at play
are quite different when the good is instead storable.
3