NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PRICING CURRENCY RISK:
FACTS AND PUZZLES FROM CURRENCY BOARDS
Sergio L. Schmukler
Luis Servén
Working Paper 9047
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9047
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2002
We are grateful to Gustavo Cañonero, Stijn Claessens, James Conklin, Sebastian Edwards, Chang Hsieh,
Marcio Garcia, Michael Kumhof, Eduardo Levy Yeyati, John Merrick, Maury Obstfeld, Roberto Rigobon,
and David Sekiguchi for their valuable comments and suggestions. We also benefited from feedback received
at presentations held at the NBER Inter-American Seminar on Economics in Cambridge, the Latin American
meetings of the Econometric Society in Buenos Aires, the LACEA meetings in Montevideo, and the World
Bank/IMF Joint Research Seminar. For excellent research assistance, we are particularly grateful to Leonor
Coutinho Gouveia. We also thank Andrea Bubula, Tatiana Didier, Marina Halac, Penny Lermanometee, and
Yaye Sakho, who helped us at different stages of the project. For help in obtaining data we thank Alberto
Ades, Gustavo Cañonero, Starla Cohen, Kevin Fan, Ricardo Martinez, Daniel Oks, and Daniel Tenengauzer.
For financial support we thank the World Bank Latin American Regional Studies Program, PREM anchor
unit, and the Research Support Budget. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research or The World Bank.
© 2002 by Sergio L. Schmukler and Luis Servén. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Pricing Currency Risk: Facts and Puzzles from Currency Boards
Sergio L. Schmukler and Luis Servén
NBER Working Paper No. 9047
July 2002
JEL No. F31, F36, G12, G15
ABSTRACT
Hard pegs, such as currency boards, intend to reduce or even eliminate currency risk. This paper
investigates the patterns and determinants of the currency risk premium in two currency boards –
Argentina and Hong Kong. Despite the presumed rigidity of currency boards, the currency premium is
almost always positive and at times very large. Its term structure is usually upward sloping, but flattens
out or even becomes inverted at times of turbulence. Currency premia differ across markets. The forward
discount typically exceeds the currency premium derived from interbank rates, particularly during crisis
times. The large magnitude of these cross-market differences can be the consequence of unexploited
arbitrage opportunities, market segmentation, or other risks embedded in typical measures of currency
risk. The premium and its term structure depend on domestic and global factors, related to devaluation
expectations and risk perceptions.
Sergio L. Schmukler Luis Servén
World Bank World Bank
1818 H Street NW 1818 H Street NW
Washington, DC 20433 Washington, DC 20433
Tel: 202-458-4167 Tel: 202-473-7451
Fax: 202-522-3518 Fax: 202-522-3518
sschmukler@worldbank.org lserven@worldbank.org
http://www.worldbank.org/research/ http://www.worldbank.org/research/
bios/schmukler.htm bios/lserven.htm

I. Introduction
The differential between local and international interest rates is a key variable for
emerging countries. These countries typically face positive interest rate differentials (or
spreads) – i.e., a higher cost of capital than developed economies. Moreover, interest rate
differentials for emerging markets vary substantially over time. In particular, they often
rise abruptly during periods of local and foreign financial turmoil. Lower spreads
typically translate into lower borrowing costs for both the public and private sector and,
other things equal, result in higher growth. For this reason, the fluctuations in interest rate
differentials have been recently at the center of academic debate and have been a major
concern for policy makers.
Conceptually, the total differential between interest rates on domestic-currency
loans issued by local borrowers and those on foreign-currency loans issued by foreign
borrowers reflects both country and currency premia. The former refers to the gap
between the borrowing costs of domestic and foreign (sovereign) borrowers in a common
currency. The latter, on which this paper focuses, refers to the gap between the domestic-
currency and foreign-currency interest rates faced by a given borrower; it is often called
“currency risk premium” and, less precisely but more popularly, currency risk.
Of the two components of interest rate differentials, the country risk premium has
been intensively studied, perhaps due to the availability of daily cross-country data.
Indexes of secondary-market yield spreads on emerging market bonds (EMBIs) are
compiled by JP Morgan. Data on primary issues also exist. The literature has studied the
behavior of yield spreads including their time pattern, determinants, and cross-country
1

comovement.1 Some papers also study the country risk premium in relation to the
currency premium.2
The other component of interest rate differentials, the currency premium, has
received less direct empirical attention in the context of emerging economies. The present
study relates directly to at least four different strands of the international finance
literature: the debate on the choice of exchange rate regime, the assessment of economic
performance under currency boards, the term structure of currency premia, and covered
interest parity.
First, the debate on the choice of exchange rate regime pays particular attention to
the currency premium. Participants in this debate, which intensified during the currency
crises of the 1990s, have claimed that countries should opt for either hard pegs or floating
regimes. Proponents of hard pegs argue that, other things equal, the adoption of a rigid
parity – such as a currency board – should reduce the currency premium, even
eliminating it entirely if the peg is viewed as irrevocable. As a consequence, hard pegs
would reduce the level of domestic interest rates.3 Credible hard pegs would also reduce
the probability of currency attacks and contagion effects. But as Edwards (2000)
suggests, the currency premium can still be significantly positive even in hard pegs, if
they are not fully credible.
1
See, for example, Edwards (1984, 1986), Favero, Giavazzi, and Spaventa (1997), Eichengreen and Mody
(1998), Kamin and von Kleist (1999), Mauro, Sussman, and Yafeh (2002), Kaminsky and Schmukler
(2001), Merrick (2001), and Rigobon (2002).
2
See Domowitz, Glen, and Madhavan (1998), Sturzenegger and Powell (2000), Garcia and Didier (2001),
and Druck, Moron, and Stein (2001).
3
Note, however, that even if the currency premium declines, the country premium could rise if adopting a
rigid peg is perceived to weaken the country’s solvency. In such case, the net effect on the level of
borrowing costs would be ambiguous.
2