NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MORAL HAZARD IN REINSURANCE MARKETS
Neil Doherty
Kent Smetters
Working Paper 9050
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9050
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2002
We thank Richard Phillips and participants of the Catastrophe Risk Workshop at the University of
Pennsylvania, and the February, 2000 NBER Insurance Workshop for helpful comments. Helpful comments
were also received from an anonymous referee. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Neil Doherty and Kent Smetters. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Moral Hazard in Reinsurance Markets
Neil Doherty and Kent Smetters
NBER Working Paper No. 9050
July 2002
JEL No. D8, G0, L1
ABSTRACT
This paper attempts to identify moral hazard in the traditional reinsurance market. We build a
multi-period principle agent model of the reinsurance transaction from which we derive predictions on
premium design, monitoring, loss control and insurer risk retention. We then use panel data on U.S.
property liability reinsurance to test the model. The empirical results are consistent with the model’s
predictions. In particular, we find evidence for the use of loss sensitive premiums when the insurer and
reinsurer are not affiliates (i.e., not part of the same financial group), but little or no use of monitoring.
In contrast, we find evidence for the use of monitoring when the insurer and reinsurer are affiliates, where
monitoring costs are lower, but little use of price controls.
Neil Doherty Kent Smetters
Dept. of Insurance and Risk Management Dept. of Insurance and Risk Management
The Wharton School The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania University of Pennsylvania
3641 Locust Walk (CPC 3020) 3641 Locust Walk (CPC 3020)
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6218 Philadelphia, PA 19104-6218
Tel: 215-898-7652 and NBER
Fax: 215-898-0310 Tel: 215-898-9811
doherty@wharton.upenn.edu Fax: 215-898-0310
smetters@wharton.upenn.edu

I. Introduction
Insurance companies whose book of business is exposed to high risk, such as hurricane or
earthquake losses or class action product liability lawsuits, have traditionally hedged the right tail
of this exposure through reinsurance. Like primary insurance, reinsurance contracts encounter moral
hazard. It is costly for the reinsurer to monitor the underwriting activities of the primary insurer and
how the latter settles claims with its own policyholders. Consequently, reinsurance relaxes incentive
for the primary to engage in careful underwriting and loss mitigation activities. This problem can be
especially severe after a natural catastrophe where the primary insurer is overwhelmed with flood
or earthquake claims, and is able to pass on the cost of settlements to the reinsurer.
Traditional reinsurance includes price controls against moral hazard, including deductibles,
copayments, and “ex-post settling up” which is a retrospective adjustment of the premium based on
losses incurred during the policy period, known as “retrospective rating.” Less formal and longer-
term controls are also in place. Reinsurance is usually conducted as a long-term relationship.
Experience bonds parties together and increases the cost of opportunistic behavior. The primary
insurer gets continuity of access to reinsurance while the reinsurer can use the relationship’s duration
to increase the effectiveness of its monitoring, and can use experience to set future prices and terms.1
Controlling moral hazard via long-term relationships can be costly. Froot and O’Connell
(1997) have documented the costs of catastrophe reinsurance and show that the ratio of premium to
expected loss increases dramatically at higher layers of coverage (i.e. for reinsurance in the right
hand tail of the loss distribution). Since moral hazard will increase in intensity the greater the level
of reinsurance, this pricing pattern is quite consistent with moral hazard. Moreover, the shear size
1See Allen and Gale (1997) for variations of the role of long term relationships in financial intermediation.
-1-

of these premium loading suggests that addressing moral hazard in this way is expensive.2 These
large premium loads are relevant today as both insured property and claims have increased
significantly the past few decades.3
Monitoring can also redress moral hazard.4 Williamson (1985) argued that, whereas markets
use price incentives to resolve agency conflicts between separate organizations, monitoring can be
a more efficient way to resolve conflicts within organizations where there is greater access to
information. This idea has been developed into models of vertical integration by Riordan (1990a,b)
and Cremer (1993, 1995). These papers show that for transactions within firms, where monitoring
is relatively cheap, more emphasis should be placed on monitoring and less on contractual
incentives. The opposite is true for transactions between firms where monitoring costs are higher.
In the last few years, insurers have begun to use new hedge instruments in which tail risk is
transferred directly to investors. These instruments, known as “insurance-linked securities,” include
catastrophe bonds, cat options and cat equity puts. The normal rationale for securitizing this risk,
instead of transferring it with reinsurance, is that very large losses can be absorbed much easier in
a multi-trillion dollar capital market than in a multi-billion dollar insurance market, especially as
2 Another explanation for Froot and O’Connell’s result is that, since the tail is thin, the coefficient of variation
for high levels of coverage is high and therefore reinsurers are extracting an appropriate risk premium. But this
explanation does not fit well with the portfolio theory. If this risk is of low beta as they show, then why the risk premium?
To support this explanation, one would need to show, not that the coefficient of variation was high for high layers
contracts, but that such contracts greatly increased the portfolio risk of the reinsurer.
3 Until the late 1980s, insured catastrophic losses were typically not very large. The only category five hurricane
to hit the United States in the 20th century was hurricane Camille in August, 1969. It scored a 6.3 “PCS Index Settlement
Value” as calculated by the Chicago Board of Trade (1995) where Property Claim Services cat options began trading
in 1994. This index corresponds to $630 million in insured losses in 1994 dollars. The actual insured losses were even
less than this amount but the CBOT, in creating a simulated index value for historical losses, adjusted the number upward
for population growth between 1969 and 1994. In sharp contrast, hurricane Andrew of August 1992, scored a significant
173.2, or $17.32 billion in 1994 dollars. Earthquake losses in previous years have also increased as more residential and
commercial development takes place in higher-risk land as the population size grows.
4See Bond and Crocker (1997) and Crocker and Morgan (1998) for insurance models.
-2-