NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
IDENTIFYING THE EFFICACY OF CENTRAL BANK INTERVENTIONS:
THE AUSTRALIAN CASE
Jonathan Kearns
Roberto Rigobon
Working Paper 9062
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9062
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2002
The authors would like to thank participants at the MIT macroeconomics lunch, and Mathew Boge of the
Reserve Bank of Australia for providing the data. The first author thanks the Reserve Bank of Australia for
funding. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research or the Reserve Bank of Australia.
© 2002 by Jonathan Kearns and Roberto Rigobon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Identifying the Efficacy of Central Bank Interventions: The Australian Case
Jonathan Kearns and Roberto Rigobon
NBER Working Paper No. 9062
July 2002
JEL No. F30
ABSTRACT
The endogeneity of exchange rates and intervention has long plagued studies of the effectiveness
of central banks actions in foreign exchange markets. Researchers have either excluded contemporaneous
intervention, so that their explanators are predetermined, or obtained a small, and typically incorrectly
signed, coefficient on contemporaneous intervention. Failing to account for the endogeneity, when central
banks lean against the wind and trade strategically, will likely result in a large downward bias to the
coefficient on contemporaneous intervention -- explaining the negative coefficient frequently obtained.
We use an alternative identification assumption, a change in Reserve Bank of Australia
intervention policy, that allows us to estimate, using simulated GMM, a model that includes the
contemporaneous impact of intervention. There are three main results. Our point estimates suggest that
central bank intervention has a economically significant contemporaneous effect. A $US100m purchase
of the domestic currency will appreciate the exchange rate by 1.35 to 1.81 per cent. This estimate is
remarkably similar to the calibration conducted by Dominguez and Frankel (1993), who themselves noted
their estimate was larger than previous empirical findings. Secondly, the vast majority of the effect of an
intervention on the exchange rate is found to occur during the day in which it is conducted, with only a
smaller impact on subsequent days. Finally, we confirm findings that Australian central bank intervention
policy can be characterized by leaning aginst the wind.
Jonathan Kearns Roberto Rigobon
MIT, E52-243d MIT, E52-434
50 Memorial Drive 50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142 Cambridge, MA 02142
jkearns@mit.edu and NBER
rigobon@mit.edu

1 Introduction
Since the introduction of floating exchange rates the use, and efficacy, of intervention in the foreign exchange
markethasbeenacontroversialtopic. Mostcentralbankshaveattimesengagedinfrequentintervention,andat
other timesfollowedamorelaissezfaire approach totheexchangerate.1 Nodoubt theobserved disparaterange
of policies between central banks, and within individual central banks over time, can in part be attributed to
the lack of accord on the effectiveness and consequences of central bank intervention. Two key questions remain
unresolved: how effective is foreign exchange intervention, and, if it is effective, through which channel does it
act?
Acriticalbarriertoansweringthesequestionshasbeenovercomingtheendogeneityofchangesintheexchange
rate and intervention. The central hypothesis is that intervention changes the exchange rate. But at the same
time, the decision to intervene is not independent of the movements in the exchange rate. Moreover, even once
a central bank has decided to intervene, the quantity of currency it buys or sells will typically depend on the
response of the exchange rate to its trades.
The literature has typically dealt with the simultaneous equations problem by assuming that the contempo-
raneous decision of the central bank is independent of the current innovations to the exchange rate. This is a
strongassumption. Forexample,itassumesthatthecentralbankdoesnotchangeitssellingor buyingbehavior
by assessing the impact its actions have had on the exchange rate. On the other hand, there is strong evidence
in stock markets that big players indeed act strategically when they are unwinding large positions. Therefore,
why should we expect the same behavior is not optimal for a central bank?
In this paper we use an alternative identification method to solve the problem of simultaneous equations.
We use daily Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) interventions data over the period 1986 to 1993, which contains
a dramatic change in intervention policy that we use for identification. We show that the estimates we obtain
have the correct sign and are significantly larger than those found with more standard methods. This is exactly
the direction we would have expected if endogenous variables is an important source of the bias. Further, the
vast majority of the effect of an intervention on the exchange rate is found to occur during the day in which it
is conducted with a smaller impact on subsequent days. This explains why small effects are usually found when
lag values are used in the typical OLS specifications. The major contribution of this paper is to provide some
evidenceonthecontemporaneouseffectivenessofintervention. Although,ourmethodologydoesnotindicatethe
channels through which intervention operates, it provides an improvement from previous estimates obtained in
the literature.
We concentrate our analysis on sterilized interventions, but we do not distinguish between secret and public
interventions. While undoubtedly this is an important distinction, most and in particular the largest, interven-
tionsarepublic. Certainly,futureresearchshouldreconsiderthisissue. Inthispaperthefocusofourattentionis
the estimationproblem. Indeed, wethinkthatthesimultaneousequationsproblemisthe crucial aspect limiting
our understanding of how effective policy is.
The identification assumption we use is based on the fact that the RBA (in 1991) decided to change their
policy regarding foreign exchange rate interventions. We interpret this shift in policy as exogenous, which is
1Schwartz (2000)suggests thatintervention is a dying practice despite the continued use of active intervention by the ECB and
Bank of Japan. However, the 18 central banks that responded to a survey reported in Neely (2001) believe it affects the exchange
rate. Traders’survey responses in CheungandWong (2000)indicate they also believe intervention has aneffectonexchange rates.
1

an important ingredient in our solution to the problem. Other countries have also changed “exogenously” their
policies,buttypicallycentralbanksendogenouslyrespondtotheconditionsinthemarket. Again,futureresearch
should endogenize the policy decision and extend the present analysis to deal with more general framework.
However, as is argued in the text below it is the case that the Australian central bank decision to change their
method of intervention is unrelated to other macro events.
Thepaper proceedsasfollows. Thereis abrief discussion, in Section II,of central bank intervention and the
associated literature. A description of the data and discussion of RBA intervention follow this, in Section III.
Section IV presents the estimation method used in this study. The results are presented in Section V, followed
by conclusions.
2 Review of the literature on Central bank intervention.
Thissectionbrieflyreviewstheliteratureoncentralbankintervention,focussingonthesimultaneousrelationship
between, and temporal behavior of, exchange rate returns and intervention. For more general and extensive
reviews see Sarno and Taylor (2001), Dominguez and Frankel (1993b) and Edison (1993).(Sarno and Taylor,
2001)(Edison, 1993)
Empirical studies, and statementsby central banks, suggest that central banksintervene in foreign exchange
markets to slow or correct excessive trends in the exchange rate, i.e. they “lean against the wind”, and to calm
disorderly markets (for example Lewis (1995b) and Baillie and Osterberg (1997b)).2 The survey responses of
central banks in Neely (2001) suggest that these factors continue to drive the decision to intervene. A recent
studyforAustraliabyKimandSheen(2000)hassimilarconclusions. Importantly,whencentralbanksintervene
theytradeinblocksthroughouttheday. AsNeely(2001)reports,theirsubsequenttradesareconditionalonthe
response of the exchange rate to their earlier trades.
Two main channels have been suggested through which sterilized intervention can affect the level of the
exchange rate: the portfolio balance channel and the signalling channel. Intervention changes the exchange rate
through the portfolio balance channel if government bonds are imperfect substitutes, and so the change in the
reserve asset holdings of a central bank results in private investors revaluing their portfolios of domestic and
foreign assets.3 Since interventions are small relative to the stock of outstanding bonds most authors, including
Rogoff (1984), have expressed skepticism that intervention could have a large impact through the portfolio
balance channel. Not surprisingly, many studies do not find evidence of this channel, and those that do, such as
Dominguez and Frankel (1993b), Evans and Lyons (2001) and Ghosh (1992), suggest that it is weak.4
Mussa (1981) suggested that if the central bank uses foreign exchange interventions to credibly indicate
intendedchangesinmonetarypolicy,theresultingrevaluingoftheexchangeratecanbedescribedasthesignaling
channel. The impact of intervention through the signaling channel has often been found to be substantially
stronger than through the portfolio balance channel (for example Dominguez and Frankel (1993b)). For the
signallingchanneltobeanongoingtransmissionmechanismcentralbanksshouldbeseentofollowinterventions
2Otherreasonsoccasionallycitedbycentralbanksincludetotargetparticularexchangerates,ortosupportothercentralbanks.
We do not explicitly consider the impact of intervention on conditional exchange rate volatility, see Rogers and Siklos (2001) for
Australia ormore generally Dominguez (1998)and Bonser-Nealand Tanner(1996).
3Theportfoliobalancechannelrequiresnotonlythatbondsareimperfectsubstitutes,butalsothefailureofRicardianequivalence.
4DominguezandFrankel(1993c)andEvansandLyons(2001)bothassesstheportfoliobalancechannelforunsterilizedintervention
and so provide upperbound estimatesfortheimpactofsterilizedintervention.
2