NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DISTANCE TO FRONTIER, SELECTION, AND ECONOMIC GROWTH
Daron Acemoglu
Philippe Aghion
Fabrizio Zilibotti
Working Paper 9066
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9066
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2002
We thank seminar participants at Birkbeck College, Canadian Institute of Advanced Research, DELTA, MIT,
SITE Stockholm, Universite de Toulouse, Universita Bocconi, and Mathias Dewatripont, Byeongju Jeong
and Abhijit Banerjee for helpful comments, and Mauricio Prado for research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2002 by Daron Acemoglu, Philippe Aghion and Fabrizio Zilibotti. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Distance to Frontier, Selection, and Economic Growth
Daron Acemoglu, Philippe Aghion and Fabrizio Zilibotti
NBER Working Paper No. 9066
July 2002
JEL No. O31, O33, O38, O40, L16
ABSTRACT
We analyze an economy where managers engage both in the adaptation of technologies from the
world frontier and in innovation activities. The selection of high-skill managers is more important for
innovation activities. As the economy approaches the technology frontier, selection becomes more
important. As a result, countires at early stages of development pursue an investment-based strategy, with
long term relationships, high average size and age of firms, large average investments, but little selection.
Closer to the world technology frontier, there is a switch to innovation-based strategy with short-term
relationships, younger firms, less investment and better selection of managers. We show that relatively
backward economies may switch out of the investment-based strategy too soon, so certain economic
institutions and policies, such as limits on product market competition or investment subsidies, that
encourage the investment-based strategy may be beneficial. However, societies that cannot switch out
of the investment-based strategy fail to converge to the world technology frontier. Non-convergence traps
are more likely when policies and institutions are endogenized, enabling beneficiaries of existing policies
to bribe politicians to maintain these policies.
Daron Acemoglu Philippe Aghion Fabrizio Zilibotti
Department of Economics Department of Economics University College London
MIT, E52-380B Harvard University Gower Street
50 Memorial Drive Littauer Center 309 London WC1E 6BT
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347 Cambridge, MA 02138 Tel: 00 44 20 7679 5852
and NBER and NBER f.zilibotti@ucl.ac.uk
daron@mit.edu p_aghion@harvard.edu

“... in a number of important historical instances industrialization processes,
when launched at length in a backward country, showed considerable differ-
ences with more advanced countries, not only with regard to the speed of
development (the rate of industrial growth) but also with regards to the pro-
ductive and organizational structures of industry... these differences in the
speed and character of industrial development were to a considerable extent
theresultofapplicationofinstitutionalinstrumentsforwhichtherewaslittle
or no counterpart in an established industrial country.”
Gerschenkron (1962, p. 7)
1 Introduction
In his famous essay, Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective, Gerschenkron
argued that relatively backward economies, such as Germany, France, Belgiumand Rus-
sia during the nineteenth century, could rapidly catch up to more advanced economies
by introducing “appropriate” economic institutions to encourage investment and tech-
nology adoption. He emphasized the role of long-term relationships between firms and
banks, of large firms and of state intervention. Underlying this view is the notion that
relatively backward economies can grow rapidly by investing in, and adopting, already
existing technologies, or by pursuing what we call an investment-based growth strategy.
If this assessment is correct, the institutions that are appropriate to such nations should
encourage investment and technology adoption, even if this comes at the expense of
various market rigidities and a relatively less competitive environment.
Although there are numerous cases in Africa, the Caribbean, Central America and
SouthAsiawherestateinvolvementintheeconomyhasbeendisastrous(e.g., Acemoglu,
Johnson and Robinson, 2001), various pieces of evidence are consistent with the notion
that rapid investment-based growth is possible with, or even sometimes encouraged by,
relatively rigid institutions and considerable government involvement. These include
the experiences of a number of European countries during the nineteenth century dis-
cussedbyGerschenkron(1962), thecorrelationbetweentariffratesandeconomicgrowth
in the nineteenth century among countries following the technological leader, Britain
(O’Rourke, 2000, but see also Irwin, 2002, for a different interpretation); the corre-
lation between protection of high-skill and high-tech industries and economic growth
in the postwar period (Nunn and Trefler, 2002); and the relatively rapid growth of
economies pursuing import-substitution and infant-industry protection policies, such as
Brazil, Mexico, Peru and Turkey, until the mid-1970s.
Perhaps the two most well-known cases of rapid investment-based growth are the
1

post-war experiences of Japan and South Korea. In Japan, the Ministry of International
Trade and Industry (MITI) played a crucial role by regulating foreign currency alloca-
tions, import licenses, andthe extent of competition, bydirecting industrial activityand
by encouraging investment by the keiretsu, the large groupings of industrial firms and
banks (e.g., Johnson, 1982, Evans, 1995, Hoshi and Kashyap, 2002). In the Korean case,
the large family-run conglomerates, the chaebol appear to have played an important
role, especially in generating large investments and rapid technological development.
The chaebol, similar to the keiretsu in Japan, received strong government support in the
form of subsidized loans, anti-union legislation and preferential treatment that sheltered
them from both internal and external competition. An additional important feature of
both the chaebol and the keiretsu was their low managerial turnover, emphasis on long-
term relationships and generally rigid structures (e.g., Wade, 1990, Vogel, 1991, Evans,
1995).
At the other extreme, we can think of the process of innovation-based growth, where
the selection of successful managers and firms, as well as a variety of other innovation-
type activities, are more important. Many view the current U.S. economy, with its
market-based financing, important role for venture capital and high rate of business
failures, and also the relatively competitive British economy of the nineteenth century
as approximating this type of innovation-based growth. Interestingly, both the perfor-
mance of economies pursuing the two different types of strategies and the views of the
economics profession on the merits of the two strategies have varied significantly over
time. While, until the mid-1970s or even the 1980s, a number of economies pursuing the
investment-based strategy were successful and many economists were enthusiastic about
this strategy, today the pendulum appears to have swung the other way.
This paper analyzes the equilibrium (and socially beneficial) choice between these
two strategies. We discuss when each arises in equilibrium, their relative efficiencies for
different stages of development, the possibility of traps and non-convergence resulting
from the choice of an incorrect strategy, and the political economy of the two strategies.
The choice between the investment-based and innovation-based strategies involves
a trade-off between investment and experience, on the one hand, and selection, on the
other. Economies can often maximize investment bychannelingmoneyto existingfirms,
andmakinguseoftheexperiencesofestablishedfirmsandmanagers. Thisisparticularly
the case in the presence of incentive problems, which are partly relaxed for existing
firms and managers because of their retained earnings, thus increasing their investment
capacity relative to newcomers. But the investment-based strategy also shelters less
2