NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INSTITUTIONAL ALLOCATION IN INITIAL PUBLIC OFFERINGS:
EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE
Reena Aggarwal
Nagpurnanand R. Prabhala
Manju Puri
Working Paper 9070
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9070
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2002
We are grateful to Rick Green (the editor) and an anonymous referee for very helpful comments. We also
thank Walid Busaba, Vojislav Maksimovic, Gordon Phillips, Bill Wilhelm, and seminar participants at
Tulane University and the 2001 Western Finance Association meetings for helpful comments. Aggarwal was
partially supported by a Steers Faculty Research Fellowship awarded by the McDonough School of Business
and by research assistance from the Capital Markets Research Center. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Reena Aggarwal, Nagpurnanand R. Prabhala and Manju Puri. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Institutional Allocation In Initial Public Offerings: Empirical Evidence
Reena Aggarwal, Nagpurnanand R. Prabhala and Manju Puri
NBER Working Paper No. 9070
July 2002
JEL No. G2, G3
ABSTRACT
We analyze institutional allocation in initial public offerings (IPOs) using a new dataset of US
offerings between 1997 and 1998. We document a positive relationship between institutional allocation
and day one IPO returns. This is partly explained by the practice of giving institutions more shares in
IPOs with strong pre-market demand, consistent with book-building theories. However, institutional
allocation also contains private information about first-day IPO returns not reflected in pre-market
demand and other public information. Our evidence supports book-building theories of IPO underpricing,
but suggests that institutional allocation in underpriced issues is in excess of that explained by book-
building alone.
Reena Aggarwal Nagpurnanand R. Prabhala Manju Puri
School of Business Smith School of Business Stanford University
Georgetown University University of Maryland Graduate School of Business
Washington, DC 20057 4427 Van Munching Hall 518 Memorial Way
aggarwal@georgetown.edu College Park, MD 20742 Stanford, CA 94505
nprabhal@rhsmith.umd.edu and NBER
mpuri@gsb.stanford.edu

It is well known that initial public offerings (IPOs) are underpriced on average.
Underpricing is a robust phenomenon that extends across equity markets in several countries
and time periods (see, e.g., Loughran, Ritter, and Rydqvist (1994)). For example, in our
sample of IPOs offered during 1997-1998, the average day one return of issues is 19.25
percent. In these offerings, the total money “left on the table” due to underpricing is a
substantial $3.5 billion.1 While the existence of these initial gains is widely known and has
been exhaustively documented, there is surprisingly little research on how these gains are
divided between different investors in IPOs.
IPO underwriters play a central role in determining the division of first day gains between
different investors. Underwriters possess substantial information about issue demand as a result of
their information gathering activities during the book-building process, and in the U.S. market,
they have considerable latitude on how IPO shares are allocated. In principle, underwriters can
favor preferred investors by allocating them more shares in “hot” issues that are expected to trade
up strongly in the aftermarket. Whether underwriters do so is the subject of an active and ongoing
debate in the academic literature and the financial press, but formal empirical evidence on such
issues remains sparse.
Articles in the recent press certainly suggest that underwriters extend favors to their
institutional clientele (see Smith and Pulliam (2001), Pulliam, Smith, and Gasparino (2000),
Pulliam and Smith (2000), and Smith and Pulliam (2000)). These articles also report that the U.S.
Attorney’s office, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), and the regulatory arm of the
National Association of Securities Dealers (NASDR) have initiated investigations into whether
investment banks allocate more shares in “hot” IPOs to favored institutional clientele, possibly in
exchange for unusually large trading commissions in subsequent trades, which could violate
NASDR rules requiring brokers and dealers to maintain standards of fair practice. Institutional
1

investors may also be granted more shares in an issue in exchange for a commitment to buy
additional shares in the aftermarket, although tying of IPO allocations to aftermarket purchases
may violate securities laws and thus concerns regulators. In addition to the investigations and the
debate in the recent financial press, the theoretical IPO literature also suggests that underwriters
may favor their institutional customers. However, the quid pro quo for such favorable treatment is
the information on IPO demand provided by such investors to underwriters, rather than short-term
trading commissions or aftermarket purchases that are the focus of current SEC investigation. It
has been suggested that the complete IPO process, including allocations practices, need to be
studied and is “an area ripe for rule-making” by the SEC (Gasparino, Schroeder, and Kranhold
(2000)).
While there has been much speculation about these aspects of the IPO process, the
available empirical evidence on these issues is limited and does little to inform the ongoing
debate. The primary obstacle to formal empirical research has been the lack of data. Regulations in
the U.S. do not mandate public disclosure of allocations followed by underwriters, and
consequently it remains a relatively opaque aspect of the IPO process. Our paper takes a step
towards filling in the gap. We contribute new empirical evidence using a new and unique dataset
of IPOs that includes information on the percentage of an issue allocated to institutional and retail
investors.
We find, not surprisingly, that institutions dominate IPO allocations, accounting for a
median of about three-quarters of shares offered in an issue. We investigate the cross-sectional
variation of the institutional allocation in IPOs, focusing on two themes. The first part of our
analysis examines whether institutions concentrate more in the better performing IPOs, while our
subsequent analysis evaluates alternative explanations for why there is a positive relationship
between institutional allocation and underpricing. We find that institutions do tend to earn greater
2