NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE HOME MARKET EFFECT AND BILATERAL TRADE PATTERNS
Gordon H. Hanson
Chong Xiang
Working Paper 9076
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9076
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2002
The authors thank Richard Baldwin,John Bound,Alan Deardorff,Robert Feenstra, David Hummels,and
seminar participants at the CEPR,the University of Michigan,and UCSD for valuable suggestions. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2002 by Gordon H. Hanson and Chong Xiang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

The Home Market Effect and Bilateral Trade Patterns
Gordon H. Hanson and Chong Xiang
NBER Working Paper No. 9076
July 2002
JEL No. F0, F1
ABSTRACT
We test for home-market effects using a difference-in-difference gravity specification. The
home-market effect is the tendency for large countries to be net exporters of goods with high transport
costs and strong scale economies. It is predicted by models of trade based on increasing returns to scale
but not by models of trade based on comparative advantage. In our estimation approach, we select pairs
of exporting countries that belong to a common preferential trade area and examine their exports of goods
with high transport costs and strong scale economies relative to their exports of goods with low transport
costs and weak scale economies. We find that home-market effects exist and that the nature of these
effects depends on industry transport costs. For industries with very high transport costs, it is national
market size that determines national exports. For industries with moderately high transport costs, it is
neighborhood market size that matters. In this case, national market size plus market size in nearby
countries determine national exports.
Gordon H. Hanson Chong Xiang
IR/PS Krannert School of Management
University of California, San Diego Purdue University
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
and NBER
gohanson@ucsd.edu

1. Introduction
Much recent theoretical work in international trade is based on increasing returns
to scale of some kind. This includes models of intra-industry trade (Krugman, 1979,
1981; Helpman, 1981), multinational firms (Helpman, 1984; Markusen, 1984), and
economic geography (Krugman, 1991; Venables, 1996). These efforts have produced
compelling explanations for why similar countries may gain from trade, why most
foreign direct investment tends to flow between rich countries, and why manufacturing
activity tends to agglomerate spatially within countries.
For purposes of empirical work, however, trade theories based on increasing
returns present a problem. Their predictions for trade flows are similar to those of
models based on comparative advantage (Helpman and Krugman, 1985; Davis, 1995).
This complicates testing trade theory (Helpman, 1999) and may account for why some
attempts to estimate the importance of increasing returns for trade have yielded mixed
1
results (Helpman, 1987; Hummels and Levinsohn, 1995; Debaere, 2001).
Recently, empirical researchers have begun to estimate the impact of increasing
returns on trade by exploiting home-market effects, as derived by Krugman (1980). The
home-market effect is the tendency for large countries to be net exporters of goods with
2
high transport costs and strong scale economies. In the presence of fixed costs, and thus
scale economies, firms prefer to concentrate global production of a good in a single
1
The observational equivalence of scale economies and comparative advantage is a problem also for
testing models of economic geography. See Ellison and Glaeser (1997) and Hanson (2001). See Evenett
and Keller (2001) for other work on trade flows, increasing returns, and comparative advantage.
2
There is debate about the robustness of the home market effect in Krugman (1980). Davis (1998) finds
that with one differentiated-good sector (with positive fixed costs), one homogeneous good sector (with
zero fixed costs), and identical sectoral transport costs the home-market effect disappears. Krugman and
Venables (1999) counter Davis’ result by showing that the home-market effect holds as long as some
homogenous goods have low transport costs or some differentiated goods have zero fixed costs. Holmes
and Stevens (2002) demonstrate further support for the generality of home-market effects.
1

location; in the presence of transport costs, it makes sense for this location to be a market
with high product demand. Goods that are subject to weak scale economies and/or low
transport costs are then produced by small economies. The home-market effect implies a
link between market size and exports that does not exist in models in which trade is based
solely on comparative advantage.
One approach to identify home-market effects uses the correlation between
industry supply and industry demand across countries or regions. In Krugman (1980),
the demand for individual goods varies across markets because of differences in
consumer preferences (e.g., German consumers prefer beer, French consumers prefer
wine), leading production of a good to concentrate in markets with high levels of
demand. Davis and Weinstein (1999, 2002) find that, for manufacturing industries in
either OECD countries or Japanese regions, industry production increases more than one-
for-one with local demand for a good. Head and Ries (2001) find evidence of similar
patterns of industry production and consumption in Canada and the United States. Both
3
sets of results are interpreted as consistent with home-market effects.
A second approach to estimate home-market effects is to examine how the income
elasticity of exports varies across goods. In theory, the income elasticity of exports
should be higher for goods subject to higher price-cost markups and higher trade costs,
which are conditions often associated with differentiated products (Rauch, 1999).
Feenstra, Markusen, and Rose (1998) estimate gravity models of trade for an aggregate of
differentiated products and for an aggregate of homogeneous products. They find that
income elasticity of exports is higher in the former sample than in the latter, which they
interpret as evidence of home-market effects.
3
For related work, see Trionfetti (1998, 2001), Weder (1998), and Brulhart and Trionfetti (2001).
2