NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DECOMPOSING THE PERSISTENCE OF INTERNATIONAL EQUITY FLOWS
Kenneth A. Froot
Jessica D. Tjornhom
Working Paper 9079
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9079
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2002
We are grateful to State Street Corporation for help in obtaining data and to Gang Bai for extraordinarily
effective research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Kenneth A. Froot and Jessica D. Tjornhom. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Decomposing the Persistence of International Equity Flows
Kenneth A. Froot and Jessica D. Tjornhom
NBER Working Paper No. 9079
July 2002
JEL No. G15, F21, G11
ABSTRACT
The portfolio flows of institutional investors are widely known to be persistent. What is less well
known, however, is the source of this persistence. One possibility is the ?informed trading hypothesis?:
that persistence arises from autocorrelated trades of investors who believe they have information about
value and who face an imperfectly liquid market. Another possibility is that there are asynchroneities
with respect to investment decisions across funds, across investments, or both. These asynchroneities
could be due to wealth effects (across investments for a single fund), investor herding (across funds for
a single investment), or generalized contagion (across funds and across investments). We use daily data
on institutional flows into 21 developed countries by 471 funds to measure and decompose aggregate
flow persistence. We find that the informed trading hypothesis explains about 75% of total persistence,
and that the remaining amount is attributable entirely to cross-fund own-country persistence. In other
words, we find statistically and economically significant flow asynchroneities across funds investing in
the same country. There are no meaningful asynchroneities across countries, either within a given fund,
or across funds. The cross-fund flow lags we identify might result from different fund investment
processes, or from some funds mimicking others? decisions. We reject the hypothesis that wealth effects
explain persistence.
Kenneth A. Froot Jessica D. Tjornhom
Graduate School of Business State Street Associates
Harvard University jdtjornhom@statestreet.com
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
kfroot@hbs.edu

I. Introduction
If there were a single characteristic that describes the portfolio flows of institutional investors, it
would seem to be flow persistence. A number of authors in widely varying contexts have found
this result. Studies looking at individual Asian equity markets have found that foreigner’s flows
are strongly persistent (see for example, Choe, Kho, and Stulz (1999, 2001) and Kim and Wei
(2001) who focus on Korean flows and Seasholes (2001) who has focused on the Thai and
Taiwanese equity markets). Studies of institutional investor flows across a number of markets
have also found strong persistence on country or regional levels (see Richards (2002), Froot,
O’Connell, and Seasholes (2001), Froot and Ramadorai (2002) and Kaminsky, Lyons, and
Schmukler (2000)). In addition, studies of mutual fund flows in the US show persistence at
relatively high frequencies. These empirical findings are robust, not only across different
databases, but also after conditioning on other variables. For example, a number of the above
studies demonstrate that flow persistence does not appear strongly diminished by controlling for
past returns, even though past returns and past flows are correlated.
Persistence in net purchases by institutional investors would not seem very important if
institutional flows had no stable relationship with prices. However, this is not the case.
Considerable research has documented that current returns are strongly positively correlated with
institutional flows, that current institutional flows tend to react positively to past returns, and that
current flows are positively predictive of future returns. These associations suggest that
institutional flows may be bound up with return momentum in equities, which is, to date, one of
the broadest and most prevalent empirical anomalies in asset pricing.1
While persistence in institutional flow is clear in the data, the underlying mechanisms driving it
are not. In models of informed trading (such as Kyle 1985), informed order flow is conditionally
autocorrelated. Traders with positive information attempt to disguise it, rationing their purchases
at any given time and deferring some into the future, in order to reduce total price impact. The
1 On the profitability and breadth of moment effects see Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) and Rouwenhorst
(1988). A number of papers study the relationship between institutional flows and equity returns both in the
US and internationally. See Cohen, Gompers, and Vuolteenaho (2001), Froot, O’Connell, and Seasholes
(2001), Froot and Ramadorai (2001), Grinblatt and Keloharju, (2000), Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers
(1995), Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1992), Nofsinger and Sias (1999), Richards (2002), Wermers
(1999, 2000).
2

same holds if the information is merely perceived, rather than actual, i.e., if there is trader
overconfidence.
This type of mechanism suggests that the persistence in institutional order flow is related to the
scope of (real or perceived) information. Under what we call the informed trading hypothesis,
each fund’s purchases of a given country’s equities are likely to be own-autocorrelated, provided
that the funds learn about the prospects of firms within that country. The autocorrelation emerges
because individual fund managers have either company-specific or country-specific information
and dispense it slowly and optimally into prices.
However, such own-fund own-country persistence is likely to be only one piece of the total
persistence in aggregated flow data. First and most obviously is that this effect may occur across
several countries at once. If two managers learn about the same country at the same time, for
example, each spacing over time their trades, then there will be cross-fund, own-country
persistence. This will result simply from each manager following the optimal trading strategy
over time for each country. Alternatively, if managers learn about two countries at once, for
example, again spacing over time their trades in each country, then there will be own-fund, cross-
country persistence. And finally, if two managers each learn about two countries at the same time
and space their trades according to Kyle, then there will also be cross-fund, cross-country
persistence. All these forms of persistence occur under the informed trading hypothesis.
Of course, mechanisms other than this dynamic optimal trading hypothesis may be at work. The
most general alternative explanation is lack of simultaneity. Investors may process information
or come to opinions at different rates, wait for other confirmatory signals for different amounts of
time, etc. These delays induce cross-fund and cross-country persistence, over and above any
own-fund own-country persistence. Such lack of simultaneity may arise from many different
sources. One is that there may be lags associated with infrastructure, bureaucracy, or decision-
making. These lags may operate across investments within a single fund or across funds. For
example, shocks to fund wealth may result in rebalancing transactions that take time to complete
(for a model along these lines, see Kyle and Xoing, 2001). Another source of asynchronicity is
that managers respond positively to each other’s decisions with some lag. Such responses might
be construed as a form of investor herding. The cause of the herding could be quite rational.
Fund managers might find that they increase returns by following first movers. Or they might
find that following first movers reduces tracking error against a peer benchmark.
3