NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LAW, ENDOWMENTS, AND FINANCE
Thorsten Beck
Asli Demirguc-Kunt
Ross Levine
Working Paper 9089
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9089
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2002
We thank David Arseneau, Pam Gill, and Tolga Sobaci for excellent research assistance, and Agnes
Yaptenco for assistance with the graphs. We thank without implicating Daron Acemoglu, John Boyd, Maria
Carkovic, Tim Guinnane, Patrick Honohan, Phil Keefer, Paul Mahoney, Alexander Pivovarsky, Andrei
Shleifer, Oren Sussman, an anonymous referee, seminar participants at the Banco Central de Chile, the
University of Minnesota, Harvard University, the World Bank, University of Maryland, and UCLA, and
conference participants at the Fedesarrollo conference on Financial Crisis and Policy Responses in
Cartagena, the Crenos conference on Finance, Institutions, Technology, and Growth in Alghero, and the
CEPR Summer Finance Conference in Gerzensee. Parts of this paper were originally part of a working paper
titled “Law, Politics, and Finance,” which was a background paper for the 2002 World Development Report.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research, the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent.
© 2002 by Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirguc-Kunt and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Law, Endowments, and Finance
Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirguc-Kunt and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 9089
August 2002
JEL No. G2, K2, O11, P51
ABSTRACT
This paper assesses two theories regarding the historical determinants of international differences
in financial development. The law and finance theory holds that legal traditions differ in terms of the
priority they attach to protecting the rights of private investors vis-a-vis the State and this has important
implications for financial development. The endowment theory argues that the disease and geographical
environment influence the formation of long-lasting institutions that influence financial development.
Using a sample of former colonies, we explore whether the legal system brought by colonizers and/or the
initial disease/geographical endowments encountered by colonizers explain financial development today.
The empirical results indicate that both the legal systems brought by colonizers and the initial
endowments in the colonies are important determinants of stock market development and private property
rights protection. However, initial endowments are more robustly associated with financial intermediary
development than legal origin and initial endowments explain more of the cross-country variation in
financial intermediary and stock market development than legal origin.
Thorsten Beck Asli Demirguc-Kunt Ross Levine
The World Bank The World Bank Carlson School of Management
1818 H Street, NW 1818 H Street, NW University of Minnesota
Washington, DC 20433 Washington, DC 20433 321 19th Ave. South
tbeck@worldbank.org ademirguckunt@worldbank.org Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
rlevine@csom.umn.edu

1
1. Introduction
A substantial body of work suggests that well-functioning financial intermediaries and
markets promote economic growth (Levine, 1997). The view that financial systems exert a first-
order impact on economic growth raises critical questions: How did some countries develop well-
functioning financial systems, while others did not? Why do some countries have strong laws and
property rights protection that support private contracting and financial development, while others
do not? While considerable research examines the finance-growth relationship, much less work
examines the fundamental sources of international differences in financial development.
This paper empirically evaluates two theories concerning the historical determinants of
financial development. First, the law and finance theory holds that (a) legal traditions differ in
terms of the priority they attach to protecting the rights of private investors vis-à-vis the State, (b)
private property rights protection forms the basis of financial contracting and overall financial
development, and (c) the major legal traditions were formed in Europe centuries ago and were then
spread through conquest, colonization, and imitation [LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and
Vishny, 1998, henceforth LLSV]. Thus, the law and finance theory predicts that historically
determined differences in legal tradition help explain international differences in financial
development today.
The law and finance theory focuses on the differences between the two most influential legal
traditions: the British Common law and the French Civil law [Hayek, 1960; LLSV, 1998].
According to this theory, the British Common law evolved to protect private property owners
against the crown [Merryman, 1985].1 This facilitated the ability of private property owners to
transact confidently, with positive repercussions on financial development [North and Weingast,
1989]. In contrast, the French Civil law was constructed to eliminate the role of a corrupt judiciary,

2
solidify State power, and restrain the courts from interfering with State policy.2 Over time, State
dominance produced a legal tradition that focuses more on the rights of the State and less on the
rights of individual investors than the British Common law [Hayek, 1960; Mahoney, 2001].
According to the law and finance theory, a powerful State with a responsive legal system will have
the incentives and capabilities to divert the flow of society’s resources toward favored ends and this
power will hinder the development of free, competitive financial systems. Thus, the law and finance
theory predicts that countries that have adopted a French Civil law tradition will tend to place less
of an emphasis on private property rights protection and will enjoy correspondingly lower levels of
financial development than countries with a British Common law tradition.
The law and finance theory focuses on the origin of a country’s legal tradition. The French
secured the Napoleonic Code in all conquered lands and colonies. Furthermore, the Code shaped
the Spanish and Portuguese legal systems, which further spread the French Civil law to Spanish and
Portuguese colonies. The British also instituted the Common law in its colonies. According to the
law and finance theory, the spread of legal traditions had enduring influences on national
approaches to private property rights and financial development: British colonizers brought a legal
tradition that stresses private property rights and fosters financial development; in contrast,
colonizers that brought the French Civil law implanted a legal tradition that is less conducive to
financial development.
The endowment theory emphasizes the roles of geography and the disease environment in
shaping institutional development and we apply this theory to the development of private property
rights and financial institutions. Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001, henceforth AJR) base
their theory on three premises. First, AJR note that Europeans adopted different types of
colonization strategies. At one end of the spectrum, the Europeans settled and created institutions to
support private property and check the power of the State. These “settler colonies” include the