NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DEFINING BENCHMARK STATUS: AN APPLICATION USING EURO-AREA BONDS
Peter G. Dunne
Michael J. Moore
Richard Portes
Working Paper 9087
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9087
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2002
An earlier version was presented at the NYU Salomon Center conference on ‘The Euro: Valuation, Hedging
and Capital Market Issues’, 5 April 2002. We are grateful for comments from our discussant, Lasse Pedersen.
We have also received very helpful comments from Kjell Nyborg. We have also benefited from discussions
with Stephen Hall. This paper is part of a research network on ‘The Analysis of International Capital
Markets: Understanding Europe’s Role in the Global Economy’, funded by the European Commission under
the Research Training Network Programme (Contract No. HPRNOECTOE1999OE00067). We thank MTS
for providing the data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Peter G. Dunne, Michael J. Moore and Richard Portes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Defining Benchmark Status: An Application using Euro-Area Bonds
Peter G. Dunne, Michael J. Moore and Richard Portes
NBER Working Paper No. 9087
August 2002
JEL No. F36, G12, H63
ABSTRACT
The introduction of the euro on 1 January 1999 created the conditions for an integrated
government bond market in the euro area. Using a unique data set from the electronic trading platform
Euro-MTS, we consider what is the ‘benchmark’ in this market. We develop and apply two definitions
of benchmark status that differ from the conventional view that the benchmark is the security with lowest
yield at a given maturity. Using Granger-causality and cointegration methods, we find a complex pattern
of benchmark status in euro-area government bonds.
Peter G. Dunne
The Queen's University of Belfast
School of Management & Economics
Belfast BT 7 1 NN
Northern Ireland
p.dunne@qub.ac.uk
Michael J. Moore
The Queen's University of Belfast
School of Management & Economics
Belfast BT 7 1 NN
Northern Ireland
m.moore@qub.ac.uk
Richard Portes
Department of Economics
London Business School
Sussex Place
Regent's Park
London NW1 4SA
and NBER
rportes@london.edu

Defining Benchmark Status: An Application using Euro-Area Bonds
Peter G. Dunne (QUB)
Michael J. Moore (QUB)
Richard Portes (LBS and CEPR)
This version: June 2002
1. Introduction
The introduction of the euro on 1 January 1999 eliminated exchange risk between
the currencies of participating member states and thereby created the conditions for
a substantially more integrated public debt market in the euro area. The euro-area
member states agreed that from the outset, all new issuance should be in euro and
outstanding stocks of debt should be re-denominated into euro. As a result, the
euro-area debt market is comparable to the US treasuries market both in terms of
size and issuance volume. Unlike in the United States, however, public debt
management in the euro area is decentralised under the responsibility of 12 separate
national agencies.
This decentralised management of the euro-area public debt market is one reason
for the fragmentation of the market and the consequent cross-country yield spreads
that exist. But the evidence for this fragmentation has not been thoroughly explored,
and one of the contributions of this paper is to describe patterns in cross-country
yield differences. For example, we find yields are lowest for German bonds; that
there is an inner periphery of countries centred on France for which yields are
consistently higher; and that the outer periphery centred on Italy display the highest
yields.
3

We begin our analysis by discussing why such yield spreads exist. Our main
contribution, however, comes in examining benchmark status. In this decentralised
euro government bond market, there is no official designation of benchmark
securities, nor any established market convention. Indeed, benchmark status is more
or less explicitly contested among countries.
We consider in detail, with empirical evidence, the meaning of the term “benchmark”
bond. The most common view associates the benchmark bond with the lowest yield.
If that were all that mattered for benchmark status, then the German market would
provide the benchmark at all maturities (see below). Analysts who take this view
accept that the appropriate criterion for benchmark status is that this is the security
against which others are priced, and they simply assume that the security with lowest
yield takes that role (e.g., Favero et al., 2000, pp. 25-26). A plausible alternative,
however, is to interpret benchmark to mean the most liquid security1, which is
therefore most capable of providing a reference point for the market. But the Italian
market, not the German, is easily the most liquid for short-dated bonds; and perhaps
the French is most liquid at medium maturities.
A different approach to defining benchmark status focuses directly on price discovery
and regards the price discovery process as a purely empirical matter. Our
perspective is that the benchmark bond is the instrument to which the prices of other
bonds react. On this view, benchmark status must emerge from estimation and
cannot simply be asserted or read off the data.
1 See Blanco (2002).
4