NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
R&D, IMPLEMENTATION AND STAGNATION:
A SCHUMPETERIAN THEORY OF CONVERGENCE CLUBS
Peter Howitt
David Mayer-Foulkes
Working Paper 9104
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9104
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2002
The authors wish to thank Philippe Aghion, Jess Benhabib and Steve Redding for helpful conversations.
Useful comments were received from seminar participants at the 2001 NBER Summer Institute, Boston
University, the University of Western Ontario, and the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2002 by Peter Howitt and David Mayer-Foulkes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

R&D, Implementation and Stagnation: A Schumpeterian Theory of Convergence Clubs
Peter Howitt and David Mayer-Foulkes
NBER Working Paper No. 9104
August 2002
JEL No. O0
ABSTRACT
We construct a Schumpeterian growth theory consistent with the divergence in per-capita income
that has occurred between countries since the mid 19th Century, and with the convergence that occurred
between the richest countries during the second half of the 20th Century. The theory assumes that
technological change underwent a transformation late in the 19th Century, associated with modern R&D
labs. Countries sort themselves into three groups. Those in the highest group converge to a steady state
where they do leading edge R&D, while those in the intermediate group converge to a steady state where
they implement technologies developed elsewhere. Countries in both of these groups grow at the same
rate in the long run, as a result of technology transfer, but inequality between them increases during the
transition. Countries in the lowest group grow at a slower rate, with relative incomes that fall
asymptotically to zero. Once modern R&D has been introduced, a country may have only a finite window
of opportunity in which to introduce the institutions that support it.
Peter Howitt David Mayer-Foulkes
Department of Economics División de Economía
Brown University Centro de Investigación y Docencia Económicas
Providence, RI 02906 Carretera México Toluca 3655
and NBER 01210 México, D.F, México
peter_howitt@brown.edu

“The greatest invention of the 19th Century was the invention of the method of inven-
tion.” Alfred North Whitehead (1931, p. 98)
“Countries that are technologically backward have a potentiality for generating growth
more rapid than that of more advanced countries, provided their social capabilities are
sufficientlydevelopedtopermitsuccessfulexploitationoftechnologiesalreadyemployed
by the technological leaders.” Moses Abramovitz (1986, p.225)
“Lack of investment in an area of expertise early on may foreclose the future develop-
ment of a technical capability in that area.” Wesley Cohen and Daniel Levinthal (1990,
p.128)
1 Introduction
The cross-country distribution of per-capita income has widened dramatically since the 19th Cen-
tury. Pritchett (1997) infers that the proportional gap in living standards between the richest
and poorest countries grew more than Þve-fold from 1870 to 1990, in what he calls “divergence,
big-time.” According to the tables in Maddison (2001) the proportional gap between the richest
group of countries and the poorest1 grew from 3 in 1820 to 19 in 1998. Quah (1993, 1997) Þnds
evidence ofemerging “twinpeaks”inthecross-countryincome distribution continuing wellinto the
second half of the 20th Century. Kremer et al. (2001) Þnd that a single-peaked distribution may
emerge but only after a prolonged transition. Mayer (2001) Þnds twin peaks in the distribution of
life expectancy using the available data for 1962 to 1997.
A large number of empirical studies2 have shown that the large income differences that have
emerged are mostly attributable to differences in productivity rather than to the differences in
schooling and capital accumulation invoked by neoclassical growth theory. In particular, Feyrer
(2001) Þnds that although the distribution of capital-output ratios is single-peaked, and the distri-
bution of education levels is almost ßat, the distribution of the productivity residual has become
increasingly twin-peaked. These studies strongly suggest that the central factor beneath growing
cross-country income disparities is technology.
There is however a major problem facing any technological explanation of divergence. SpeciÞ-
cally, many studies3 show that a large group of countries have been converging to parallel growth
1Therichestgroup was Western Europe in 1820 and the “Euopean Offshoots” (Australia, Canada, New Zealand
and the United States) in 1998. The poorest group was Africa in both years.
2See for example Knight et al. (1993), Islam (1995), Caselli et al. (1996), Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare (1997),
Prescott (1998), Hall and Jones (1999) and Easterly and Levine (2001).
3For example, Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1992), Mankiw et al. (1992) and Evans (1996).
1

paths over the past 50 years or so. The tendency to convergence4 among rich countries is easy
to understand as a manifestation of technology transfer. But what force was opposing technology
transfer so as to produce the technological divergence that took place over the longer period from
the mid 19th Century? And why did that force stop working during the second half of the 20th
Century?
Moreover, this modern convergence group does not include all countries. In particular, the
gap between the leading countries as a whole and the very poorest countries as a whole continued
to widen throughout the second half of the 20th Century. For example, the proportional gap in
per-capita income between Mayer’s (2002) richest and poorest convergence groups grew by a factor
of 2.6 between 1960 and 1995, and the proportional gap between Maddison’s richest and poorest
groups grew by a factor of 1.75 between 1950 and 1998. This raises the further question of why the
forces that brought an end to the divergence among middle-to-high income countries did not also
bring an end to the divergence between very rich and very poor countries.5
Our purpose here is to show how these questions can be addressed by modern Schumpeterian
growth theory. To this end we propose a model of economic growth based on the multi-country
model of Howitt (2000), which in turn is an extension of the Aghion-Howitt (1992, 1998) model
of growth through creative destruction, and which implies a particular form of club-convergence.
SpeciÞcally, intheearliermulti-countrymodelallcountriesthatcontinuetoinvestin newtechnolo-
gies eventually grow at the same rate, because they draw ideas from each other, whereas countries
that do not invest in new technologies stagnate, because without making technology investments
of their own they cannot beneÞt from technology transfer.
One problem with the earlier model of Howitt (2000) is that it does not take into account that
different countries have used different strategies for tapping into the global technological frontier.
Only a small handful of rich countries performleading-edge R&D. In 1996, for example, 5 countries
accounted for over 80 percent of the world’s formal R&D expenditures, and 11 countries accounted
4We use the term “convergence” throughout to mean that countries approach parallel long-run growth paths.
For emphasis we sometimes refer to the concept as “parallel convergence.” Although the neoclassical growth model
with instantaneous technology transfer exhibits parallel convergence, nevertheless the conceptisnot the sameasthe
more familiar “conditional convergence,” which means (Galor, 1996) that countries with the same characteristics
convergetothesamegrowthpath. Forexample, inthecaseofmultiplesteadystatesofthesortillustratedinFigure
3 below, countries with the same characteristics but different initial conditions could converge to different growth
paths (an example of club-convergence) but these paths would all be parallel. Conversely, in a model of conditional
convergence, countries with one set of characteristics could all converge to a growth path that was not parallel to
the common asymptotic path of countries with a different set of characteristics. Thus parallel convergence does not
imply and is not implied by the usual concept of conditional convergence.
5(Except for a small number of formerly poor “miracle” countries such as Botswana, China, Mauritius and the
East Asian NICs).
2