NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANK PANICS AND THE ENDOGENEITY OF CENTRAL BANKING
Gary Gorton
Lixin Huang
Working Paper 9102
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9102
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2002
Thanks to Franklin Allen, Eslyn Jean-Baptiste, Michael Bordo, John Boyd, Charles Calomiris, Ed Green,
Richard Kihlstrom, Holger Mueller, Ben Polak and to seminar participants at New York University, the Yale
Banking Conference, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Conference on the Origins of Central
Banking for comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Gary Gorton and Lixin Huang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Bank Panics and the Endogeneity of Central Banking
Gary Gorton and Lixin Huang
NBER Working Paper No. 9102
August 2002
JEL No. G21, E58
ABSTRACT
Central banking is intimately related to liquidity provision to banks during times of crisis, the
lender-of-last-resort function. This activity arose endogenously in certain banking systems. Depositors
lack full information about the value of bank assets so that during macroeconomic downturns they
monitor their banks by withdrawing in a banking panic. The likelihood of panics depends on the
industrial organization of the banking system. Banking systems with many small, undiversified banks,
are prone to panics and failures, unlike systems with a few big banks that are heavily branched and well
diversified. Systems of many small banks are more efficient if the banks form coalitions during times
of crisis. We provide conditions under which the industrial organization of banking leads to incentive
compatible state contingent bank coalition formation. Such coalitions issue money that is a kind of
deposit insurance and examine and supervise banks. Bank coalitions of small banks, however, cannot
replicate the efficiency of a system of big banks.
Gary Gorton Lixin Huang
Department of Finance Department of Economics
The Wharton School University of Pennsylvania
University of Pennsylvania Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367 lixin2@ssc.upenn.edu
and NBER
gorton@wharton.upenn.edu

1
I. Introduction
The most important function of a central bank is to provide liquidity to the banking system in
times of crisis. The classic work on central banking, Lombard Street, by Walter Bagehot,
published in 1873, offered the advice that in times of panic the central bank (Bank of England)
should lend freely and continue to pay out currency. At the time Lombard Street was published,
there was no central bank in the U.S. and yet the private arrangement of banks in the U.S.
clearinghouse system had already discovered Bagehot’s precepts and was acting on them. In this
paper we argue that the lender-of-last-resort function of “central banking” arose endogenously
through the formation of state contingent bank coalitions, such as clearinghouses, which provided
liquidity during banking panics. Moreover, in the model we propose, banking panics are not
irrational manifestations of multiple equilibria. Rather, they represent depositors monitoring their
banks in banking systems composed of many small banks. Since panics do not happen in
banking systems with large, heavily branched, well diversified, banks, this is consistent with the
historical experience of countries internationally.
A thesis of this paper is that central banking (the lender-of-last-resort) emerges as a response to
the banking system’s problems. The problem is the ability of depositors to monitor their banks.
Monitoring banks corresponds to banking panics, and such panics may involve inefficiencies
because banks may be mistakenly liquidated. Another thesis we develop is that banking panics
are not a manifestation of an inherent problem with banks per se. On the contrary, the theory we
develop views panics as a rational form of monitoring of banks by uninformed depositors.
Briefly, depositors know the state of the macroeconomy, but not the idiosyncratic state of their
own bank. The way to check on a bank is to ask the bank to convert its demand deposits into
currency. But, banks as a whole cannot do this and then the banking system faces liquidation.
Historically, and in the model we present, banks form coalitions that can turn illiquid loan
portfolios into liquid claims that can convince depositors that the banks, as a group, are solvent,
even if a depositor’s particular bank is not. This is the lender-of-last-resort function.
The model closely follows the U.S. experience with panics, not surprisingly since the U.S. is the
leading example of the case of frequent banking panics. In the case of the U.S., liquidity
provision by banks literally took the form of private money called “clearinghouse loan
certificates.” These certificates were issued by bank coalitions and functioned as a form of
deposit insurance from the point of view of depositors because they served to convert claims on a
single bank into claims on the group of banks in the coalition. For depositors to accept these

2
certificates required that banks coinsure each other. Moreover, for this insurance system to work,
there must be banking panics that impose externalities on the banks doing well, forcing them to
subsidize other banks. We show how banking panics play a critical economic function enforcing
the incentive compatibility of bank coalitions. In order for the bank coalition to form during
times of panic, the banks had to agree to mutually monitor each other to enforce reserve and
capital requirements. This monitoring is the historical origin of bank examination and
supervision.
While bank coalitions in the U.S. were highly developed because of the industrial organization of
the U.S. banking system, bank coalitions appear to be part of the banking histories of most
countries, as we discuss below. Sometimes coalitions were formal arrangements; sometimes they
were informal arrangements. Sometimes the coalitions were organized around a single dominant
th
bank, such as the Suffolk Bank of pre-Civil War New England, J.P. Morgan in the 19 century, or
the Bank of Montreal in Canada. Sometimes private banks formed a coalition with the
government, as British banks often did with the Bank of England. Not all these coalitions issued
private money directly to the public, but all had features of coinsurance that correspond to
liquidity creation.
The extent to which coalitions were formed and were formalized is related to the frequency with
which they were called upon to provide liquidity. This likelihood is related to some other
important facts about banking history. In particular, historically, there is significant cross section
variation in countries’ panic experiences. Historical studies have led to a consensus that the cross
section variation in panic experience is due to variation in the industrial organization of the
banking system. We review some of the evidence below. Such evidence is important because it
suggests that panics are not an inherent feature of banking per se, as is commonly supposed and
asserted theoretically. Our study is explicitly aimed at showing the importance of this industrial
organization and its relation to the frequency of panics and bank failures.
The model we analyze is simple. There are two core assumptions. First, there is asymmetric
information between banks, who are better informed, and their depositors. Second, banks may
engage in moral hazard if their equity falls below a critical value. These are fairly standard
assumptions. As one might expect, these assumptions lead depositors to sometimes want to
withdraw their bank deposits. Withdrawals may be inefficient because the bank may, in fact, be
quite well off, but depositors do not know this. We consider different organizational forms of the
banking industry, systems with a few highly branched, well diversified, banks, as well as systems