NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FIRMS’ DECISIONS WHERE TO INCORPORATE
Lucian Bebchuk
Alma Cohen
Working Paper 9107
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9107
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2002
For helpful comments we are grateful to Steve Choi, Jim Cox, David Cutler, Jesse Fried, Rob Daines, Allen
Ferrell, Jill Fisch, Andrew Guzman, Assaf Hamdani, Nicholas Hecker, Caroline Hoxby, Bert Huang,
Christine Jolls, Marcel Kahan, Jason Knott, Josh Lerner, Lynn LoPucki, Geoffrey Miller, Mark Ramsayer,
Larry Ribstein, Roberta Romano, Andrei Shleifer, Rob Sitkoff, Lynn Stout, Guhan Subramanian, Manuel
Trajtenberg, and seminar participants at Harvard, George Mason University, the University of Chicago, the
University of Toronto, and the spring meeting of the NBER corporate finance program. For financial support
we thank the Harvard Law School John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and Business and the NBER.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2002 by Lucian Bebchuk and Alma Cohen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Firms’ Decisions Where to Incorporate
Lucian Bebchuk and Alma Cohen
NBER Working Paper No. 9107
August 2002
JEL No. G30, G38, H70, K22
ABSTRACT
This paper empirically investigates the decisions of publicly traded firms where to incorporate.
We study the features of states that make them attractive to incorporating firms and the characteristics of
firms that determine whether they incorporate in or out of their state of location. We find that states that
offer stronger antitakeover protections are substantially more successful both in retaining in-state firms
and in attracting out-of-state incorporations. We estimate that, compared with adopting no antitakeover
statutes, adopting all standard antitakeover statutes enabled the states that adopted them to more than
double the percentage of local firms that incorporated in-state (from 23% to 49%). Indeed, the
incorporation market has not even penalized the three states that passed two extreme antitakeover statutes
that have been widely viewed as detrimental to shareholders. We also find that there is commonly a big
difference between a state's ability to attract incorporations from firms located in and out of the state, and
we investigate several possible explanations for this home-state advantage. Finally, we find that
Delaware's dominance is greater than has been recognized and can be expected to increase further in the
future. Our findings have significant implications for corporate governance, regulatory competition, and
takeover law.
Lucian Bebchuk Alma Cohen
Harvard Law School NBER
1557 Massachusetts Avenue 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138 Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER acohen@kuznets.harvard.edu
bebchuk@law.harvard.edu

1 Introduction
This paper uses data on firms’ incorporation choices to study the market for
corporate law in the United States. In particular, the paper focuses on the demand-
side of this market, studying the determinants of firms’ incorporation decisions.
Analyzing these decisions is valuable for understanding the patterns of
incorporation and the outcomes of regulatory competition in the corporate area.
A central feature of the US corporate environment is the presence of regulatory
competition in corporate law. Corporations are free to choose their state of
incorporation, and they are subject to the corporate law of the state in which they
have chosen to incorporate. Whether and to what extent this regulatory competition
works well has long been one of the most hotly debated questions among corporate
law scholars. As European corporations have recently become free to choose their
country of incorporation among the EEC countries, this question has also become
important in Europe.
According to the view that appears to dominate the current thinking of
corporate law academics, state competition produces a “race-toward-the-top” that
benefits shareholders (see Winter (1977, 1989), Easterbrook and Fischel (1991),
Fischel (1982) and Romano (1993a, 1993b, 1998)). On this view, the desire to attract
incorporations induces states to develop and provide corporate arrangements that
enhance shareholder value. An alternative view is more skeptical with respect to the
incentives provided by state competition (see, e.g., Cary (1974), Bebchuk (1992),
Bar-Gill, Barzuza, and Bebchuk (2001)). On this view, competition encourages states
to provide rules that are too favorable to corporate managers and controllers with
respect to corporate issues, such as takeover rules, that have a major effect on the
private benefits of managers and controllers.
In this debate, most scholars have made similar assumptions about the supply
side of the market, namely, that states seek to attract incorporations, but they
differed in their views on the demand side, namely, on what type of rules would
make states more successful in attracting incorporations. Note, however, that the
demand side would be important even if one were to relax the assumption that
states seek to maximize the number of incorporations. Even if some or many states
selected their corporate rules on the basis of considerations other than such
maximization, the demand side would determine the distribution of firms among
whatever choices states would provide.
The debate on state competition has stimulated a large body of empirical
research. This research has largely focused on analyzing how shareholder wealth is
affected by incorporating in Delaware (see Bhagat and Romano (2001), Romano
1

(2001), and Bebchuk, Cohen, and Ferrell (2002) for surveys of this work). Several
studies have suggested that reincorporations to Delaware are associated with
abnormal returns (see, e.g., Romano (1985), Heron and Lewellen (1998)). In addition,
a recent, influential study by Daines (2001a) suggested that incorporation in
Delaware is correlated with a higher Tobin’s Q. However, Bebchuk, Cohen, and
Ferrell (2002) argue that selection issues make it difficult to infer from existing
studies that a Delaware incorporation has a positive effect on shareholder wealth.
They also point out that, if such an effect did exist, it would not teach us much about
how well state competition works overall; because of the network benefits from
incorporating in the dominant state, doing so would be beneficial even in an
equilibrium in which state competition does not work well.1
In any event, the existing empirical work does not examine some significant
aspects of the incorporation market on which this paper focuses. Whereas prior
work has only examined how the market is divided between Delaware and non-
Delaware firms, this paper studies the distribution of incorporations among all
states and thus, in turn, how states other than Delaware differ in their performance
in the market for incorporations. Furthermore, whereas prior work has taken
incorporation decisions as given, we seek to investigate the determinants of these
incorporation decisions.
In particular, we investigate which features of corporate law systems make
them more and less successful in attracting incorporations. We also study how
incorporation choices are influenced by firms’ location and, finding such influence,
we investigate the reasons for its existence. The results we report are for the set of all
non-financial firms; the results for the set of all firms are similar and are reported in
an earlier version of this paper (Bebchuk and Cohen (2002)).
We start by providing a full account of the distribution of incorporations
among states. Putting aside Delaware, states still differ greatly both in their ability to
retain firms headquartered (“located”) in them and in their ability to attract out-of-
state incorporations. For example, whereas Illinois and California retain only 11%
and 22% of the firms located in them respectively, Indiana and Minnesota retain
70% and 75% respectively. As to out-of-state incorporations, 33 states attract less
than 10 out-of-state incorporations each, whereas 7 states attract more than 25 out-
of-state incorporations each.
1 Bar-Gill, Barzuza, and Bebchuk (2001) develop a formal model of a race-to-the-bottom
equilibrium in which (i) states are induced to provide rules that provide managers with
excessive private benefits and (ii) incorporation in the dominant state is associated with a higher
shareholder value due to the institutional advantages and network benefits offered by this state.
2