NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
UNDERSTANDING MUTUAL FUND AND HEDGE FUND
STYLES USING RETURN BASED STYLE ANALYSIS
Arik Ben Dor
Ravi Jagannathan
Working Paper 9111
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9111
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2002
We would like to thank David A. Hsieh for providing us with the hedge funds returns data and Narayan Naik
for the options strategy return data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Arik Ben Dor and Ravi Jagannathan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Understanding Mutual Fund and Hedge Fund Styles Using Return Based Style Analysis
Arik Ben Dor and Ravi Jagannathan
NBER Working Paper No. 9111
August 2002
JEL No. G10, G14, G20, G23
ABSTRACT
We provide an introduction to the use of return based style analysis of Sharpe (1992) in practice.
We demonstrate the importance of selecting the right style benchmarks and how the use of inappropriate
style benchmarks may lead to wrong conclusions. When style analysis is applied to sector oriented funds
such as healthcare, precious metals, energy, technology, etc., the set of benchmarks should include sector
or industry indexes. Following Glosten and Jagannathan (1994), Fung and Hsieh (2001), and Agarwal
and Naik (2001), we show how to analyze the investment style of hedge fund managers by including the
returns on selected option based strategies as style benchmarks. In the examples we consider, return based
style analysis provides insights not available through commonly used “peer” evaluation alone.
Arik Ben Dor Ravi Jagannathan
Northwestern University J.L. Kellogg Graduate School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Leverone/Anderson Complex
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and NBER
rjaganna@northwestern.edu

Introduction
Several changes have taken place in the past three decades in the U.S. capital
markets. An important one among them is the reduction in the direct holdings of
corporate equities by individual investors and a corresponding increase in institutional
holdings. The growth of mutual funds and pension funds during this period has been the
primary cause of the sharp increase in the institutional holdings of equities in the U.S.A.
Whereas mutual funds and pension funds held only 14% of all U.S. corporate equities in
1970, they held almost 40% by 20011. While holding equities through money
management institutions has made it possible for individual investors to reap
diversification benefits and plan sponsors to benefit from specialization it has not been
without cost. Individual investors as well as pension plan sponsors who invest through
professional money managers need to monitor their actions and evaluate their
performance and this introduces invisible agency costs.
For example, consider a large plan sponsor who allocates the funds across several
money managers based on each manager’s unique investment style. How can a plan
sponsor verify that the investment decisions taken by the manger and the securities he
purchased are consistent with the assigned investment style? How can a plan sponsor
ensure that the bets taken by different external managers do not offset each other?
Furthermore, external money mangers are compensated based on their performance. In
many cases an active investment manger’s performance is assessed in terms of her ability
1 Based on the Flow of Funds Accounts of the United States, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System.
2

to “beat a benchmark”2. How can the pension fund manger evaluate the nature of the risk
the manager undertook in order to attain a performance that is superior to that of the
benchmark? These problems are not unique to plan sponsors however, but are also of
considerable concern to Individual investors who own actively managed mutual funds.
Return-based Style Analysis provides a way of identifying the asset mix style of
the fund manager and comparing it with the asset mix style of the performance
benchmark. This enables the plan sponsor or an individual investor to evaluate how well
an active money manager performed and whether he provides diversification benefits in a
multi-manager portfolio. The use of the technique however, is not without limitations. As
we illustrate in several examples the technique relies crucially on the correct specification
of the style benchmark asset classes. Inappropriate or inadequate choice of style
benchmarks may lead to wrong inferences about performance and the level of “active”
management. For example, when style analysis is applied to sector oriented funds such as
healthcare, precious metals, energy, technology, etc., the set of benchmarks should
include sector or industry indexes. We also show how to analyze the investment style of
hedge fund managers by including the returns on selected option based strategies as style
benchmarks. In the examples we consider, return based style analysis provides insights
not available through commonly used “peer” evaluation alone.
The reminder of the paper is organized as follows. We provide a brief overview of
Portfolio-based Style Analysis in section 1 and review the underlying theory behind
Return based Style Analysis in section 2. We provide several examples showing how to
2 An example would be a management fee of 10 basis points (0.10%) of assets under management plus
additional 15 basis points for each 1% of performance over the benchmark such as the S&P500. Typically
the fees are determined from time to time through negotiation between the manger and the pension plan
sponsor.
3