NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DOES CONFIDENTIAL PROXY VOTING MATTER?
Roberta Romano
Working Paper 9126
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9126
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2002
I have benefitted from helpful suggestions by Yakov Amihud, Ian Ayres, Sanjai Bhagat, John Donohue,
Jonathan Feinstein, Richard Ippolito, John Lott, Tracie Woidtke, and participants at workshops at the George
Mason University School of Law, Ohio State University College of Law, New York University Center for
Law and Business and Texas A & M University College of Business. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Roberta Romano. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Does Confidential Proxy Voting Matter?
Roberta Romano
NBER Working Paper No. 9126
September 2002
JEL No. G34, K22
ABSTRACT
Confidential voting in corporate proxies is a principal recommendation in activist institutional
investors' guidelines for corporate governance reforms. This paper examines the impact of the adoption
of confidential voting on proposal outcomes through a panel data set of shareholder and management
proposals submitted from 1986-98 to 130 firms that adopted confidential voting in those years.
Institutional investors promoting confidential voting maintain that private sector institutions have
conflicts of interest that prevent them from voting against management even though to do so would
maximize the value of their shares; they contend that anonymous ballots will enable such investors to
vote their true interest, and thereby anticipate reduced support for management proposals and increased
support for shareholder proposals. The paper finds, contrary to confidential voting advocates'
expectations, that adoption of confidential voting has no significant effect on voting outcomes. Voting
outcomes are best explained by proposal type; neither institutional nor insider ownership, nor prior
performance, significantly affect the level of support a proposal receives. Moreover, the conflict of
interest hypothesis is not supported in the data, as private institutional holdings post-adoption of the
voting reform do not affect the support level for proposals. Confidential voting also does not affect
firms' stock performance. The results suggest that institutional investor initiatives directed at confidential
voting are not a fruitful allocation of investors' resources.
Roberta Romano
Yale Law School
Box 208215,
New Haven, CT 06520-8215
and NBER
Tel: 203-432-4965; fax: 203-432-4871
roberta.romano@yale.edu.

1. Introduction
Institutional investors have over the past decade vigorously engaged in corporate
governance activities, introducing proposals under the SEC’s proxy proposal rule 14a-8 and
privately negotiating with the management of targeted firms over adoption of governance
reforms. One of the more prevalent reform proposals with institutional activists is adoption of
confidential proxy voting--voting procedures under which management does not know how
individual shareholders vote. Confidential voting proposals are among the most common type
of proposal submitted by institutions, on a par with proposals to eliminate defensive tactics to
takeovers (see table 1). It has also been a focus of the private negotiations undertaken by the
behind-the-scenes activist institution, TIAA-CREF, the pension fund for university educators
(Carleton, Nelson and Weisbach, 1998). These actions are consonant with the fact that
confidential proxy voting is the first principle listed in the “core corporate governance policies”
of the Council of Institutional Investors (CII),1 an organization of pension funds that promotes
institutional investors’ concerns and serves as an informational clearinghouse and forum for its
members to coordinate and communicate on shareholder activism programs.
Proponents of confidential voting proposals maintain that a number of shareholders have
conflicts of interest that prevent them from voting against management when to do so would
maximize share value (e.g., Pound, 1988). They conjecture that shareholders with such conflicts
1 “All directors should be elected annually by confidential ballots counted by independent
tabulators. Confidentiality should be automatic and permanent and apply to all ballot items.
Rules and practices concerning the casting, counting and verifying of shareholder votes should be
clearly disclosed.” The Council’s corporate governance policies are listed on their website at:
http://www.cii.org/corp_governance.htm. Other core policies involve the independence of the
board of directors and specified board committees. The Council’s “core policies” are those that it
“believes should be implemented by all companies.”
1

will not feel constrained to vote with management if it were unable to ascertain how they voted.
These proposals obtain broad support among investors beyond the sponsoring institutions:
confidential voting proposals receive high levels of support compared to other shareholder
proposals–only proposals to repeal takeover defenses obtain an equal or higher average support
level (see, e.g., Gillan and Starks, 2000, 292).2
There has been, however, no prior empirical research on the impact of confidential proxy
voting to determine whether the widely held belief that it is beneficial is accurate and
consequently, whether institutional investors should continue to direct efforts at advocating that
reform of the proxy process. This paper measures the efficacy of confidential voting by
examining whether its adoption has affected voting outcomes, as contemplated by its proponents.
The central finding of the paper is that confidential voting has no significant effect on voting
outcomes. It also has no impact on firm performance, paralleling the results of insignificance
regarding the performance effects of other types of governance reform proposals advanced by
activist shareholders (for reviews see Black, 1998; Romano, 2001).
2. Why Do Investors Propose Confidential Voting?
Proponents of confidential voting believe that conflicts of interest prevent certain
shareholders from voting against management when to do so would maximize share value (e.g.,
Pound, 1988). Voter anonymity is expected to eliminate or mitigate such conflict. Banks and
insurance companies are identified as the prime candidates for such conflicts, as they have more
dimensions on which they may aspire to do business with a firm whose shares they hold in
fiduciary accounts, than other institutional money managers, and those business prospects could
2 This is true of this study’s set of shareholder proposals as well (see table 4).
2