NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANKING PANICS AND THE ORIGIN OF CENTRAL BANKING
Gary Gorton
Lixin Huang
Working Paper 9137
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9137
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2002
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Gary Gorton and Lixin Huang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Banking Panics and the Origin of Central Banking
Gary Gorton and Lixin Huang
NBER Working Paper No. 9137
September 2002
JEL No. E5, G2
ABSTRACT
Gorton and Huang (2001) argue that private coalitions of banks can act as central banks, issuing
private money and providing deposit insurance during times of panic. This lender-of-last-resort role
depends upon banking panics occurring, because the threat of liquidation makes the private bank coalition
incentive compatible, inducing banks to monitor each other. But, despite the evolution of private bank
coalitions, government central banks and government deposit insurance schemes historically replaced
the private bank coalitions. In this paper we ask why this transition from private arrangements to public
arrangements occurred. We survey the historical and international evidence on panics, suggesting that
Gorton and Huang (2001) are consistent with the evidence. Then, we extend Gorton and Huang (2001)
to show the welfare improvement brought about by a government central bank replacing private bank
coalitions as lender-of-last-resort. In particular, panics, while necessary for private coalitions to function,
are costly because they disrupt the use of bank deposits as a medium of exchange. With government
deposit insurance, panics do not occur, but the government must monitor banks. Such monitoring by the
government is not as effective as private bank coalitions. We provide conditions under which the
government can avoid the costs associated with panics by implementing deposit insurance and thereby
raise social welfare.
Gary Gorton
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania and NBER
gorton@wharton.upenn.edu
Lixin Huang
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
lixin2@ssc.upenn.edu

1
I. Introduction
Central banking is a twentieth century phenomenon. According to Capie (1997), there were only
eighteen central banks at the beginning of the 20th century. By 1950 there were 59 central banks
and by 1990 there were 161. At the beginning of the 20th century, the U.S. Federal Reserve
System was not yet established; this would occur in 1914. The Bank of Canada came into being
after the Great Depression, in 1934. Prior to the 20th century central banks were established as
institutions with monopoly rights over money issuance. But, if a critical element of central
banking is the function of lender-of-last-resort, then these institutions generally did not become
central banks until later, typically during the 20th century. For example, although the Bank of
England was established in 1694, it did not behave as a lender-of-last-resort until much later (see
Lovell (1957)).
Explicit government deposit insurance is an even later development than lender-of-last-resort role
of government central banks. In 1980 only sixteen countries had explicit deposit insurance
programs; by 1999, sixty-eight countries had such programs (see Garcia (1999) and Demirigüç-
Kunt and Sobaci (2000)). In the United States, deposit insurance was adopted in 1934 and in
Canada in 1967. Today, in Germany, deposit insurance is still a private scheme, set up and run
by the banks themselves. As with central banking generally, not only is deposit insurance late in
developing, but also there is substantial cross-section variation in whether it is private or public.
While the spread of central banks in the 20th century is likely related to the growth of activist
monetary policy, it has been difficult to explain the origin of central banking. According to
Goodhart (1985), central banks evolved as a response to the inability of the banks themselves to
cope with panics. There was a natural evolution because some private banks assumed special
roles in the capacity as the government’s bank. These banks “evolved” into central banks. West
(1974) and Timberlake (1978) focus on the origin of the Federal Reserve System, relating it to the
real bills doctrine. Livingston (1986) argues that the Federal Reserve System came into being as
part of the rise of finance capital, a manifestation of class struggle. Smith (1936) argues that
central banks came into being as a tool to raise revenue for the government, but says little about
the lender-of-last-resort role of central banks. In the case of Canada, Bordo and Redish (1987)
argue that the origin of the Bank of Canada was essentially political; there was no economic
rationale. Indeed, it is not an oversimplification to say that political explanations predominate
over economic explanations in the literature on central banking.

2
Why was central banking, by which we mean the lender-of-last-resort function, late in
developing? Why did it develop in some countries first and not in others? Similarly, why is
deposit insurance such a modern institution when panics have happened for some time in some
economies? Gorton and Huang (2001) argue that the development of a central banking role as
lender-of-last-resort, and deposit insurance, is intimately connected to the industrial organization
of the banking system. Central banking first developed as a private response to problems in
banking systems with many small, undiversified, banks. In such banking systems, uninformed
depositors need to monitor their banks. Briefly, depositors know the state of the macroeconomy,
but not the idiosyncratic state of their own bank. The way to check on a bank is to ask the bank
to convert its demand deposits into currency. But, banks as a whole cannot do this and then the
banking system faces liquidation. In response to this, banks form coalitions that can turn illiquid
loan portfolios into liquid claims and convince depositors that the banks, as a group, are solvent,
even if a depositor’s particular bank may not be. This is the lender-of-last-resort function. But,
these problems do not arise in banking systems with a small number of well-diversified banks.
Such banking systems do not experience panics or high bank failure rates. Notably, as in the case
of Canada, discussed below, they also did not develop central banks or adopt deposit insurance.
These observations are important because they strongly suggest that banking panics are not a
manifestation of an inherent problem with banks per se. We review the historical evidence
further below.
The logic of the Gorton and Huang (2001) model closely follows the U.S. experience with panics.
In the U.S., private bank clearinghouses issued private money called “clearinghouse loan
certificates” during panics. These certificates functioned as a form of deposit insurance from the
point of view of depositors because they served to convert claims on a single bank into claims on
the group of banks in the coalition. For depositors to accept these certificates, they must be
convinced that banks will coinsure each other. The coinsurance system only works if there are
banking panics. Banking panics impose externalities on the banks doing well, forcing them to
subsidize and monitor the banks that are not doing well. Monitoring via the coalition is more
efficient than without the coalition because not all banks are closed in the panic. The coalition
distinguishes banks doing well from those doing poorly, closing some of the latter banks and
altering the incentives of other poorly performing banks. Banking panics play a critical economic
function in enforcing the incentive compatibility of bank coalitions. Also, in order for the bank
coalition to form during times of panic, the banks had to agree to mutually monitor each other to