NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE NEW YORK SCHOOL VS. THE SCHOOL OF PARIS:
WHO REALLY MADE THE MOST IMPORTANT ART AFTER WORLD WAR II?
David W. Galenson
Working Paper 9149
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9149
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2002
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2002 by David W. Galenson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The New York School vs. the School of Paris:
Who Really Made the Most Important Art After World War II?
David W. Galenson
NBER Working Paper No. 9149
September 2002
ABSTRACT
American historians of modern art routinely assume that after World War II New York replaced
Paris as the center of the western art world. An analysis of the illustrations in French textbooks shows
that French art scholars disagree: they rate Jean Dubuffet as the most important painter of the era, ahead
of Jackson Pollock, and they consider Yves Klein’s anthropometries of 1960 as the greatest contribution
of a single year, in front of Andy Warhol’s innovations in Pop Art. Yet the French texts also show that
the French artists’ practices and conceptions of art paralleled those of the Americans. Thus while French
and American scholars disagree over the relative importance of their nations’ artists, there is no
disagreement that the most important art of the 1950s was produced by experimental seekers, and that
of the ‘60s by conceptual finders.
David Galenson
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
sogrodow@midway.uchicago.edu

3
The idea that judgments of aesthetic merit can be affected by the nationality of the
observer would not come as a great surprise to even casual followers of international figure
skating competitions. Even more narrowly, that French and American judgments can differ
considerably is witnessed by the relative esteem of film critics from the two countries for Jerry
Lewis movies, or of their wine experts for California vintages. This investigation tests for
national differences between these countries in a very different aesthetic domain, that of modern
painting after World War II. The issue considered here is an intriguing one: is the canon of
modern art significantly different in different countries, or is there an international consensus on
the relative merit of modern artists?
The Triumph of American Painting?
In 1983, an art historian named Serge Guilbaut began his book on the history of Abstract
Expressionism with the declaration that “After the Second World War, the art world witnessed
the birth and development of an American avant-garde, which in the space of a few years
succeeded in shifting the cultural center of the West from Paris to New York.”1
The proposition stated by Guilbaut was hardly a new one. Perhaps its earliest and most
dramatic announcement had been made by the American critic Clement Greenberg. In 1946,
writing in The Nation, Greenberg had confidently and conventionally asserted that
“The School of Paris remains still the creative fountainhead of modern art, and its every move is
decisive for advanced artists everywhere.”2 Just two years later, however, Greenberg had
emphatically changed his mind. In an article in Partisan Review titled “The Decline of Cubism,”
he proclaimed the fall of Paris and the rise of New York:
If artists as great as Picasso, Braque, and Léger have declined so
grievously, it can only be because the general social premises that

4
used to guarantee their functioning have disappeared in Europe.
And when one sees, on the other hand, how much the level of
American art has risen in the last five years, with the emergence of
new talents so full of energy and content as Arshile Gorky,
Jackson Pollock, David Smith - and also when one realizes how
consistently John Marin has maintained a high standard, whatever
the narrowness of his art - then the conclusion forces itself, much
to our own surprise, that the main premises of Western art have at
last migrated to the United States, along with the center of gravity
of industrial production and political power.3
Although Greenberg’s claim initially shocked many people, this position gained currency
over time. In 1956, when William Seitz completed his Princeton dissertation on Abstract
Expressionism, the first large-scale academic study of the new movement, he would conclude
that “It was with a sense of the importance of what was taking place in American art during the
postwar decade that this study of its values was undertaken.” In discussing the issues of
influence and priority, Seitz noted that:
The topic of American influence on European style is a touchy
one, and statements concerning it should not be made without
careful study. On the basis of the present evidence we do know,
however, that the uniting features of the style which can now be
found in England, France, Germany, Italy, Spain, and even Japan
... were well established here, due to the war situation, two years
earlier [than in France].4
In 1970, Irving Sandler gave his history of Abstract Expressionism the title The Triumph
of American Painting.5 This view of the era had by then become commonplace among American
art scholars, and it has remained their standard and virtually unquestioned judgment to the
present.6
Unlike Greenberg, Seitz, and Sandler, Serge Guilbaut is French. His concurrence with
the belief of the American scholars in the dominance of postwar American art might therefore be
taken to indicate that there is no dispute along national lines over this proposition. This