NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LIQUIDITY, EFFICIENCY AND BANK BAILOUTS
Gary Gorton
Lixin Huang
Working Paper 9158
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9158
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2002
We thank Franklin Allen, Jack Kareken, Richard Kihlstrom, and seminar participants at University of
Minnesota and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for comments and suggestions. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Gary Gorton and Lixin Huang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Liquidity, Efficiency and Bank Bailouts
Gary Gorton and Lixin Huang
NBER Working Paper No. 9158
September 2002
JEL No. G21, E58
ABSTRACT
Why do governments bailout banking systems in distress? We argue that the government can
efficiently provide liquidity. We present a general equilibrium model in which not all assets can be used to
purchase all other assets at every date. At some dates agents want to sell projects or securities. The only
buyers are agents who have previously opportunistically invested in otherwise dominated assets because only
these (“liquid”) assets can be used to purchase the projects or securities. The market price of the projects or
securities sold depends on the supply of liquidity, which is determined in general equilibrium. The supply
of liquidity is not perfectly elastic, so asset prices can deviate from “efficient market” prices, that is, the
conditional expectation of the asset payoff. While private liquidity provision is socially beneficial since it
allows valuable reallocations, it is also socially costly since liquidity suppliers could have made more efficient
investments ex ante. As a result, there is a potential role for the government to supply liquidity by issuing
government securities, backed by tax revenue. Government bailouts of banking systems are an example of
such public liquidity provision.
Gary Gorton Lixin Huang
Department of Finance Department of Economics
The Wharton School University of Pennsylvania
University of Pennsylvania Philadelphia, PA 19104
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
gorton@wharton.upenn.edu

1
I. Introduction
In the early 1980s high interest rates caused many U.S. savings and loan institutions to
become economically distressed.1 But, what was to become the thrift crisis in the late 1980s has,
in large part, been attributed to the fact that insolvent institutions were allowed to remain open,
mostly due to the depleted resources of the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation.
Insolvent thrifts were not promptly closed and their assets sold to new investors. The policy of
allowing insolvent institutions to remain open was labeled a policy of “forbearance” and Ed Kane
deemed the insolvent thrifts “zombies”.2 Eventually, the Resolution Trust Corporation was
established to liquidate the assets of insolvent thrifts.3 The bailout of the thrift industry ultimately
cost $180 billion (3.2% of GDP); see Caprio and Klingebiel (1996).4
Prolonged and expensive government bailouts of financial intermediaries following
banking crises have recently proliferated around the world, and it is not only transitional and
emerging economies that have had such experiences.5 As in the U.S. thrift crisis, the resolution
of these crises typically involves the use of public money to subsidize the restructuring or
disposal of impaired loans, a “bailout.” In a survey of 120 banks in 24 developed countries in the
1980s and 1990s, Goodhart (1995) found that two out of three failed banks were bailed out.
These bailouts are expensive. In a sample of 40 such episodes, Honohan and Klingebiel (2000)
found that, on average, countries spend 12.8 percent of their GDP cleaning up their banking
1 For example, the assets of operating GAAP-insolvent institutions in 1984 were $107.3 billion. The total
assets of the 1,290 GAAP-insolvent institutions and nearly insolvent institutions were 45 percent of all
assets of insured thrifts in 1984. See Brumbaugh (1988). On the thrift crisis generally see Barth (1991),
Kane (1989), and White (1991).
2 The term “zombie thrifts” became widely used and is now applied to similar banking situations. In a
private communication, Ed Kane recalls having first used this term in a speech to the American Bar
Association in 1986. It first appeared in published work in Kane (1987), a paper that was presented at the
Western Economics Association in 1986.
3 The 1989 Financial Institutions Recovery, Reform and Enforcement Act (FIRREA) substantially changed
the regulatory structure of the thrift industry. The Resolution Trust Corporation (RTC) was part of the
1989 law. The RTC was the government vehicle for selling the assets of closed thrifts.
4 According to Barth and Bartholomew (1992), as of 1992: “More than 500 institutions were closed at an
estimated present-value cost in excess of $50 billion. Still another 500 or more institutions were open but
insolvent at the end of the decade. These remaining candidates for closure will cost an estimated $100
billion or more…” (p. 37). Other estimates are considerably higher. For example, the Wall Street journal,
April 6, 1990, cites a Congressional Budget Office and General Accounting Office projection of a cost of
$300 to $350 billion. See Kane and Yu (1996) for market value estimates.
5 Caprio and Klingebiel (1999) count 112 episodes of systemic banking crises in 93 countries since the late
1970s. Since 1980, at least two-thirds of International Monetary Fund member countries have experienced
problems with their banking systems (see Daniel (1997)). Also, see Lindgren, et. al., (1999).

2
systems. Claessens, Djankov, and Klingebiel (1999) set the costs at 15-50 percent of GNP. To
emphasize, even developed economies other than the U.S. have faced large costs of bank bailouts.
For example, Spain is estimated to have spent 16.8 percent of GNP on bailouts, Sweden. 6.4
percent of GDP, Finland, 8 percent of GDP. See Caprio and Klingebiel (1996).
In bank bailouts the government directly aids banks by buying equity, extending long-
term loan guarantees to the banks, or buying bank loans at favorable prices. (Usually, non-
performing loans are purchased by the government at face value (see Daniel (1997)).) Sometimes
government bonds are exchanged for bad bank loans. Often a public centralized asset
management company is set up that uses government funds to lend to troubled banks against
specific loan collateral or that buys the loans from the banks. An early, and influential, example
of such a vehicle was the Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC) that President Herbert
Hoover initiated during the onset of the Great Depression in the U.S. (see Olson (1977)). The
RFC is the (implicit or explicit) model for a large number of such vehicles in countries around the
world, including the Resolution Trust Corporation, founded to use federal money to buy and then
sell assets of insolvent U.S. savings and loans institutions (see Todd (1992)). As we discuss later,
government bank restructuring agencies are now commonplace.6
Why do government bailouts occur? Why does the government engage in forbearance,
rather than simply closing insolvent banks and selling their assets to private investors
immediately?7 Are government bailouts efficient? The basic idea developed in this paper is that
it is costly for private agents to be prepared to purchase the assets of the banking system (or a
large part of the banking system) because liquidity is socially costly. Simply put, the sheer
volume of the assets that need to be sold can be too large for private agents to absorb quickly. The
resources of private agents are “illiquid.” In order to make this point, we first must address the
issue of “liquidity.” What is “liquidity” and where does it come from? And, how does “liquidity”
relate to “market efficiency”? The first part of the paper addresses these questions. The second
part of the paper demonstrates how these answers are useful in understanding government
bailouts. We show how the government can create liquidity and improve welfare. We go on to
6
It is not only financial institutions that are bailed out. Nonfinancial firms are also sometimes bailed out.
Nonfinancial firm bailout examples include firms that had outstanding commercial paper during the Penn
Central crisis (see Calomiris (1994)), the Chrysler Corporation (see Iacoca and Novak (1986)), and the
airlines industry following the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001. In these cases, the government
provided loan guarantees to a syndicate of banks and, in the case of Penn Central crises, provided liquidity
through the Federal Reserve’s discount window lending. A related example is the case of the hedge fund
Long Term Capital Management (LTCM), where the lenders in effect purchased the assets at the
government’s instigation (see Lowenstein (2000)). LTCM is discussed further below.
7 We do not address the issue of why banking systems come to be distressed. See Gorton and Winton
(2002) for a survey of the literature on banking crises and banking panics.