NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EFFICIENT PATENT POOLS
Josh Lerner
Jean Tirole
Working Paper 9175
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9175
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2002
We thank Jing-Yuan Chiou, Nancy Gallini, Parag Pathak, Suzanne Scotchmer, and participants in the
"GREMAQ workshop on the Economics of the Internet and Innovation" for helpful comments. Financial
support was provided by Harvard Business School's Division of Research. All errors are our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2002 by Josh Lerner and Jean Tirole. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Efficient Patent Pools
Josh Lerner and Jean Tirole
NBER Working Paper No. 9175
September 2002
JEL. No. K11, L41, M2
ABSTRACT
The paper builds a tractable model of a patent pool, an agreement among patent owners to
license a set of their patents to one another or to third parties. It first provides a necessary and
su±cient condition for a patent pool to enhance welfare. It shows that requiring pool members to be
able to independently license patents matters if and only if the pool is otherwise welfare reducing,
a property that allows the antitrust authorities to use this requirement to screen out unattractive
pools.
The paper then undertakes a number of extensions. It evaluates the "external test," according
to which patents with substitutes should not be included in a pool; analyzes the welfare implications
of the reduction in the members' incentives to invent around or challenge the validity of each other's
patents; looks at the rationale for the (common) provision of automatic assignment of future related
patents to the pool; and, last, studies the intellectual property owners' incentives to form a pool or
to cross-license when they themselves are users of the patents in the pool.
Josh Lerner Jean Tirole
Harvard Business School Institut d’Economie Industrielle
South Hall, Room 220 Manufacture des Tabacs
Boston, MA 02163 Bureau MF 529 - Bat. F
and NBER 21 allees de Brienne
jlerner@hbs.edu 31000 Toulouse FRANCE
tirole@cict.fr

1 Introduction
A patent pool is an agreement among patent owners to license a set of their
patents to one another or to third parties. Patent pools have played an important
role in industry since the 1856 sewing machine pool, although their number and
importance considerably subsided in a hostile antitrust environment after World
War II. Patent pools have been making a comeback in the last few years, and
many believe that pools are bound to be as important or more important in
the new economy as in traditional sectors. Innovations in hardware, software or
biotechnology often build on a number of other innovations owned by a diverse
set of owners.1
There is now widespread agreement among policymakers and economists that
patent pools may benefit both intellectual property owners and consumers, pro-
vided that the pools include patents that are complementary or blocking. It is
perhaps puzzling that so few pools have been formed in the recent past despite
the favorable treatment the US Department of Justice (DOJ) and the US Fed-
eral Trade Commission (FTC) have given to pools of complementary innovations.
This paper unveils some factors that either encourage or hinder the formation of
a pool.2 We analyze the strategic incentives to form a pool in the presence of
current and future innovations that either compete with or are complementors to
the patents in the pool.
A second focus of our analysis is the process through which competition au-
thorities examine patent pools. A recent doctrine is that only “essential patents”
1SeeCarlson(1999)andGilbert(2002)forexcellenthistoricalperspectivesonpatentpools.
2The list of these factors is by no means exhaustive. For example, pools are less likely to
form when the owners of intellectual property have different information, for example on the
social value or the effective duration of individual innovations. Bargaining inefficiencies are
thenboundtoarise.Also, whensubstantialdecisionshavetobemadeafterthepoolisformed,
it may be difficult to design a proper governance structure, i.e., to align the interest of pool
members.
2

be included in pools. In a number of cases, an independent expert has been
assigned the role of ensuring that only essential inventions are added to the pool
and removing patents that are no longer essential in the future. In the context
of a pool defining a DVD-ROM and video standard, Assistant Attorney General
Joel Klein defined essentiality in the following way:3
“Essential patents, by definition, have no substitutes; one needs li-
censes to each of them in order to comply with the standard.”
In other words, the inventions covered by the patents in the pool must be
complements (internal test); furthermore, each individual patent admits no sub-
stitute outside the pool (external test). One may wonder whether such standards
are too strict or too lenient. By contrast, there have been historically (before
1995) almost no provisions relative to the inclusion of essential patents in pools.
AnotherfeatureofinterestintherecentpoolsapprovedbyAmericanantitrust
authoritiesisthatpatentownersretainarighttolicensetheirinventionseparately
from the pool. 44% of the 63 pools included in the sample in Lerner et al. (2002)
allow pool members to offer independent licenses outside the pool. When is the
independent-licensing provision beneficial to the members of the pool? Is it a
(presumably cheap) way of accommodating the concerns of antitrust authorities?
Shapiro (2001) uses Cournot (1838)’s analysis to point out that patent pools
raise welfare when patents are perfect complements and harm welfare when they
are perfect substitutes. While this is a useful first step in the antitrust analysis
of patent pools, patents are rarely perfect complements or perfect substitutes;
indeed, antitrust authorities sometimes wonder whether they are complements or
3Letter of Joel I. Klein to R. Carey Ramos, Esq., June 10, 1999,
http://www.usdoj.gov:80/atr/public/busreview/2485.wpd.
3