NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BOND RISK PREMIA
John H. Cochrane
Monika Piazzesi
Working Paper 9178
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9178
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2002
We thank Geert Bekaert, Michael Brandt, Lars Hansen, Bob Hodrick, Narayana Kocherlakota, Pedro Santa-
Clara, Martin Schneider and many seminar participants for helpful comments. Cochrane acknowledges
research support from the Graduate School of Business and from an NSF grant administered by the NBER.
Updated drafts of this paper are maintained on the authors’ web pages, including color graphs. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2002 by John H. Cochrane and Monika PIazzesi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Bond Risk Premia
John H. Cochrane and Monika Piazzesi
NBER Working Paper No. 9178
September 2002
JEL No. G1, E4
ABSTRACT
This paper studies time variation in expected excess bond returns. We run regressions of
annual excess returns on forward rates. We find that a single factor predicts 1-year excess returns
on 1-5 year maturity bonds with an R2 up to 43%. The single factor is a tent-shaped linear function
of forward rates. The return forecasting factor has a clear business cycle correlation: Expected
returns are high in bad times, and low in good times, and the return-forecasting factor forecasts long-
run output growth. The return-forecasting factor also forecasts stock returns, suggesting a common
time-varying premium for real interest rate risk. The return forecasting factor is poorly related to
level, slope, and curvature movements in bond yields. Therefore, it represents a source of yield curve
movement not captured by most term structure models. Though the return-forecasting factor
accounts for more than 99% of the time-variation in expected excess bond returns, we find
additional, very small factors that forecast equally small differences between long term bond returns,
and hence statistically reject a one-factor model for expected returns.
John H. Cochrane Monika Piazzesi
Graduate School of Business Anderson Graduate School of Management
University of Chicago UCLA
1101 E. 58th St. 110 Westwood Plaza
Chicago, IL 60637 Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER and NBER
john.cochrane@gsb.uchicago.edu piazzesi@ucla.edu

1 Introduction
This paper studies time-varying risk premia in the term structure of interest rates. We
run regressions of one year excess returns — borrow at the one year rate, buy a long term
bond, and sell it in one year — on all forward rates available at the beginning of the
period. We find R2 values as high as 43%. The forecasts are statistically significant for
allmaturities, eventakingintoaccountthesmallsamplepropertiesofteststatistics. The
forecasts survive in subsamples, in real time, and across two datasets. Most importantly,
the pattern of regression coefficients is the same for all maturities. A single “return-
forecasting factor,” a single linear combination of forward rates (or yields), describes
time-variation in the expected return of all bonds. A rise in the return-forecasting factor
implies steadily greater expected excess returns for longer maturity bonds.
This work extends Fama and Bliss’s (1987) and Campbell and Shiller’s (1991) classic
regressions. Fama and Bliss found that the spread between the n-year forward rate and
the 1-year yield predicts the 1-year excess return of the n-year bond, with R2 about 15%.
Campbell and Shiller found similar results forecasting yield changes with yield spreads.
(Campbell 1995isanexcellentsummary.)Wemorethandoublethe R2. Wefindthatthe
same linear combination of forward rates predicts bond returns at all maturities, where
Fama and Bliss relate each bond’s expected excess return to a different forward spread.
Our return-forecasting factor completely drives out Fama and Bliss’s forward spread in
a multiple regression. Our regressions improve on Fama and Bliss’s statistical evidence
for forecastable returns, especially in small samples.
We explore extensively the macroeconomic and financial interpretation and implica-
tions of our bond return forecasts, both for their own interest and to make the forecasts
more concrete and believable. Fama and Bliss (1989), Harvey (1989) and many others
document that the term spreads which forecast bond returns are correlated with eco-
nomic conditions and forecast output and stock returns. It is natural to see how the
return-forecasting factor behaves in these roles. We find that the return-forecasting
factor has a clear business cycle correlation. Expected excess returns are high in bad
times, and low in good times. However, business cycle variables do not forecast bond
returns. The return-forecasting factor apparently reflects additional or better-measured
information. The return-forecasting factor forecasts GDP growth, but only at horizons
over a year, in contrast to the yield spread which forecasts output over short horizons.
Thus, we overturn the link between bond excess return forecasts and short term (mon-
etary?) output fluctuations suggested by term spreads. The return-forecasting factor
also forecasts stock returns, about as much as it would forecast the return of an 8-year
duration bond. The return-forecasting factor is a bit stronger in the 1990s, when interest
rate changes were largely real, than it is in the 1970s when inflation had a strong effect
on interest rates, and the return-forecasting factor is poorly correlated with inflation. All
of this evidence points to a time-varying, business cycle related premium for holding real
interest rate risk.
The return-forecasting factor also forecasts changes in short-term interest rates. The
classic expectations hypothesis predicts that a forward rate higher than the short rate
2

should forecast a rise in the short rate. Fama and Bliss’s (1987) rejection of the expec-
tations hypothesis showed that this is not true — there is no tendency for the short rate
to rise in the first year after we observe a high forward rate. This phenomenon is the flip
side of Fama and Bliss’s return forecasts: since the interest rate does not rise, long term
bondpricesdonotfalltooffsettheirhigherinitialyields, solong-termbondholdersmake
money. Our return-forecasting factor does forecast changes in 1-year rates. However, our
forecastisroughlyspeakinginthe“wrongdirection.” Whenthereturn-forecastingfactor
signals high returns on long term bonds, it forecasts a decline in the short rate that will
raise long term bond prices, so long term bond holders make even more money than by
Fama and Bliss’s mechanism.
We also relate our findings to the term structure literature in finance, especially the
“multifactor affine model” literature in which all bond yields are driven by a few factors.
The return-forecasting factor is a tent-shaped linear combination of forward rates. It is
not a “curvature factor” in yields, though. Expressed as a function of yields rather than
forward rates, it is curved through the 4-5 year maturity rather than curved at the short
end. As a result, the return-forecasting factor is poorly related to the level, slope, and
curvature factors that describe the vast bulk of moments in bond yields and that form
the basis of most term structure models. Much of the variation in the return-forecasting
factorisrelatedtothesmalladditionalyieldcurvefactorsthatareconventionallyignored.
In addition, most term structure models are specified and estimated at monthly or even
weeklyfrequency. Wefindamovingaveragestructureinthemonthlyyielddata, possibly
induced by measurement error, so a monthly AR(1) yield representation raised to the
12thpowermissesmuchoftheone-yearbondreturnpredictabilityandcompletelymisses
the single-factor representation. To see the return forecasts, you must look directly at
the one year horizon, or more complex time series models.
These two facts may explain why the return-forecasting factor has gone unrecognized
forsolonginthiswell-studieddata, andthesefactscarryimportantimplicationsforterm
structure modeling. If you first posit a factor model for yields, estimate it on monthly
data, and then look at one year expected returns, you will completely miss excess return
forecastability. To incorporate our evidence on risk premia, a yield curve model must
includesomethinglikeourreturn-forecastingfactorinadditiontotraditionalfactorssuch
as “level,” “slope,” and “curvature,” even though the return-forecasting factor does little
improve the model’s fit for yields, and it must reconcile the difference between our direct
annual forecasts and those implied by short horizon regressions.
The return-forecasting factor accounts for more than 99% of the time-variation of
bond expected excess returns. However, additional very small factors forecast very small
spreads between long-term bond returns with statistical significance. These additional
factors cause a statistical rejection of a single factor model for expected returns. The
additionalfactorscorrespondtosmall,idiosyncratic,transitorymovementsinbondprices
oryields. Thesemovements may representsmall liquidity premia, exploitableby extreme
long-short positions (such as the famous 29.5 - 30 year LTCM bond spread), or they may
reflect measurement error in prices.
3