NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC IMPACT OF NATIVE AMERICAN CASINOS
William N. Evans
Julie H. Topoleski
Working Paper 9198
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9198
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2002
This project is supported by a grant from the Smith-Richardson Foundation. The authors wish to thank Kim
Eisler, members of Gila River Indian Community, the Yavapai-Apache Nation, the Oneida Nation, and the
Lac Courte Oreilles Band of Lake Superior Chippewa, seminar participants at the University of Maryland,
Cornell University and MIT for a number of helpful suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by William N. Evans and Julie H. Topoleski. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Social and Economic Impact of Native American Casinos
William N. Evans and Julie H. Topoleski
NBER Working Paper No. 9198
September 2002
JEL No. L83, R58
ABSTRACT
In the late 1980s, a series of legal rulings favorable to tribes and the subsequent passage of
the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act of 1988 legalized gaming operations on reservations in many
states. Today, there are over 310 gaming operations run by more than 200 of the nations’ 556
federally-recognized tribes. Of these operations, about 220 are “Las Vegas” style casinos with slot
machines and/or table games. We use a simple difference-in-difference framework where we
compare economic outcomes before and after tribes open casinos to outcomes over the same period
for tribes that do not adopt or are prohibited from adopting gaming. Four years after tribes open
casinos, employment has increased by 26 percent, and tribal population has increased by about 12
percent, resulting in an increase in employment to population ratios of five percentage points or
about 12 percent. The fraction of adults who work but are poor has declined by 14 percent. Tribal
gaming operations seem to have both positive and negative spillovers in the surrounding
communities. In counties where an Indian-owned casino opens, we find that jobs per adult increase
by about five percent of the median value. Given the size of tribes relative to their counties, most
of this growth in employment is due to growth in non-Native American employment. The increase
in economic activity appears to have some health benefits in that four or more years after a casino
opens, mortality has fallen by 2 percent in a county with a casino and an amount half that in counties
near a casino. Casinos do, however, come at some cost. Four years after a casino opens,
bankruptcy rates, violent crime, and auto thefts and larceny are up 10 percent in counties with a
casino.
William N. Evans Julie H. Topoleski
Department of Economics Department of Economics
University of Maryland University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742 College Park, MD 20742
and NBER topolesk@econ.umd.edu
evans@econ.umd.edu

I Introduction
Native Americans living on reservations are among the poorest people in the United States, with
median household incomes that are 60 percent lower and poverty rates that are five times higher than
national averages. To spur economic development, a handful of tribes opened large-scale bingo halls
and/or casinos with Las Vegas-style gambling in the late 1970s and early 1980s. During this period, the
number and size of tribal gaming operations were severely restricted by state laws. In the late 1980s, a
series of legal rulings favorable to tribes and the subsequent passage of the Indian Gaming Regulatory
Act of 1988 legalized gaming operations on reservations in many states. Today, there are over 310
gaming operations run by more than 200 of the nations’ 556 federally-recognized tribes. Of these
operations, about 220 are “Las Vegas” style casinos with slot machines and/or table games. By 1999,
about half of tribal members in the lower 48 states are in tribes that run a casino-style gaming operation.
By 2000, Indian-owned gaming operations generated about $10 billion in revenues, about one-sixth of all
revenues generated by legal gaming in this country.
An explicit goal of the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act (IGRA) is to promote “tribal economic
development, self-sufficiency, and strong tribal governments.”1 Whether the IGRA has achieved this goal
is an empirical question that to date has received little attention. In the popular press, the answer to this
question varies widely. Casinos in Connecticut, California, and New York have been incredibly
successful and in 2000 had combined revenues in excess of $4 billion.2 Tribes in Minnesota and
Wisconsin report dramatic decreases in unemployment rates (National Gambling Impact Study
Commission Report (1999), p. 6-16). Other reports paint the opposite picture. Tribes of the Greater
Sioux Nation in North and South Dakota operate about a dozen gambling facilities, but because of the
125 U.S.C. 2702(1)
2Sean Murphy. “Tribal Gamble: The Lure and Peril of Indian Gaming. A Big Roll at Mohegan Sun.” The Boston
Globe. December 10, 2000. (http://www.boston.com/globe/nation/packages/gaming/part1.htm )
1

relative geographic isolation of these tribes, these gambling halls generate relatively little revenue.3 The
Boston Globe reports, “While a few dozen tribes lucky enough to own reservation land near major
population centers make headlines with gambling casinos generating mind-boggling wealth, the vast
majority of America's Indians remain mired in poverty, victimized by ill-conceived federal policies and a
gathering backlash spurred by the myth that Native Americans everywhere are cashing in.”4
In this paper, we examine the economic and social impact that Indian-owned casinos have had on
reservations and the surrounding communities. We use a simple difference-in-difference framework
where we compare economic outcomes before and after tribes open casinos to outcomes over the same
period for tribes that do not adopt or are prohibited from adopting gaming. In the first part of the paper,
we examine the impact of the casinos on some tribal economic outcomes. The results of this analysis are
staggering. Four years after tribes open casinos, employment increases by 26 percent, and tribal
population increases by about 12 percent, resulting in an increase in employment to population ratios of
five percentage points or about 12 percent. The fraction of adults who work but are poor declines by 14
percent.
Tribal gaming operations seem to have both positive and negative spillovers in surrounding
communities. In counties where an Indian-owned casino opens, we find that jobs per adult increase by
about percent of the median value. Given the size of tribes relative to their counties, most of this
growth in employment is due to growth in non-Native American employment. The increase in economic
activity appears to have some health benefits in that four or more years after a casino opens, mortality has
fallen by 22 per 100,000 in a county with a casino and an amount half that in counties near a casino.
Casinos do, however, come at some cost. Four years after a casino opens, bankruptcy rates, violent
crime, and auto thefts and larceny are up 10 percent in counties with a casino.
3Michael Rezendes. “Tribal Gamble: The Lure and Peril of Indian Gaming. Few Tribes Share Casino Windfall.”
The Boston Globe. December 11, 2000. (http://www.boston.com/globe/nation/packages/gaming/part2.htm )
4Ibid.
2