NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE ROLE FOR DISCRETIONARY FISCAL POLICY
IN A LOW INTEREST RATE ENVIRONMENT
Martin Feldstein
Working Paper 9203
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9203
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2002
The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2002 by Martin Feldstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Role for Discretionary Fiscal Policy in a Low Interest Rate Environment
Martin Feldstein
NBER Working Paper No. 9203
September 2002
ABSTRACT
Although there is now widespread agreement in the economics profession that discretionary
“counter-cyclical”fiscal policy has not contributed to economic stability and may have actually been
destabilizing at particular times in the past, there is one important condition when discretionary
fiscal policy can play a constructive role: in a sustained downturn when aggregate demand and
interest rates are low and when prices are falling or may soon be falling.
This short note begins by summarizing the general case against using fiscal policy for
stabilization. It next considers the argument for using a “hyperexpansive” monetary policy to reduce
the risk that a low rate of inflation will lead to a deflationary situation in which monetary policy
becomes ineffective. Such a policy would increase the risk of asset price bubbles and of a
misaligned exchange rate.
Discretionary fiscal policy provides an alternative way to stimulate the economy when
aggregate demand and interest rates are low and when prices are falling or may soon be falling. A
stimulus can be achieved without increasing budget deficits if the fiscal policy acts by providing an
incentive for increased private spending. Specific examples for the U.S. and Japan are considered.
Martin Feldstein
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
and Harvard University
mfeldstein@nber.org

The Role for Discretionary Fiscal Policy in a Low Interest Rate Environment
Martin Feldstein*
There is now widespread agreement in the economics profession that deliberate
“countercyclical” discretionary fiscal policy has not contributed to economic stability and may
have actually been destabilizing at particular times in the past.1 Most economists agree that
monetary policy is the superior tool for macroeconomic stabilization.2
Despite this general presumption again discretionary fiscal policy as a tool of
stabilization (which I support), I believe that there is one important condition when
discretionary fiscal policy can play a constructive role: in a sustained downturn when aggregate
demand and interest rates are low and when prices are falling or may soon be falling. This
situation is of more than theoretical interest since it describes Japan’s current condition and some
analysts believe may also be relevant to the U.S. and to Germany.
*Professor of Economics, Harvard University, and President of the National Bureau of
Economic Research. This note is based on my comments on Alan Auerbach’s paper, “Is There a
Role for Discretionary Fiscal Policy?”, presented at the Jackson Hole Federal Reserve
Conference, August 30, 2002. Those comments are available at
www.nber.org/feldstein/auerbach2002.html
1I distinguish between “deliberate” discretionary stabilization policy (i.e., aimed at
cyclical stabilization) and the incidental effect of fiscal changes done for other reasons. The tax
cuts enacted in 1981 and in 2001 were both planned during the earlier election campaigns as
structural changes designed to improve long-term incentives but happened to play a positive but
unintended stabilization role.
2See for example recent papers by Auerbach (2002) , Giovazzi et. al. (2000) , and Romer
and Romer (1994) This view has developed over a long period of time. Even economists who did
not consider themselves to be monetarists came to this conclusion on the basis of their own
studies. Research by Otto Eckstein in the 1970s and by the Office of Management and Budget
of the Carter administration concluded that the timing of previous discretionary fiscal policies
had actually been destabilizing.
-1-

In discussing the case for discretionary fiscal policy in this context I will also emphasize
that an expansionary fiscal policy need not increase the full employment deficit. More
specifically, changes in fiscal incentives may be more useful than traditional fiscal policies that
increase budget deficits and work through income effects alone.
The Case Against Discretionary Fiscal Stabilization Policy
To explain why discretionary fiscal policy may be constructive in the special case that I
have identified, it is useful to begin by reviewing the now generally accepted case against using
discretionary fiscal stabilization policy under most circumstances when a change in aggregate
demand is desired.
This general consensus against discretionary fiscal policy is a really remarkable reversal
from the Keynesian view of appropriate policy that prevailed in the 1960s and even in the 1970s.
The basic view at that time was that a shortfall of aggregate demand could be and should be
reversed by a cut in taxes or an increase in government spending. The economics profession has
now rejected that prescription for three basic reasons:
First, the powerful multiplier effect assumed in the early textbook Keynesian models was
dramatically reduced when economists recognized that the marginal propensity to save out of
temporary tax cuts is likely to be relatively high and that the increase in money demand that
accompanies an economic expansion causes a demand-reducing rise in interest rates.
Second, more recent analyses summarized in Giavazzi et. al., (2000) have shown that tax
reductions or expenditure increases can actually depress economic activity. One important way
in which this can occur is by raising long term interest rates as bond investors react to the fear of
-2-