NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHAT IS THE TRADEOFF BETWEEN
SMALLER CLASSES AND TEACHER QUALITY?
Christopher Jepsen
Steven Rivkin
Working Paper 9205
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9205
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2002
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors alone and do not necessarily reflect any position of the Public
Policy Institute of California or the National Bureau of Economic Research. We would like to thank Mark
Baldassare, Julian Betts, Gary Hart, Kim Rueben, Jon Sonstelie, and seminar participants at the Public Policy
Institute of California, Stanford University, and the Fall 2001 APPAM meetings for their many helpful
comments. We would also like to thank Anne Danenberg for invaluable data support and Pedro Cerdan and
Jackie Chou for excellent research assistance.
© 2002 by Christopher Jepsen and Steven Rivkin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

What is the Tradeoff Between Smaller Classes and Teacher Quality?
Christopher Jepsen and Steven Rivkin
NBER Working Paper No. 9205
September 2002
JEL No. I2, H4, J4
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates the effects of California’s class size reduction program on teacher
quality and student achievement in an effort to gain a comprehensive understanding of the
impact of a large-scale decrease in class size. It uses year-to-year differences in class size
generated by natural variation in enrollment and the state’s class size reduction program to
identify both the direct effects of class size reduction and accompanying changes in teacher
quality. The results show that, all else equal, smaller classes raise third-grade mathematics and
reading achievement, particularly for lower-income students. However, the expansion of the
teaching force required to staff the additional classrooms appears to have led to a deterioration
in average teacher quality in schools serving a predominantly black student body. This
deterioration partially or, in some cases, fully offset the benefits of smaller classes,
demonstrating the importance of considering all implications of any policy change.
Christopher Jepsen Steven Rivkin
Public Policy Institute of California Amherst College
500 Washington Street Department of Economics
Suite 800 P.O. Box 5000
San Francisco, CA 94111 Amherst, MA 01002-5000
jepsen@ppic.org and NBER
sgrivkin@amherst.edu

Encouraged by results from the Tennessee class size experiment, California enacted
legislation in 1996 that reduced K-3 class sizes by roughly ten students per class at an annual cost
of over $1 billion. Although the Tennessee experiment and most recent statistical analyses find that
smaller classes benefit students in the early grades (particularly those who are economically
disadvantaged), little evidence exists on the effects of a large-scale reduction in class size that
requires the hiring of a large number of new teachers. In addition to adding many rookie teachers,
such a rapid expansion of the teaching force may lead to a decline in the average quality of new
hires that offsets at least some of the benefits of smaller classes over the longer term, particularly in
high-poverty urban schools that have the most difficulty attracting and retaining teachers. Ross
(1999) describes the influx of inexperienced, non-certified teachers into elementary schools in
South Central Los Angeles following class size reduction (CSR). This influx, he reports, was
prompted in part by the departure of many experienced teachers to newly created positions in more
affluent communities.
As Heckman (2001) emphasizes, it is important to consider both direct and indirect effects
of a policy in order to gain a comprehensive understanding of its impact. With that in mind, this
paper investigates the effects of the California CSR program on student achievement with special
attention to the link between class size and teacher quality. A number of factors hinder an analysis
of the overall effect of CSR. Because California did not administer statewide examinations until the
1997-1998 school year, no baseline measure of achievement prior to CSR is available. Also, the
statewide implementation of CSR makes it more difficult to separate its effects from other changes
including expanded school accountability, the spread of charter schools, and test score inflation.
Previous evaluations of the effects of CSR compare achievement in schools that did and
did not implement CSR in the initial year. In drawing these comparisons, the reports used
demographic information and student performance in non-CSR grades as controls for potentially
2

confounding differences in students and schools.1 Although such comparisons may well account
for most of the systematic differences between timely and late adopters of CSR, these difference-
in-difference estimators are likely to be contaminated by the effects of CSR on non-CSR grades.
As we show below, evidence strongly suggests that the implementation of CSR also affected the
composition of teachers and student achievement in grades not directly affected by CSR.
Our approach also uses differences in the timing of CSR implementation but does not
compare achievement across schools on the basis of the year a school reduces class size. Instead,
we remove school fixed effects and use class size and teacher characteristic changes between 1997
and 1999 to estimate the effects of smaller classes and teacher characteristics on third-grade
achievement. The class size coefficients can be multiplied by the average reduction in class size
under CSR to obtain estimates of the gains from reducing class size for schools with particular
demographic compositions.2
Although included variables provide some information on teacher quality, these and other
observable characteristics explain only a small portion of the total variation in quality as measured
by teacher value added to achievement (Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain, 2000). Therefore we attempt
to capture unmeasured changes in teacher quality in addition to the changes in observable
characteristics by comparing the relationship between class size and achievement in schools that
implemented CSR in 1998 or 1999 with the relationship for schools that had already implemented
CSR as of 1997. This approach takes advantage of the fact that sources of within-school variation
in class size for the years 1997 and 1999 differ systematically with the timing of CSR
implementation. On the one hand, class size variation between 1997 and 1999 for early adopters
(1996 or 1997) stems almost entirely from natural shifts over time in enrollment that are unlikely to
be related to teacher quality changes. Estimates of class size effects for these schools should
1 See Bohrnstedt and Stecher (1999) and Stecher and Bohrnstedt (2000).
3