NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE TIME SERIES OF THE CROSS SECTION OF ASSET PRICES
Lior Menzly
Tano Santos
Pietro Veronsesi
Working Paper 9217
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9217
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2002
We thank seminar participants at University of Texas at Austin, NYU, University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign, McGill, MIT, and the University of Chicago. We also thank John Cochrane, George
Constantinides, Lars Hansen, John Heaton, Martin Lettau and Jessica Wachter for their comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2002 by Lior Menzly, Tano Santos, and Pietro Veronesi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Time Series of the Cross Section of Asset Prices
Lior Menzly, Tano Santos, and Pietro Veronesi
NBER Working Paper No. 9217
September 2002
JEL No. G1
ABSTRACT
In this paper we propose a general equilibrium model that successfully reproduces the
historical experience of the cross section of US stock prices as well as the realized history of the
market portfolio. The model achieves this while addressing traditional concerns in the asset pricing
literature: A high equity premium and volatility of returns, the long horizon predictability, and a low
volatility of the risk free rate. The model combines a rich payoff structure with a habit persistence
discount factor, which allows us to identify the effect on prices of idiosyncratic cash flow shocks
versus business cycle components.
Lior Menzly Tano Santos
University of Chicago Graduate School of Business
1101 East 58th Street University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637 1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jesus.santos@gsb.uchicago.edu
Pietro Veronesi
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER, CEPR
pietro.veronesi@gsb.uchicago.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
What are the sources of differences across asset prices? How does the cross section
of stock prices behave over the business cycle? Do prices show secular trends and, if so,
what is the source of this trend? Asset prices are the result of the interaction of cash flows
with the stochastic discount factor and, consequently, answers to these questions rest on a
thorough understanding of each of these two components. Surprisingly though, there has been
little theoretical work combining a rich payoff structure with an interesting pricing kernel in a
general equilibrium framework, and, hence, these issues have not been successfully addressed
in the literature. The purpose of this paper is to fill this void. Specifically, we write a general
equilibrium model that tightly links the cross section and the time series of asset prices to cash
flows and a consumption based stochastic discount factor. The model successfully reproduces
the historical experience of the cross section of US stock prices as well as the realized history
of the market portfolio. In addition, our set up is able to address traditional concerns in the
asset pricing literature: A high equity premium and volatility of returns, the long horizon
predictability, and a low volatility of the risk free rate.
To gain some insight on the interaction between cash flows and stochastic discount
factors, Figure 1 shows evidence on the relation between the cross section of asset prices and
the business cycle. Panel A shows the log of the price dividend ratio of the market portfolio
versus the cross sectional standard deviation of the log price dividend ratios of industry-sorted
portfolios for the sample period 1927-2001. Both series show a great deal of comovement and
indeedtheircorrelationisasolid.75. Asitiswellknownvariationinthepricedividendratioof
themarketportfolioismostlydrivenbyshockstoexpectedratesofreturn, anaggregateeffect.
Thehighcorrelationbetweenthesetwoseriesthensuggestsalinkbetweentheaggregatefactors
drivingthetimeseriesvariationofthemarketportfolioandthecrosssectionaldispersionacross
industries. Moreover, Panel B, where we plot the same series in first differences, shows that
the same pattern holds for higher frequencies. Once again both series show a great deal of
comovement and their correlation coefficient is still a healthy .40.
Clearly, price dividend ratio fluctuations can only be driven by news to cash flows and
news to discount rates, so whatever variation there is in the cross section of these ratios must
be driven by differences on how each industry loads in either one of these two components.
We can then apply the traditional tools of variance decomposition literature to deepen our
1

understanding of the driving forces behind the time variation in the cross sectional dispersion.
Table I Panel A reports the percentage of the variance of log price dividend ratio that is
driven by shocks to expected cash flows versus shocks to expected returns for two industries
in our sample, Railroads and Paper. For comparison we include the more standard variance
decomposition for the market portfolio.1 Paper and Railroads differ markedly. For example,
while Paper is similar to the market portfolio, as shocks to discount rates make up the largest
component of the variance of its log price-dividend ratio, this is not true for Railroads, where
the cash flow component seems to have a bigger role (although statistically insignificant). A
similar exercise across industries reveals that for some industries the variance of log price-
dividend ratios is driven to a large extent by cash flow news whereas for others they explain a
much smaller fraction of this variance.
Table I Panel B reports the same result from the perspective of standard five year ahead
predictabilityregressions. PricedividendratiospredictfuturereturnsinthecaseofPaper,very
much like (or even better than) the well known predictability result for the market portfolio,
whereas they do not in the case of Railroads.
The variance decomposition and predictability regressions are ideal instruments to an-
alyze what drives the price dividend ratios of various industries and summarize their cross
sectional differences conveniently, but we are interested in another aspect of the data as well,
namely, the level and trend of asset prices. To illustrate this Figure 2 plots the price of Rail-
roads and Paper, normalized both by the level of US consumption. For comparison, we have
included the price consumption ratio of the market portfolio. The pattern is striking: while
Railroads has experienced a severe secular decline, Paper experienced a surge in the mid fifties
and has remained roughly steady ever since. These two industries differ only in their cash flow
realizationsandweareinterestedinfindingouthowfarcanthesecashflowsgoinrationalizing
the observed histories.
Our model will be able to shed light on the cross-sectional differences in predictability
1The voluminous literature on the variance decomposition starts with Campbell and Shiller’s (1988a,b)
seminal contribution. See also Cochrane (1991). The general finding is that the cash flow component does not
explainmuchofthevariationofthelogprice-dividendratioofthemarketportfolio,whilethereturncomponent
explainsalargerpercentageofit. Vuoltenahoo(2002)conductsthesameexerciseatthefirmlevel,findingthat,
in contrast to the market portfolio, individual stock returns are mainly driven by news to cash flows. Ours is
the same exercise at an intermediate level of aggregation.
2