NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A FISCAL THEORY OF SOVEREIGN RISK
Martín Uribe
Working Paper 9221
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9221
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2002
I would like to thank Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé and seminar participants at the European Central Bank and
the 2002 meeting of the Society for Economic Dynamics held in New York, NY. for helpful comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2002 by Martín Uribe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Fiscal Theory of Sovereign Risk
Martín Uribe
NBER Working Paper No. 9221
September 2002
JEL No. E6, F41
ABSTRACT
This paper presents a fiscal theory of sovereign risk and default. Under certain monetary-
fiscal regimes, the risk of default, and thus the emergence of sovereign risk premia, are inevitable.
The paper characterizes the equilibrium processes of the sovereign risk premium and the default rate
under a number of alternative monetary policy arrangements. Under some of the policy
environments considered, the expected default rate and the sovereign risk premium are zero although
the government defaults regularly. Under other monetary regimes the default rate and the sovereign
risk premium are serially correlated and therefore forecastable. Environments are characterized
under which delaying default is counterproductive.
Martín Uribe
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
uribe@econ.upenn.edu

1 Introduction
Certain monetary-fiscal arrangements are incompatible with price stability and government
solvency. Consider, for example, the case of an independent central bank whose policy is to
peg the price level. Under this monetary regime, the government cannot use the price level
as a shock absorber of negative fiscal shocks. Specifically, by sticking to a price level target,
the government gives up its ability to inflate away part of the real value of public debt via
surprise inflation in response to a sudden deterioration of the fiscal budget. Under these
circumstances, default of the public debt is inevitable.1
Policy regimes of this type, under which debt repudiation is, under certain states of the
world the only possible outcome, are not unheard of. A point in case is the recent debt
crisis in Argentina. Between 1991 and early 2002, Argentina pegged the domestic price of
tradables to the US counterpart by fixing the peso/dollar exchange rate. Abandoning the
exchange-rate peg was never an easy option for the Argentine government. This is because
the peg was instituted by a law of Congress—the 1991 Convertibility Law—which required
the enactment of another law to deactivate it. In the midst of a prolonged recession, in 2001
doubts began to be cast about the government’s ability to curb fiscal imbalances. These
fears placed the country risk premium, measured by the difference between the interest rate
on Argentine and US dollar-denominated government bonds of similar maturities, over 1,800
basis points, among the world’s highest at the time. Eventually, the Argentine government
defaulted; first on interest obligations, in December of 2001, and shortly thereafter on the
entire principal.
Price level targeting is not the only monetary arrangement under which pressures for
default can arise under certain fiscal scenarios. Consider, for example, the case of a central
bank that aggressively pursues an inflation target by setting the nominal interest rate as
an increasing function of inflation with a reaction coefficient larger than unity. This type
of policy rule is often referred to as a Taylor rule after John Taylor’s (1993) seminal paper.
Suppose that, at the same time, the fiscal authority follows an active stance whereby it does
not adjust the primary deficit to ensure intertemporal solvency. Under this policy mix, if
the government refrains from defaulting, then price stability is in general unattainable. In
particular, the equilibrium rate of inflation converges to either plus or minus infinity. Loyo
(1999) refers to the latter equilibrium as a ‘fiscalist hyperinflation.’ Given this monetary-
fiscal regime, default is a necessary consequence if price stability is to be preserved. An
example of the policy regime described here is given by Brazil. After abandoning a crawling
1Krugman’s (1979)celebrated model of balance of payments crises is an example in which the aforemen-
tioned incompatibility is resolved by abandoning the price stability goal.
1

peg policy, since mid 1999 the Brazilian central bank has actively used the interest rate as an
instrument to target inflation. Although in recent years fiscal discipline has been enhanced,
the Brazilian Treasury is facing serious difficulties implementing additional fiscal reforms
necessary to slowdown the rapid growth in public debt. Interestingly, a growing number of
observers are beginning to consider a ’unilateral restructuring’ of Brazil’s public debt as a
likely way out of hyperinflation.2
The focus of this paper is to characterize the equilibrium behavior of default and the
country risk premium in policy environments under which the government cannot guarantee
the full service of public obligations without relinquishing price stability. A central ques-
tion this paper seeks to answer is how different monetary policy specifications affect the
equilibrium behavior of default and sovereign risk premia. The analysis is organized around
two canonical policy arrangements. Under both environments fiscal policy is assumed to be
‘active’ in the sense of Leeper (1991). Specifically, real primary surpluses are assumed to be
exogenous and random. In one of the policy regimes considered, the central bank pegs the
price level. In the other, the monetary authority follows a Taylor rule.
Our characterization of equilibrium under default reveals that the properties of the equi-
libriumstochasticprocessfollowedbythedefaultrateandthesovereignriskpremiumdepend
heavily upon the underlying monetary policy regime. For example, in the Taylor-rule econ-
omy, the expected default rate and the country risk premium are zero. This means that the
default rate is unforecastable. By contrast, in the price-targeting economy current and past
fiscal deficits predict future default rates. Moreover, in the price-targeting economy the fis-
cal authority has more degrees of freedom in setting the default rate than in the Taylor-rule
economy.
Clearly, having to default is a situation no policymaker wishes to be involved in. So
procrastination is commonplace. Sometimes governments choose to let go of their price
stability goals in the hopes of retaking them after inflating their way out of default. A
natural question, therefore, is what standard general equilibrium models tell us about the
consequences of delaying default. We find that substituting a temporary increase in inflation
for default is not always possible. Specifically, we identify situations in which postponing the
decision to default leads to a hyperinflationary situation that in order to be stopped requires
an eventual default of larger dimension than the one that would have taken place had the
government not chosen to procrastinate.
2See, forexample,the articlesbyTedTruman(seniorfellow atthe Institute forInternationalEconomics,
former assistant secretary of the Treasury for international affairs, and former director of the Division of
InternationalFinanceattheFederalReserveBoard)publishedintheFinancial Times onJune25,2002,and
by Joaqu´ınCottani (chief economistof Lehman Brothers)published in the Argentine newspaper La Naci´on
on June 23, 2002. See also the June 29, 2002 issue of The Economist.
2