NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INFORMATION CONTENT OF EQUITY ANALYST REPORTS
Paul Asquith
Michael B. Mikhail
Andrea S. Au
Working Paper 9246
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9246
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2002
We wish to thank SP Kothari, Grace Pownall, Philip Stocken, Beverly Walther, Richard Willis, and workshop
participants at MIT, Wharton, the SECARC, and the AAA Annual Meeting for helpful comments and
suggestions. We also acknowledge the research assistance of Jeff Braun. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Paul Asquith, Michael B. Mikhail and Andrea S. Au. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Information Content of Equity Analyst Reports
Paul Asquith, Michael B. Mikhail and Andrea S. Au
NBER Working Paper No. 9246
October 2002
JEL No. G11, G14, G24, M41
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates the market reaction to the information released in security analyst
reports. It shows that the market reacts significantly and positively to changes in recommendation
levels, earnings forecasts, and price targets. While changes in price targets and earnings forecasts
both provide information to the market, revisions in price targets have a larger and more significant
impact than comparable revisions in earnings forecasts. The text of the report is also a significant
source of information as it provides the justifications supporting an analyst’s summary opinion.
When all of this information is considered simultaneously, some of it, notably the earnings forecasts,
is subsumed. The results further show that analysts correctly predict price targets slightly over 50%
of the time. Finally, the valuation methodology used does not seem to be correlated with either the
market’s reaction or the analyst’s accuracy.
Paul Asquith Michael B. Mikhail
Sloan School of Management Fuqua School of Business
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Duke University
50 Memorial Drive Box 90120
Cambridge, MA 02142 Durham, NC 27708
and NBER mmikhail@duke.edu
pasquith@mit.edu
Andrea S. Au
Sloan School of Management
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
andreau@mit.edu

1. Introduction
This paper investigates the association between market returns and the content of security
analysts’ reports. In addition, it provides the first detailed catalog of the elements in a typical
analyst report. An analyst’s report is the culmination of a process that includes the collection,
evaluation, and dissemination of information related to a firm’s future performance. The
majority of these reports include three key summary elements: earnings forecasts, a stock
recommendation - such as buy, sell, or hold - and a price target. In addition, many reports
present extensive quantitative and descriptive analysis supporting these summary elements.1
Previous research on analyst reports primarily examines revisions in only the first two
summary elements: stock recommendations and earnings forecasts. We extend this research by
incorporating the contents of analyst reports in their entirety rather than just individual elements
such as the summary recommendation. One problem in evaluating stock recommendations alone
is that there are a limited number of recommendation levels. For example, although analysts
have five distinct recommendations - strong buy, buy, hold, sell, and strong sell - at their
disposal, they are generally reluctant to use the two negative ratings.2 By incorporating the
gradations available in the analysts’ price targets and the reports’ contents, we overcome many
of the disadvantages caused by the use of a few discrete recommendation categories.3 Our
approach to this analysis is captured by the quote “In the end, stock ratings and target prices are
just the skin and bones of analysts’ research. The meat of such reports is in the analysis, detail,
1 Recently some firms have announced that they will to expand this list of summary elements to include information
such as the projected price volatility and the stock’s dividend outlook. See “Merrill Lynch Announces Major
Changes to Stock Ratings and Compensation Systems for Research Analysts.”
2 An often-cited rationale for this avoidance is that an analyst’s salary and bonus may be linked to quantifiable
measures such as his firm’s underwriting fees or commissions generated by his recommendations, outcomes that
may be facilitated by the issuance of favorable reports. In addition, analysts traditionally relied on company
management for information and thus had a reason to maintain good relations with them. The 2000 SEC Regulation
FD, which requires firms to publicly disseminate all material information, presumably reduces this incentive.
3 Mikhail, Walther, and Willis (2002) report that approximately 55% of all recommendations are buys or strong
buys, 39% are holds and only 6% are sells or strong sells. See also Barber, Lehavy, McNichols, and Trueman
(2001). Recent announcements by Wall Street Firms to change to only three ratings codify their actual behavior.
See “Should You Trust Wall Street’s New Ratings?”
1

and tone.4” This is especially true for reiterations, which represent almost two thirds of the
analyst reports in our database.
Using a database constructed from analyst reports issued during 1997-1999, we examine
if, after controlling for changes in earnings forecasts and summary recommendations, the
market’s response to the release of a security analyst report varies with price target changes and
other information contained in the report. Our analysis shows that changes in the summary stock
recommendations, earnings forecasts, and price targets all provide independent information to
the capital markets. In particular, incorporating changes in analyst price targets dramatically
increases the fit of our regression results over that obtained from earnings forecast revisions and
discrete recommendations alone.
Adding proxies for other information in a report, such as the strength of the written
arguments made to support an analyst’s opinion, significantly alters our results. As expected, the
stronger the justifications provided in the report, the larger the market’s reaction to the report.
After including this additional information in our model, our results show that although the
market reaction is still correlated with changes in price targets, the significance of earnings
forecast revisions decreases. Moreover, while our recommendation downgrades remain
statistically negative, the significance of recommendation upgrades is eliminated. Recent
reductions in the recommendation levels used by some firms (e.g., from five to three by Merrill
Lynch and Goldman Sachs) will likely further increase the market’s reaction to price targets and
other information contained in analyst reports.5
We extend our analysis to examine if the market treats an analyst’s report differently
based on the type of recommendation revision. For example, is a change in a firm’s price target,
earnings forecasts or an analyst’s justifications for an opinion more important in a report that
reiterates an old recommendation or in a report that provides an upgrade or downgrade? We find
4 See “When a Stock’s Rating and Target Collide.”
5 See “Should You Trust Wall Street’s New Ratings?”
2