NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE ROLE OF INFORMATION IN DRIVING FDI:
THEORY AND EVIDENCE
Ashoka Mody
Assaf Razin
Efraim Sadka
Working Paper 9255
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9255
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2002
We wish to thank Benjamin Bental for very useful comments on an earlier draft and Prakash Loungani for
many insightful discussions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Ashoka Mody, Assaf Razin and Efraim Sadka. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Role of Information in Driving FDI: Theory and Evidence
Ashoka Mody, Assaf Razin and Efraim Sadka
NBER Working Paper No. 9255
October 2002
JEL No. F0
ABSTRACT
We develop a simple information-based model of FDI flows in which the abundance of
“intangible" capital in the source countries, which generates expertise in cream-skimming
investment projects in the host countries and enhances FDI flows. Corporate transparency in the host
countries, on the other hand, diminishes the value of this expertise and thereby reduces the flow of
FDI. Empirical evidence (from a sample of 12 source countries and 45 host countries over the 1980s
and 1990s) which is analyzed in a gravity equation model provides some support to our theoretical
hypotheses. The gains from FDI in the host country in our model are reflected in a more e.cient size
of stock of domestic capital and its allocation across firms. These gains depend crucially (and
inversely) on the degree of competition among FDI investors.
Assaf Razin Ashoka Mody
Department of Economics International Monetary Fund
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv, 69978 Efraim Sadka
ISRAEL Tel Aviv University
NBER and Cornell University
ar256@cornell.edu

The Role of Information in Driving FDI: Theory and Evidence
∗
Ashoka Mody, Assaf Razin and Efraim Sadka
† ‡ §
September 2002
Abstract
Wedevelopasimpleinformation-basedmodelofFDIflowsinwhichtheabundanceof“intangible"
capital in the source countries, which generates expertise in cream-skimming investment projects in
the host countries and enhances FDI flows. Corporate transparency in the host countries, on the
other hand, diminishes the value of this expertise and thereby reduces the flow of FDI. Empirical
evidence(fromasampleof12sourcecountriesand45hostcountriesoverthe1980sand1990s)which
is analyzed in a gravity equation model provides some support to our theoretical hypotheses. The
gains from FDI in the host country in our model are reflected in a more efficient size of stock of
domestic capital and its allocation across firms. These gains depend crucially (and inversely) on the
degree of competition among FDI investors.
1 Introduction
Foreign direct investment (FDI) has been growing faster than world GDP, and is becoming a major
component of foreign investment.1 Indeed, empirical studies distinguish this form of capital flows from
other forms, such as portfolio-equity and debt flows. We usually observe both one-way flows of FDI,
from developed to developing economies, and two-way flows among developed economies. The purpose
of this paper is to explore some unique features of FDI associated with information and transparency,
that make it stand out among the various forms of capital flows.
We identify from empirical data two main categories of variables that significantly explain FDI
inflows. First, a positive correlation between the industry specialization in the source countries and
∗We wish to thank Benjamin Bental for very useful comments on an earlier draft and Prakash Loungani for many
insightful discussions.
†International Monetary Fund
‡Tel-Aviv University and Cornell University
§Tel-Aviv University
1See, for example, the case of Australia; The Australian Productivity Commission (2002).
1

FDI flows into the host countries is shown to exist. Second, countries with higher quality of corporate
transparencies and stronger capital market institutions, attract less FDI flows.
Weincorporatethesenewconsiderationsinagravitymodelofcapitalflows. Suchmodelshaveproved
useful in explaining bilateral trade flows and, more recently, cross-border equity flows (Portes and Rey,
2000 and Portes, Rey and Oh, 2001). There has been some initial exploration of the determinants of
FDI in gravity models (Wei, 2000), but not focusing on the role of information as we do here.
In this paper we first develop a simple information-based model, that is consistent with empirical
findings. We interpret the industry specialization in the source country as providing a comparative
advantagetothepotentialforeigndirectinvestors,inelicitinggoodinvestmentopportunitiesinthehost
country,relativetodomesticinvestorsinthelattercountry. Thisadvantagemaystem,forinstance,from
the ability of FDI investors to apply better industry-specific micro-management standards (“intangible
capital"). In our model this element is captured by assuming a lower cost of cream-skimming (of high-
productivity firms) on the part of foreign direct investors. This advantage of FDI investors in their
cream-skimmingskills isless pronouncedwhencorporate transparenciesandcapital market institutions
are of high quality in which case FDI inflows are less abundant.2 The magnitude of the non-traditional
gains from trade that arise in our model depends crucially (and inversely) on the degree of competition
among potential FDI investors over the domestic firms. These gains can shrink to zero if there is no
such competition altogether.
Our model also suggests that the gains from FDI are reflected in a more efficient size of the stock of
domestic capital and its allocationacross firms. Domestic firms that are controlledby FDI investors are
typically the “cream" (high-productivity firms).The magnitude of the non-traditional gains from trade
that arise in our model depends crucially (and inversely) on the degree of competition among potential
FDI investors over the domestic firms. These gains can shrink to zero if there is no such competition
altogether. Also, FDIinflowsenlarge the sizeofthe aggregatestockofdomesticcapital(underplausible
assumptions). This result is consistent with empirical evidence. For instance, Borenzstein, DeGregoris
and Lee (1998) and Bosworth and Collins (1999) provide such evidence for a sample of developing
countries during the period 1978-1995. More recently, Hecht, Razin and Shinar (2002) find in similar
samplesthat theeffect ofFDIinflowsondomestic investment issignificantlylargerthaneitherportfolio
equity or loan inflows; see table A1 in the appendix. They provide also evidence that FDI inflows
promote efficiency: The effect of FDI on GDP growth is higher than the effect of other inflows, after
2See also Razin and Sadka (2002).
2