NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CORPORATE DEMAND FOR LIQUIDITY
Heitor Almeida
Murillo Campello
Michael S. Weisbach
Working Paper 9253
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9253
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2002
We thank Viral Acharya, Charlie Hadlock, George Pennacchi and seminar participants at the Atlanta Finance
Forum, the University of Illinois, New York University, and the New York Federal Reserve Bank for helpful
comments and suggestions. We also thank Steve Kaplan and Luigi Zingales for providing us with their data.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2002 by Heitor Almeida, Murillo Campello and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Corporate Demand for Liquidity
Heitor Almeida, Murillo Campello and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 9253
October 2002
JEL No. G31, G32, D23, D92
ABSTRACT
This paper proposes a theory of corporate liquidity demand and provides new evidence on
corporate cash policies. Firms have access to valuable investment opportunities, but potentially
cannot fund them with the use of external finance. Firms that are financially unconstrained can
undertake all positive NPV projects regardless of their cash position, so their cash positions are
irrelevant. In contrast, firms facing financial constraints have an optimal cash position determined
by the value of today’s investments relative to the expected value of future investments. The model
predicts that constrained firms will save a positive fraction of incremental cash flows, while
unconstrained firms will not. We also consider the impact of Jensen (1986) style overinvestment on
the model’s equilibrium, and derive conditions under which overinvestment affects corporate cash
policies. We test the model’s implications on a large sample of publicly-traded manufacturing firms
over the 1981-2000 period, and find that firms classified as financially constrained save a positive
fraction of their cash flows, while firms classified as unconstrained do not. Moreover, constrained
firms save a higher fraction of cash inflows during recessions. These results are robust to the use of
alternative proxies for financial constraints, and to several changes in the empirical specification.
We also find weak evidence consistent with our agency-based model of corporate liquidity.
Heitor Almeida Murillo Campello
Stern School of Business University of Illinois
New York University 340 Wohlers Hall
44 W 4th Street 1206 S. Sixth Street
New York, NY 10012 Champaign, IL 61820
halmeida@stern.nyu.edu m-campe @uiuc.edu
Michael S. Weisbach
University of Illinois
340 Wohlers Hall
1206 S. Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
weisbach@uiuc.edu

I Introduction
One of the most important decisions a financial manager makes is how liquid a firm’s balance sheet
shouldbe. Givenaninflowofcashtothefirm,amanagercanchoosetoreinvestthecashinphysical
assets, to distribute the cash to investors, or to keep the cash inside the firm. In fact, managers
choose to holda substantial portionof their assetsin the formof cash andliquidsecurities; in1999,
for the 25 nonfinancial companies in the Dow Jones index, the average ratio of cash and equivalent
securities to annual capital expenditures was 227%, and for 11 of the 25 the ratio was at least
97%. The financial press has been critical of these large cash holdings, and suggests that they are
a manifestation of agency problems.1 However, the difficulty with these sorts of criticisms is that
they are made without a sense of what cash holdings would be in the absence of agency problems.
As Keynes (1936) originally discussed, the major advantage of a liquid balance sheet is that it
allows firms to make value-increasing investments when they occur. However, Keynes also pointed
out that this advantage is limited by the extent to which firms have access to capital markets (p.
196). Wepresentamodelthatformalizesthisintuition. Init,afirmwhoseaccesstocapitalmarkets
is limited by the nature of its assets, may anticipate facing financing constraints when undertaking
investments in the future. Cash holdings are valuable because they increase the likelihood that
the firm will be able to fund those investments. However, increasing cash is also costly for such
a firm because it decreases the quantity of current investments that the firm can make. In other
words, cashyieldsalowerreturnthanthatassociatedwiththefirm’sphysicalinvestmentsprecisely
because the firm foregoes current positive NPV projects in order to hold cash. In contrast to a firm
facing constrained access to the capital markets, an unconstrained firm (i.e., a firm that is able to
invest in all of its positive NPV projects) has no use for cash, but also faces no cost of holding cash.
Our model contains a number of empirical predictions for corporate cash policies. The cleanest
of those predictions concerns a firm’s propensity to save cash out of cash inflows, which we refer
to as the cash flow sensitivity of cash. Our model implies that a firm’s cash flow sensitivity of
cash depends on the extent to which the firm faces financing constraints: firms that are financially
unconstrainedshouldnothaveasystematicpropensitytosavecash,whilefirmsthatareconstrained
shouldhaveapositivecashflowsensitivityofcash. Wealsostudywhethertheseoptimalcashpolicy
1See, for example, “What to do with all that cash?”, Business Week, Nov/20/2000, and “Time pressure on six
continents”, Financial Times, Jan/22/2002.
1

implications remain when the firm can hedge against future cash flows. In a framework similar to
that of Froot et al. (1993), we analyze both hedging and cash policies. Unlike these authors, we
assume that the same frictions that make firms financially constrained also constrain their ability
to hedge. Although the analysis of cash policies becomes more involved when firms are allowed to
hedge, the main implications of our model continue to hold.
We also study the implications of agency arguments such as Jensen (1986) in the context of our
model. Wedosobecauseofthecommonviewthatlargecashpositionsareamanifestationofagency
problems, and also because evidence from Blanchard et al. (1994), Harford (1999), and Lie (2000)
suggests that incremental cash is likely to be used on value-reducing investments, consistent with
the story that managers’ utilities are increasing with the quantity of the firm’s assets. Accordingly,
we model a situation in which an overinvestment-prone manager potentially distorts his firm’s cash
policies. Because the manager derives utility from value-reducing investments in addition to value-
increasing ones, he will save a portion of cash inflows to the firm that can exceed the amount of
savings needed to fund the first-best level of investment. Such policies ensure the manager’s ability
to undertake all the investments he desires in the future, even if he does not have access to capital
markets. Perhaps the most interesting implication of the agency model of liquidity is that the
effect of overinvestment tendencies on firm’s cash policies will be most pronounced for firms that
are relatively unconstrained in the capital markets, but which do not have sufficient free cash flow
to fund the manager’s desired investment. Intuitively, the agency problem turns a firm that would
be unconstrained if it invested at the first best level into one that is effectively constrained because
of the extra investment its manager would like to undertake.
We evaluate the implications of our theory on a sample of manufacturing firms between 1981
and 2000. Because the main predictions of our model concern differences between constrained
and unconstrained firms, we classify firms by the nature of their financial constraints using five
alternative approaches suggested by the literature. For each classification scheme, we estimate the
cash flow sensitivity of cash for both the constrained and the unconstrained firm subsamples. We
find that, under each of the five classification schemes, the cash flow sensitivity of cash is close to
and not statistically different from zero for the unconstrained firms, but positive and significantly
different from zero for the constrained firms. This finding is consistent with the implications of our
baseline (no agency) model. We further test the rationale of our theory by examining the empirical
2