NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE ROLE OF COMPANY STOCK IN DEFINED CONTRIBUTION PLANS
Olivia S. Mitchell
Stephen P. Utkus
Working Paper 9250
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9250
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2002
The authors are grateful for comments provided by Shlomo Benartzi, Richard Hinz, Doug Kruse, Nick
Souleles, Jack VanDerhei, and the Labor Studies group at the NBER; and for research assistance from
Kathleen Callan, Walter Lenhard, William Nessmith, and James Troyer of Vanguard. Financial support for
this research was provided by the National Bureau of Economic Research and the Pension Research Council.
This study is part of the NBER program on the Economics of Aging. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Olivia S. Mitchell and Stephen P. Utkus. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

The Role of Company Stock in Defined Contribution Plans
Olivia S. Mitchell and Stephen P. Utkus
NBER Working Paper No. 9250
October 2002
JEL No. G2, G3
ABSTRACT
This paper explores the risks and benefits of holding company stock in employer-sponsored
defined contribution (DC) retirement plans. We address three questions: (1) What is the role and
function of company stock in such plans? (2) Who might be affected by enhanced portfolio
diversification in such plans? and (3) What mechanisms exist, or might be developed, to enhance
portfolio diversification if more diversification were deemed useful? Firms offer company stock
within DC plans in an effort to enhance economic performance, though evidence is mixed on
productivity gains from stock ownership. We demonstrate that concentrated stock positions arise
most often in larger firms’ DC plans where sponsors direct employer contributions and restrict
diversification. Stock concentration also arises because participants systematically underestimate
the risk of employer stock and over-rely on its past performance in making investment decisions.
In a retirement system with concentrated stock positions, there will always be some participants who
forfeit DC plan savings to firm bankruptcy. Encouraging plan diversification mitigates this risk, but
it could also induce some companies to redirect plan contributions to other forms of stock
compensation or to replace stock contributions with cash compensation. We conclude by describing
policy tools that might be used to encourage diversification and discuss conditions for their effective
implementation.
Olivia S. Mitchell Stephen P. Utkus
Professor of Insurance and Risk Management Principal
The Wharton School Vanguard Center for Retirement Research
3641 Locust Walk, Rm. 304 CPC 100 Vanguard Boulevard, J24
Philadelphia PA, 19104-6218 Malvern, PA 19355
and NBER steve_utkus@vanguard.com
mitchelo@wharton.upenn.edu

The Role of Company Stock in Defined Contribution Plans
In the United States, defined contribution (DC) pensions have often relied on employer
common stock as an essential component of their investment portfolios, particularly in the case
of plans sponsored by large employers. Company stock in retirement plans has also been used to
encourage stock ownership among rank-and-file employees, with the intent of enhancing
employee productivity and boosting shareholder value. It is against this backdrop that recent
stock market shocks have highlighted the dangers to DC plans of heavy reliance on a single
company’s stock. Prominent firms including Lucent, Enron, and Worldcom, have recently seen
their stock prices drop precipitously or collapse entirely, prompting lawsuits from plan
participants who lost billions of dollars of retirement saving. These and other company stock
losses have kindled Congressional debate regarding the proper role of company stock in DC
plans over the extent to which these plans should emphasize investment diversification in pursuit
of retirement security, on the one hand, versus potential productivity gains that might be
attributed to employee stock ownership, on the other.
This chapter explores several aspects of this debate. First, we offer essential background
regarding the role of company stock in U.S. pension plans. After surveying the legal and
fiduciary status of company stock, we briefly review the role of Employee Stock Ownership
Plans (ESOPs) and combined 401(k)/ESOP (or KSOP) plans. Second, we analyze holding
patterns of company stock in DC retirement plans. Next, we evaluate explanations offered for
why employers and employees tolerate (or even prefer) high levels of company stock holdings,
and then we provide an assessment of the impact of concentrated holdings of company stock on
retirement incomes. A final section sketches policy alternatives and concludes.

2
Company Stock in US Defined Contribution Pensions
Employers in the U.S. may elect to offer retirement programs in addition to paying into
the national mandatory Social Security system, and they are encouraged to do so by a variety of
federal income tax incentives. About half the civilian private-sector labor force today is covered
by a company-sponsored retirement plan. Many plan types and plan designs are permissible
under current law: some employees receive a promise of future retirement benefits in defined
benefit (DB) plans, while others receive a promise of a fully-funded current contributions to DC
plans. Total private pension assets stand at about $4 trillion, roughly divided between DB and
DC plans.
Two decades of growth have firmly established the central importance of DC plans in the
U.S. retirement marketplace. There are now over 700,000 corporate DC pension plans covering
nearly 56 million workers and managing over $2 trillion in assets; all evidence points to
increasing growth in this sector for the foreseeable future.1 By comparison, there are only
56,000 DB retirement plans covering about 23 million active participants (see Table 1), and DB
plans continue to decline over time in terms of number and coverage.
Table 1 here
The Pension Legal and Fiduciary Framework. The key legislation governing U.S. private
sector retirement plans is the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA). This
law requires plan fiduciaries, who usually include the plan sponsor as well as plan administrators
and advisers, to manage a retirement plan in the participants’ best interest. ERISA further
requires that fiduciaries must comply with an “exclusive purpose” rule, indicating that the
1Aggregate 2001 statistics based on the authors’ estimates from US Department of Labor and Federal Reserve Board
data appear Table 1. The most recent official data on pension assets and participants are from 1998 taken from
Form 5500 data filed with the US Department of Labor.