NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FIRM-SPECIFIC RESOURCES, FINANCIAL-MARKET DEVELOPMENT
AND THE GROWTH OF U.S. MULTINATIONALS
Susan Feinberg
Gordon Phillips
Working Paper 9252
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9252
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2002
We wish to thank Wayne Ferson, Robert McDonald, Vojislav Maksimovic, Raymond Mataloni, Oguzhan
Ozbas, John Popham, Antoinette Schoar, Lemma Senbet, Scott Shane, Peter Wysocki, Bernie Yeung, William
Zeile and seminar participants at Boston College, the Center for Economic Studies, Department of Commerce,
MIT finance and organizations seminars and the University of South Carolina for helpful comments. The
statistical analysis of firm-level data on U.S. multinational corporations reported in this study was conducted
at the International Investment Division, Bureau of Economic Analysis, United States Department of
Commerce, under arrangements that maintained legal confidentiality requirements. Views expressed are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Department of Commerce or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Susan Feinberg and Gordon Phillips. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Firm-Specific Resources, Financial-Market Development and the Growth
of U.S. Multinationals
Susan Feinberg and Gordon Phillips
NBER Working Paper No. 9252
October 2002
JEL No. F1, G3
ABSTRACT
We study the resource allocation decisions of U.S. multinational corporations (MNCs). We
examine how established MNCs grow across countries and how firm-specific resources and host
country financial-market development influence MNC growth. We find evidence of intra-firm trade-
offs to growth in MNCs that have limited organizational capital and high R&D, and MNCs with low
external and internal financing. In countries with less developed capital markets, we find significant
within-MNC trade-offs to growth between affiliates and their U.S. parents. These trade-offs diminish
over time as local capital markets develop. Our evidence indicates that access to financing and
organizational capital are important resources for MNC affiliate growth.
Susan Feinberg Gordon Phillips
R.H. Smith School of Business R.H. Smith School of Business
University of Maryland University of Maryland
Van Munching Hall Van Munching Hall
College Park, MD 20742 College Park, MD 20742
feinberg@glue.umd.edu and NBER
gphillips@rhsmith.umd.edu.

Multinational corporations are increasingly an important source of production and em-
ployment in industrializedcountries (OECD, 1999). Existing research shows that U.S. multi-
national corporations (MNCs) have higher accounting profits and higher stock market valu-
ations, higher advertising and R&D, and higher Tobin’s qs than do firms that only produce
and sell domestically.1 However, we know little about what influences the international
growth and operating decisions of established MNCs across networks of affiliates. Despite
the obvious importance of MNCs’ resource allocation choices, much of the research on MNC
expansion has focused primarily on initial foreign investment decisions.2 Similarly, policy
makershavefocusedmoreonluringinitialforeigninvestmentsthanoncreatingenvironments
in which existing MNC subsidiaries can become more globally competitive.
Our research focuses on the importance of firm- and market-specific factors to MNCs’
allocation of resources across networks of affiliates. We draw on the theory of the conglom-
erate firm and its resource allocation decisions across markets to study the growth of MNCs
as networks of affiliates. We first study whether there are geographic trade-offs to growth
across affiliates (and parents) within the MNC, similar to the intra-industry trade-offs to
growth in U.S. conglomerate firms shown in Maksimovic and Phillips (2002).3 Second, we
examine the extent to which these trade-offs vary systematically based on MNC and country
characteristics.
We wish to determine how the growth of MNC affiliates is related to firm-specific factors
shown by previous research to be important for the emergence of multinational operations.4
For example, we examine how growth differs among affiliates of MNCs that are more R&D-
intensive, since R&D indicates the presence of knowledge assets. We also study variations
in growth among affiliates that differ in their access to capital. The market-specific factors
that we examine are capital market development and host country contracting effectiveness.
We test our predictions using disaggregated panel data from the U.S. Department of
Commerce on 8,106 foreign affiliates of 862 U.S. MNC parent companies in 41 countries.
1See Vernon (1971), Dunning (1973), Kim and Lin (1986), and Morck and Yeung (1991). Errunza and
Senbet(1981,1984)showthatthevalueofmultinationalityincreaseswiththeextentanMNCsellsoverseas.
2See Baldwin (1988), Dixit (1989), and Wheeler and Mody (1992).
3Denis, Denis and Yost (2002) document the extent of global diversification by U.S. firms and extend
work by Bodnar, Tang and Weintrop (1999) in studying the valuation effects of MNCs in the stock market.
4See Buckley and Casson (1976), Dunning (1973), Ethier (1986), Helpman (1982), and Rugman (1981).
1

An important feature of this data is that it contains detailed information about foreign
affiliates’ trade and financing both within the MNC and in local markets. Thus, we can
directly examine how internal financial and product markets affect MNC growth. Previous
literature on U.S. conglomerate firms has only been able to indirectly infer the extent of
internal capital and product market flows.5
We examine two central questions about MNC growth. First, do MNC affiliates grow
together, or do they compete for scarce resources from their U.S. parents, as parents choose
to allocate resources based on affiliates’ relative efficiency and demand growth? We refer to
this latter case as within-MNC trade-offs to growth.
To address this first question, we draw on theories of the MNC and theories of conglom-
erate firms that focus on trade-offs in the allocation of resources across multiple markets.
Domestic conglomerate firms allocate their scarce resources according to the returns to scale
in the use of these resources and to the demand growth in their markets. We therefore
examine whether there are similar trade-offs among divisions of MNCs, and whether these
trade-offs vary for MNCs that are more R&D intensive or have potentially differential access
to financing.
Second, we examine whether MNCs’ resource allocation decisions vary with differences
in financial-market and institutional development in the affiliates’ local markets. Although
recent research examines the impact of financial market development and the legal environ-
ment on country economic development and the growth of domestic firms6, we know little
about the impact of financial markets on the growth of established MNC affiliates.
UsingpaneldataontheentirepopulationofU.S.MNCs-disaggregatedattheindividual
foreign affiliate level for each MNC parent - our empirical analysis demonstrates that MNC
growth is strongly related to affiliate efficiency. The efficiency of an MNC affiliate, relative
to other same-industry affiliates of a given U.S. parent and relative to other same-industry
affiliates in the same country, strongly predicts the affiliate’s growth, especially when there
is demand growth in the affiliate’s local market.
We also find evidence of trade-offs across affiliates within MNCs, particularly for MNCs
5For evidence on investment patterns by diversified firms see Shin and Stulz (1998), Scharfstein (1998),
Rajan, Servaes and Zingales (2000), and Maksimovic and Phillips (2002).
6SeetheevidenceprovidedinKingandLevine(1993),Levine(1997),LaPorta,Lopezde-Silanes,Shleifer,
andVishny(1997),Demirguc-KuntandMaksimovic(1998),RajanandZingales(1998),andWurgler(2000).
2