NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
COMPETITION AND INNOVATION:
AN INVERTED U RELATIONSHIP
Philippe Aghion
Nicholas Bloom
Richard Blundell
Rachel Griffith
Peter Howitt
Working Paper 9269
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9269
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2002
The authors would like to thank Daron Acemoglu, Tim Bresnahan, Wendy Carlin, Paul David, Janice Eberly,
Dennis Ranque, Robert Solow, Manuel Trajtenberg, Alwyn Young, John Van Reenen and participants at
CIAR, Harvard and MIT. Financial support for this project was provided by the ESRC Centre for the
Microeconomic Analysis of Fiscal Policy at the IFS. The data was developed with funding from the
Leverhulme Trust. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Philippe Aghion, Nicholas Bloom, Richard Blundell, Rachel Griffith, and Peter Howitt. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Competition and Innovation: An Inverted U Relationship
Philippe Aghion, Nicholas Bloom, Richard Blundell, Rachel Griffith, and Peter Howitt
NBER Working Paper No. 9269
October 2002
JEL No. O0, L1
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates the relationship between product market competition (PMC) and
innovation. A growth model is developed in which competition may increase the incremental profit
from innovating; on the other hand, competition may also reduce innovation incentives for laggards.
There are four key predictions. First, the relationship between product market competition (PMC)
and innovation is an inverted U-shape. Second, the equilibrium degree of technological ‘neck-and-
neckness’ among firms should decrease with PMC. Third, the higher the average degree of ‘neck-
and-neckness’ in an industry, the steeper the inverted-U relationship. Fourth, firms may innovate
more if subject to higher debt-pressure, especially at lower levels of PMC. We confront these
predictions with data on UK firms’ patenting activity at the US patenting office. They are found to
accord well with observed behavior.
Philippe Aghion Peter Howitt
Department of Economics Department of Economics
Harvard University Brown University, Box B
Littauer Center 309 Providence, RI 02912
Cambridge, MA 02138 and NBER
and NBER peter_howitt@brown.edu
p_aghion@harvard.edu
Nicholas Bloom and Rachel Griffith Richard Blundell
Institute for Fiscal Studies University College London
nbloom@ifs.org.uk r.blundell@ucl.ac.uk
rgriffith@ifs.org.uk

1. Introduction
Economists have long been interested in the relationship between product market
competition (PMC) and innovation. Both the theoretical IO and the more recent
endogenous growth literatures tackle the issue. Standard IO theory1 predicts
that innovation should decline with competition, as more competition reduces the
monopoly rents that reward successful innovators. However, empirical work such
as Geroski (1995), Nickell (1996) and Blundell, Griffith and Van Reenen (1999)
has pointed to a positive correlation between product market competition and
innovative output. Several theoretical approaches have been used in an attempt
to reconcile the Schumpeterian paradigm with the evidence provided in these
studies, generating various predictions as to the shape of the relationship between
PMC and innovation.2
One such approach, introduced by Aghion-Harris-Vickers (1997) and sub-
sequently analyzed in Aghion-Harris-Howitt-Vickers (2001), extends the basic
Schumpeterian model by allowing incumbent firms to innovate. In these mod-
els, innovation incentives depend not so much upon post-innovation rents per se,
but more upon the difference between post-innovation and pre-innovation rents
(the latter were equal to zero in the basic model where all innovations were made
by outsiders). In this case, more PMC may end up fostering innovations and
growth as it may reduce a firm’s pre-innovation rents by more than it reduces its
1See, inter alia, Dasgupta-Stiglitz (1980) and also the first generation of Schumpeterian
growth models (Aghion-Howitt (1992), Caballero-Jaffe (1993).
2For example, Aghion-Dewatripont-Rey (1999). See Aghion-Howitt (1998), Chapter 7, for a
survey of some of these these attempts.
2

post-innovation rents. In other words, competition may increase the incremental
profits from innovating, and thereby encourage R&D investments aimed at “es-
caping competition”; and it will do so to a larger extent in more “neck-and-neck”
industries, that is in industries in which oligopolistic firms face more similar pro-
duction costs; the firm with lower (resp. higher) unit costs is referred to as the
technological leader(resp. follower) in thecorrespondingindustry, and whenboth
firms have the same unit costs they are referred to as neck-and-neck firms.
In this framework firms innovate in order to reduce production costs, and
they do it “step-by-step”, in the sense that a laggard firm in any industry must
first catch up with the technological leader before becoming itself a leader in the
future. In neck-and-neck industries competition is particularly intense and it is
also in those industries that the “escape-competition” effect pointed out above
is strongest. On the other hand, in less neck-and-neck, or more “unleveled”, in-
dustries, more competition may also reduce innovation as the laggard’s reward to
catchingupwiththetechnologicalleadermayfall(thisisa“Schumpeterianeffect”
of the kind emphasized in the earlier models). Finally, by increasing innovation
incentives relatively more in neck-and-neck industries than in unleveled indus-
tries, an increase in product market competition will tend to reduce the fraction
of neck-and-neck industries in the economy; this “composition effect” reinforces
the Schumpeterian effect in inducing a negative correlation between PMC and
aggregate productivity growth or the aggregate rate of innovations.
The paper begins with the derivation of four key empirical predictions of this
“step-by-step innovation” model. The first prediction is that the relationship be-
3