NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TRANSPARENCY AND INTERNATIONAL INVESTOR BEHAVIOR
R. Gaston Gelos
Shang-Jin Wei
Working Paper 9260
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9260
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2002
The authors wish to thank Philippe Bacchetta, Andrew Berg, Patrick Bolton, Tito Cordella, Douglas Gale,
Philippe Martin, Paolo Mauro, Alessandro Prati, David Robinson, Nouriel Roubini, Antonio Spilimbergo,
Jiang Wang, and seminar participants at the IMF for helpful discussions, Torbjörn Becker, Przemek
Gajdeczka, Hunter Monroe, and Anthony Richards for detailed comments on earlier drafts, and Peter Allum
for sharing data. Nese Erbil and Chi Nguyen provided excellent research assistance. The views in the paper
are the authors’ own and may not reflect those of the IMF or any other organization that they are or have been
associated with.
© 2002 by R. Gaston Gelos and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Transparency and International Investor Behavior
R. Gaston Gelos and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 9260
October 2002
JEL No. F30, D80, G10, G30
ABSTRACT
Does country transparency affect international portfolio investment? We examine this and
related questions using some new measures of transparency and a unique micro dataset on
international portfolio holdings. We distinguish between government and corporate transparency.
There is clear evidence that international funds invest systematically less in less transparent
countries. On the other hand, herding among funds tends to be more prevalent in less transparent
countries. There is also some evidence that during crises, funds flee non-transparent countries by
a greater amount.
R. Gaston Gelos Shang-Jin Wei
International Monetary Fund International Monetary Fund
Room 9-718 Room 10-700m
700 19th Street, N.W. 700 19th Street N.W.
Washington, DC 20431 Washington, DC 20431
ggelos@imf.org and NBER
swei@imf.org

- 2 -
1. INTRODUCTION
In policy circles, lack of transparency has frequently been blamed for the recent financial
crises in emerging markets. For example, the IMF (2001) notes that a “lack of transparency was
a feature of the buildup to the Mexican crisis of 1994–95 and of the emerging market crises of
1997–98,” stating that “inadequate economic data, hidden weaknesses in financial systems, and a
lack of clarity about government policies and policy formulation contributed to a loss of
confidence that ultimately threatened to undermine global stability.” Consequently, the
international financial institutions have actively promoted more transparency among their
member countries as well as made strides to become more transparent in their own operations.
The strive for more transparency presupposes that destabilizing behavior by individual
investors can be avoided or attenuated by improved provision of information. For example,
international investment funds may be more likely to engage in herding in less transparent
countries (where herding is defined as funds taking investment decisions which they would not
take if they did not observe other funds taking them). As a result, investors may rush in and out
of countries even in the absence of substantial news about fundamentals.
In theory, however, it is controversial whether lower country transparency yields higher
herding or volatility. On the one hand, one set of theoretical explanations of herding behavior
relies on asymmetric information (e.g., Bikhchandani et al., 1992; Banerjee, 1992; Devenow and
Welch, 1996; Bikhchandani and Sharma, 2000). We would note that there is a natural linkage
between low transparency and asymmetry of information. Low transparency typically does not
mean that no one knows anything. Rather, lower transparency means that less information is
made publicly available, which in turn implies that the gap between those who know and those
who do not becomes larger. Such higher informational asymmetry should therefore result in
more herding.
On the other hand, herding by institutional investors can be rationalized without an
appeal to informational asymmetry at all, but instead by the incentives faced by fund managers
that result from the need to have their performances compared periodically with a common
benchmark (Scharfstein and Stein, 1990; and Chevalier and Ellison, 1999). In this case, an

- 3 -
improvement in a country’s transparency would not imply a reduction in international investors’
herding behavior.
Related to this discussion, the theoretical link between availability of information and
market volatility is ambiguous, as pointed out, among others, by Furman and Stiglitz (1998).
While their argument is not specifically about herding behavior, it is about investors’ trading
behavior in different information environments. In particular, they suggest that if more
transparency means a higher frequency of information release (holding the true value of the
fundamental constant), price volatility could increase rather than decline. The notion that
transparency may not necessarily reduce volatility is reflected in the recent literature on
corporate transparency. In particular, Bushee and Noe (2000) report a positive association
between corporate transparency and the volatility of the firm’s stock price. Firms with higher
levels of disclosure tend to attract certain types of institutional investors which use aggressive,
short-term trading strategies which in turn can raise the volatility of the firm’s stock price. It is
not clear whether this investor self-selection story can be generalized to international context.
Ultimately, the effect of transparency on the behavior of international investors is an empirical
question.
International evidence on this question, however, is still lacking. To be sure, there are
several empirical studies that measure the degree of herding among funds, including Lakonishok,
Shleifer and Vishny (1992), Grinblatt, Titman and Wermers (1995), and Wermers (1999) for the
U.S., Choe, Kho and Stulz (1999) and Kim and Wei (2002) for Korea, and Borensztein and
Gelos (forthcoming) for emerging markets worldwide. However, as far as we know, there is no
paper that studies the connection between a country’s level of transparency and the degree of
herding by international investors.
Transparency may also affect the level of international portfolio investment in addition to
its effect on herding. On this, there is less disagreement in the existing literature. In the corporate
finance context, Diamond and Verrechia (1991), among others, have argued that a reduction in
informational asymmetry can increase the investment from large investors and hence reduce the
cost of capital for the firm (see Healy and Palepu, 2001, and Core, 2001, for reviews of the
empirical literature on corporate disclosure). So far, there is no theoretical paper that has
modeled explicitly the effect of a country’s transparency on the level of international portfolio