NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHAT IS THE PRICE OF HUBRIS?
USING TAKEOVER BATTLES TO INFER
OVERPAYMENTS AND SYNERGIES
Pekka Hietala
Steven N. Kaplan
David T. Robinson
Working Paper 9264
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9264
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2002
We would like to thank Rob Gertner for suggesting that this acquisition would have theoretical interest. Erik
Stafford provided helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Pekka Hietala, Steven N. Kaplan, and David T. Robinson. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

What is the Price of Hubris? Using Takeover Battles to Infer Overpayments and Synergies
Pekka Hietala, Steven N. Kaplan, and David T. Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 9264
October 2002
ABSTRACT
We present a framework for determining the information that can be extracted from stock prices
around takeover contests. In only two types of cases is it theoretically possible to use stock price
movements to infer bidder overpayment and relative synergies. The takeover contest for Paramount
in 1994 illustrates one of these generic cases. We estimate that Viacom, the “winning” bidder,
overpaid for Paramount by more than $2 billion. This occurred despite the fact that Viacom’s CEO
owned roughly 3/4 of Viacom. These results are consistent with managerial overconfidence and/or
large private benefits, but not with the traditional agency-based incentive problem.
Pekka Hietala
Insead
Boulevard de Constance
77305 Fontainebleau
Cedex, France
Steven Kaplan
University of Chicago Graduate School of Business
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
steven.kaplan@gsb.uchicago.edu
David Robinson
Columbia University
3022 Broadway
Uris Hall 414
New York, NY 10027

When a merger is announced, three different pieces of information affect the stock prices of the
target and bidder. The announcement reveals information about the potential synergies arising from the
combination, the stand-alone value of the firms involved in the merger, and, how the value will be split
between the target and the bidder(s). In general, it is not possible to distinguish among these three effects
in a particular takeover contest. For example, if the announcement reveals favorable (unfavorable)
information about the target and bidder, the combined change in bidder and target stock values will
exceed (not exceed) the synergies arising from the merger.1 Similarly, if the bid reveals favorable
(unfavorable) news about the stand-alone value of the bidder, the change in bidder stock value will
overstate (understate) the benefit of the transaction to the bidder.2
This paper develops and applies a classification scheme that identifies those situations in which it
is potentially possible to disentangle the sources of price changes. In the first part of the paper, we
identify two generic cases in which synergy, overpayment, and information effects can be disentangled to
solve for the estimated overpayment by the bidder. One occurs when the acquisition is not consummated;
the other occurs when the acquisition is a takeover contest that includes exactly two bidders. We also
discuss the additional (information) conditions that must be satisfied in practice to be able to disentangle
the different effects. Even among the generic cases we identify, we point out that most takeovers will not
satisfy the necessary conditions.
In the second part of this paper, we analyze the takeover contest for Paramount that began in the
fall of 1993 and ended in the winter of 1994. This contest (1) is representative of one of the generic cases
and (2) comes close to satisfying the required information conditions. The Paramount contest involved
exactly two bidders: QVC, led by Barry Diller; and Viacom, led by Sumner Redstone. The unusual
structure of the contest allows us to estimate bidder overpayments, relative synergies, and information
effects.
1 See, for example, Bradley, Desai and Kim (1988), Jensen and Ruback (1983), and Roll (1986).
2 For example, offers financed by the bidder's stock may signal that the stock is over-valued (Franks, Harris, and
Titman (1991)).
1

We use our framework to calculate that the market estimated that Viacom, the eventual “winner"
of the takeover battle, overpaid by more than $2 billion when it agreed to purchase Paramount in a $9.2
billion acquisition in February 1994. The market estimates appear to be reliable in that market prices did
not revert in the three years following the acquisition. This overpayment occurred despite the fact that
Sumner Redstone, the CEO of Viacom, owned more than 75% of the Viacom’s cash flow and voting
rights.
These results have two possible (and not mutually exclusive) interpretations. The first is that
Redstone’s beliefs were very different from those of the market. The unwillingness to revise those beliefs
in light of the market reaction is strongly consistent with the argument in Roll (1986) that “bidding firms
infected by hubris simply pay too much for their targets,” as well as papers that stress managerial
overconfidence such as Heaton (2002) and Malmendier and Tate (2002).
The second interpretation is that Redstone received large private (and non-pecuniary) benefits
from the acquisition. Perhaps he wanted to be the “king of all media.” This is strongly consistent with
theories in which private benefits drive managerial decision making over and above pecuniary incentives.
The important point here is that neither interpretation is consistent with the traditional agency or incentive
problem because Redstone controlled such a large fraction of Viacom’s cash flow rights. Our analysis
indicates that the combination of hubris and private benefits exceeded $1.5 billion.
This paper contributes to a large literature in corporate finance that studies the information and
value effects of mergers. That literature is too large to survey here.3 The papers closest to ours are
Bhagat, Hirshleifer and Noah (2001), Fuller, Netter and Stegemoller (2002), and Schurman (1999).
Bhagat et al. (2001) estimate overpayments and synergies using movements in the bidder’s and target's
stock prices around an intervening offer from another firm. They identify their empirical analysis by
using ex post data (the sample average) to estimate the ex ante probabilities of success for initial and
subsequent bidders and the expected price that a winning bidder will have to pay. With these
assumptions, they find that acquisitions are expected to be value increasing overall, but that bidders do
2