NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ANOMALIES AND MARKET EFFICIENCY
G. William Schwert
Working Paper 9277
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9277
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2002
Forthcoming in the Handbook of the Economics of Finance, edited by George Constantinides, Milton Harris,
and René M. Stulz. The Bradley Policy Research Center, William E. Simon Graduate School of Business
Administration, University of Rochester, provided support for this research. I received helpful comments
from Yakov Amihud, Brad Barber, John Cochrane, Eugene Fama, Murray Frank, Ken French, David
Hirshleifer, Tim Loughran, Randall Mørck, Jeff Pontiff, Jay Ritter, René Stulz, A. Subrahmanyam, Sheridan
Titman, Janice Willett, and Jerold Zimmerman. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by G. William Schwert. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Anomalies and Market Efficiency
G. William Schwert
NBER Working Paper No. 9277
October 2002
JEL No. G14, G12, G34, G32
ABSTRACT
Anomalies are empirical results that seem to be inconsistent with maintained theories of
asset-pricing behavior. They indicate either market inefficiency (profit opportunities) or
inadequacies in the underlying asset-pricing model.
The evidence in this paper shows that the size effect, the value effect, the weekend effect,
and the dividend yield effect seem to have weakened or disappeared after the papers that highlighted
them were published. At about the same time, practitioners began investment vehicles that
implemented the strategies implied by some of these academic papers.
The small-firm turn-of-the-year effect became weaker in the years after it was first
documented in the academic literature, although there is some evidence that it still exists.
Interestingly, however, it does not seem to exist in the portfolio returns of practitioners who focus
on small-capitalization firms.
All of these findings raise the possibility that anomalies are more apparent than real. The
notoriety associated with the findings of unusual evidence tempts authors to further investigate
puzzling anomalies and later to try to explain them. But even if the anomalies existed in the sample
period in which they were first identified, the activities of practitioners who implement strategies
to take advantage of anomalous behavior can cause the anomalies to disappear (as research findings
cause the market to become more efficient).
G. William Schwert
Simon School of Business
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
Schwert@schwert.ssb.rochester.edu

1 Introduction
Anomalies are empirical results that seem to be inconsistent with maintained theories of
asset-pricing behavior. They indicate either market inefficiency (profit opportunities) or
inadequacies in the underlying asset-pricing model. After they are documented and analyzed in
the academic literature, anomalies often seem to disappear, reverse, or attenuate. This raises the
question of whether profit opportunities existed in the past, but have since been arbitraged away,
or whether the anomalies were simply statistical aberrations that attracted the attention of
academics and practitioners.
Surveys of the efficient markets literature date back at least to Fama (1970), and there are
several recent updates, including Fama (1991) and Keim and Ziemba (2000), that stress
particular areas of the finance literature. By their nature, surveys reflect the views and
perspectives of their authors, and this one will be no exception. My goal is to highlight some
interesting findings that have emerged from the research of many people and to raise questions
about the implications of these findings for the way academics and practitioners use financial
theory.1
There are obvious connections between this chapter and earlier chapters by Ritter (10 –
Investment Banking and Securities Issuance) and Ferson (16 – Multifactor Pricing Models), as
well as later chapters by Barberis and Thaler (18 – Behavioral Issues), Cochrane (20 – New
Facts in Finance), and Easley and O’Hara (21 – Market Microstructure and Asset Pricing). In
fact, those chapeters draw on some of the same findings and papers that provide the basis for my
conclusions.
At a fundamental level, anomalies can only be defined relative to a model of “normal”
1This chapter is not meant to be a survey of all of the literature on market efficiency or anomalies. Failure to
cite particular papers should not be taken as a reflection on those papers.
3

return behavior. Fama (1970) noted this fact early on, pointing out that tests of market efficiency
also jointly test a maintained hypothesis about equilibrium expected asset returns. Thus,
whenever someone concludes that a finding seems to indicate market inefficiency, it may also be
evidence that the underlying asset-pricing model is inadequate.
It is also important to consider the economic relevance of a presumed anomaly. Jensen
(1978) stressed the importance of trading profitability in assessing market efficiency. In
particular, if anomalous return behavior is not definitive enough for an efficient trader to make
money trading on it, then it is not economically significant. This definition of market efficiency
directly reflects the practical relevance of academic research into return behavior. It also
highlights the importance of transactions costs and other market microstructure issues for
defining market efficiency.
The growth in the amount of data and computing power available to researchers, along
with the growth in the number of active empirical researchers in finance since Fama’s (1970)
survey article, has created an explosion of findings that raise questions about the first, simple
models of efficient capital markets. Many people have noted that the normal tendency of
researchers to focus on unusual findings (which could be a by-product of the publication process,
if there is a bias toward the publication of findings that challenge existing theories) could lead to
the over-discovery of “anomalies.” For example, if a random process results in a particular
sample that looks unusual, thereby attracting the attention of researchers, this “sample selection
bias” could lead to the perception that the underlying model was not random. Of course, the key
test is whether the anomaly persists in new, independent samples.
Some interesting questions arise when perceived market inefficiencies or anomalies seem
to disappear after they are documented in the finance literature: Does their disappearance reflect
4