NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE BENEFITS OF THE HOME MORTGAGE INTEREST DEDUCTION
Edward L. Glaeser
Jesse M. Shapiro
Working Paper 9284
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9284
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2002
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research
© 2002 by Edward L. Glaeser and Jesse M. Shapiro. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

The Benefits of the Home Mortage Interest Deduction
Edward L. Glaeser and Jesse M. Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 9284
October 2002
ABSTRACT
The home mortgage interest deduction creates incentives to buy more housing and to become
a homeowner, and the case for the deduction rests on social benefits from housing consumption and
homeownership. There is little evidence suggesting large externalities from the level of housing
consumption, but there appear to be externalities from homeownership. Externalities from living
around homeowners are far too small to justify the deduction. Externalities from homeownership
are larger, but the home mortgage interest deduction is a particularly poor instrument for
encouraging homeownership since it is targeted at the wealthy, who are almost always homeowners.
The irrelevance of the deduction is supported by the time series which shows that the ownership
subsidy moves with inflation and has changed significantly between 1960 and today, but the
homeownership rate has been essentially constant.
Edward L. Glaeser Jesse M. Shapiro
Department of Economics Department of Economics
Harvard University Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138 Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu

I. Introduction
The American subsidy of homeownership is among the most prominent feature of our tax
code. In 1999, 773 billion dollars was deducted by 40 million homeowners using the
home mortgage interest deduction. After state taxes, it is the most common deduction
and ultimately the home mortgage interest deduction stands as one of the most striking
and one of the most debated features of the U.S. tax code.
To its detractors, the home mortgage interest deduction is a boondoggle that robs the U.S.
treasury and subsidizes America’s wealthiest homeowners, the construction industry and
quite possibly politically active banks and entities like Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. To
these critics, the deduction stands as glaring evidence for Director’s Law— redistribution
ultimately goes to the median voter. Moreover, the critics of the deduction argue that it
distorts behavior and induces Americans to spend too much on housing. Some analysts,
such as Voith (2001), even blame the plight of the inner cities on the housing subsidy.
To its supporters, the home mortgage interest deduction is a cornerstone of American
society. Homeownership gives people a stake in society and induces them to care about
their neighborhoods and towns. By subsidizing property ownership, the deduction
induces people to invest and then to have a stake in our democracy. Ownership makes
people vote for long run investments instead of short run transfers. Moreover, home
ownership, and perhaps housing consumption itself, seems to be good for the outcomes
of children. The deduction may favor the rich, but after all, much of the tax code is
progressive and the home mortgage interest deduction just levels the playing field a little.
We believe that there is truth to both of these views. The home mortgage interest
deduction, like almost all deductions, disproportionately favors the wealthy. After all, in
2001, more than 50 percent of taxes saved by deductions were saved by the richest decile
in America. Furthermore, a rich body of economic research shows how the deduction
increases, and possibly distorts, housing consumption.
2

However, there appear to be externalities both from homeownership and from housing
consumption itself. Causal inference is tricky, but homeownership is strongly correlated
with political activism and social connection. Homeownership appears to increase home
maintenance and gardening. Most tellingly, people seem to be willing to pay more to live
around homeowners. Controlling for metropolitan area and for the observable human
capital of neighbors, we find that a ten percent increase in the local homeownership rate
increases local housing prices by 1.5 percent. While omitted unobservable variables
might explain this correlation, the overall body of research seems to confirm positive
externalities from homeownership.
While the evidence suggests externalities that might be worth subsidizing, the home
mortgage interest deduction does not appear to be an effective means of actually
subsidizing ownership. While the deduction appears to increase the amount spent on
housing, it appears to have almost no effect on the homeownership rate. The best
evidence for this claim is the simple time series shown in Figure 1. Since 1960, the
inflation rate has soared and collapsed, causing the subsidy to homeownership to
similarly rise and fall (our formula for the subsidy is based on Poterba, 1986). Likewise,
as Figure 2 shows, changes in the tax code have caused itemization rates to rise and fall.
If the tax code powerfully impacted homeownership, we might expect a relationship
between itemization rates and homeownership but as Figure 2 shows, there is no such
relationship. Since the 1950s, the homeownership rate has barely budged, staying within
a fixed band between 63 and 68 percent. Moreover, the changes in the rate that have
occurred seem more related to the suburbanization of the economy than to the subsidy
created by the deduction.
This relative invariance of the homeownership rate shouldn’t surprise us.
Homeownership is almost perfectly linked with the type of housing structure. People
living in single family detached units usually own and people who live in multi-family
units rent. As this stock of housing is relatively fixed in the short run, we shouldn’t
expect much of a response in the homeownership rate to any short run fluctuations. In
the long run, though, the power of the home mortgage interest deduction to impact
3