NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EMPLOYEE STOCK OPTIONS, CORPORATE TAXES AND DEBT POLICY
John R. Graham
Mark H. Lang
Douglas A. Shackelford
Working Paper 9289
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9289
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2002
We appreciate excellent research assistance from Courtney Edwards, Allison Evans, and Julia Wu and
insightful comments from Alon Brav, John Core, Richard Frankel, John Hand, Mike Lemmon, Ed Maydew,
Hamid Mehran, Vikas Mehrotra, Richard Sansing, Terry Shevlin, Jake Thomas and workshop participants
at Duke University, MIT, the University of North Carolina and Wharton. All data are publicly available. Lang
was visiting the University of Queensland when the first draft of this paper was completed. Graham
acknowledges financial support from the Alfred P. Sloan Research Foundation. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by John R. Graham, Mark H. Lang, and Douglas A. Shackelford. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Employee Stock Options, Corporate Taxes and Debt Policy
John R. Graham, Mark H. Lang, and Douglas A. Shackelford
NBER Working Paper No. 9289
October 2002
JEL No. H2
ABSTRACT
We find that employee stock option deductions lead to large aggregate tax savings for
Nasdaq 100 and S&P 100 firms and also affect corporate marginal tax rates. For Nasdaq firms, the
median marginal tax rate is 31 percent when option deductions are ignored but falls to 5 percent
when one accounts for the deductions. For S&P firms, however, option deductions do not affect
marginal tax rates to a large degree. In the spirit of DeAngelo and Masulis (1980), option deductions
are important nondebt tax shields that can affect corporate policies. We find evidence consistent with
option deductions substituting for interest deductions in corporate capital structure decisions. This
evidence explains in part why some firms appear to be underlevered.
Douglas A. Shackelford
CB 3490 McColl Building
University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3490
and NBER
doug_shack@unc.edu
Other contact info: langm@bschoolunc.edu, john.graham@duke.edu

This paper explores the corporate tax implications of compensating employees with
nonqualified stock options. Corporations deduct the difference between current market and strike
prices when an employee exercises a nonqualified stock option. For option-intensive companies
with rising stock prices, this deduction can be very large. The purpose of this paper is to assess
the impact of these deductions on marginal tax rates and corporate decisions, such as debt
policy.1
Understanding the tax implications of options is increasingly important because the
proportion of compensation paid in stock options has soared in recent years. Desai (2002) reports
that the top five officers of the largest 150 U.S. firms received options with grant values
exceeding $16 billion in 2000, a tenfold increase over the decade. He estimates that proceeds
from option exercises averaged 29 percent of operating cash flows in 2000, up from 10 percent
in 1996. Option compensation has spread beyond technology stocks. The National Center for
Employee Ownership estimates that the number of employees receiving stock options grew from
less than one million in 1990 to approximately 10 million in 1999, with only a third of these
workers in high-technology firms (http://www.nceo.org/library/option_myths.html).
The exercise of these stock options has created large corporate income tax deductions.
Sullivan (2002) estimates that the total corporate tax savings from the deduction of stock options
jumped from $12 billion in 1997 to $56 billion in 2000. Ciprianao, Collins and Hribar (2001)
report that the tax savings from employee stock option deductions for the S&P 100 and the
Nasdaq 100 averaged 32 percent of operating cash flows in 2000, up from 8 percent in 1997.
Sullivan (2002) adds that option tax deductions in 2000 exceeded net income for eight of the 40
largest U.S. companies (as determined by market capitalization): Microsoft, American Online,
1 Throughout the paper, we use the Scholes, et al. (2001) definition of the marginal tax rate: the present value of
current and future tax liabilities generated by an additional dollar of current income.

Cisco Systems, Amgen, Dell Computer, Sun Microsystems, Qualcomm, and Lucent.
Furthermore, companies as diverse as General Electric, Pfizer, Citigroup, and IBM deducted
over $1 billion in stock option compensation in 2000.
We confirm that employee stock option deductions substantially reduce corporate tax
payments. We estimate that in 2000 stock options reduced corporate taxable income by
approximately $100 billion for our sample of S&P 100 and Nasdaq 100 firms. For the S&P 100
firms, aggregate stock option deductions equal approximately 10 percent of aggregate pretax
income. For the Nasdaq 100 companies (which are more option-intensive), aggregate deductions
exceed aggregate pretax income. Not surprisingly, with corporate tax savings of these
magnitudes, employee stock option deductions are attracting considerable political scrutiny,
including current legislation to limit the tax deductions to the amount expensed for book
purposes (e.g., Senate bill 1940, Ending the Double Standard for Stock Options Act, introduced
February 13, 2002).2
This study, however, focuses primarily on the effect of employee stock options on
marginal tax rates (MTRs) because MTRs often affect economic decision making. For our
sample, the median marginal tax rate falls from 34 percent when we ignore option deductions, to
26 percent when we include options in the analysis. For Nasdaq firms, the deductions comprise
such a large proportion of pre-option income that the median MTR tumbles from 31 percent to 5
percent when option deductions are included in the tax rate calculation. We isolate the effect of
three classes of options on the MTR : those already exercised, those granted but not yet
2 Enron’s recent failure has contributed to the growing attention on the magnitude of stock option deductions. For
example, the New York Times (February 7, 2002) states, “Enron's collapse has also renewed lawmakers' interest in
how companies that issue stock options do not have to deduct their costs under accounting rules. But these
companies can and do take sizable tax deductions every year in which large blocks of options are exercised by
executives. As a result, many of the nation's largest and most profitable companies have escaped paying income
taxes in recent years. From 1996 to 2000, for example, Enron eliminated taxes of $625 million through aggressive
stock option grants."
2