NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HEALTH INSURANCE ON THE INTERNET AND
THE ECONOMICS OF SEARCH
Mark V. Pauly
Bradley Herring
David Song
Working Paper 9299
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9299
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2002
This research was supported, in part, by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation’s Changes In Health Care
Financing and Organization (HCFO) Initiative. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Mark V. Pauly, Bradley Herring, and David Song. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Health Insurance on the Internet and the Economics of Search
Mark V. Pauly, Bradley Herring, and David Song
NBER Working Paper No. 9299
October 2002
JEL No. D83, G22, I10
ABSTRACT
This paper explores the level and dispersion of premiums paid for individual health insurance
by comparing “asking price” data posted on an electronic insurance exchange with survey data on
premiums actually paid in the period just before the advent of electronic exchanges. The primary
theoretical question is whether the pattern of differences between asking prices and transactions
prices can be explained using a simple search theory. We hypothesize, following suggestions of
Stigler and Rothschild, that higher risks who expect to pay higher premiums for a given policy will
engage in more intensive search than lower risks, given the same distribution of asking prices. As
a result, for a given distribution of asking prices, the dispersion of premiums actually paid
(transactions prices) will be smaller for higher risks. Therefore, the introduction of an electronic
exchange should have a larger potential influence on the dispersion and level of premiums paid for
lower risks than for higher risks. We find evidence consistent with each of these hypotheses.
Mark V. Pauly, Ph.D. Bradley Herring, Ph.D.
Chair, Health Care Systems Department Department of Health Policy & Management
The Wharton School Emory University’s Rollins School of Public Health
University of Pennsylvania 1518 Clifton Road, NE. Atlanta, GA 30322
208 Colonial Penn Center bjherri@sph.emory.edu
3641 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6218
and NBER
pauly@wharton.upenn.edu
David Song
Health Care Systems Department
The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania
204 Colonial Penn Center
3641 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6218
dasong@wharton.upenn.edu

1
I. Introduction
Insurance markets of all types have become available to consumers on the Internet.
Electronic methods offer the possibility of reducing the cost to the consumer of searching among
policies, companies, and premiums virtually to zero. Before the advent of Internet-based
exchanges, the great bulk of consumers used insurance brokers or agents to assist them in their
search. Agents are widely thought to have provided information of the type now available on the
Internet, at a higher cost. The impact of substituting one technology for another, both overall
and for different types of consumers, is not yet fully clear.
Some people obtain health insurance as individuals, in the same way as they obtain auto,
homeowners, or most other insurances. At present, this fraction is less than 10 percent of total
private insurance since the vast majority of private health insurance is employment-based.
Recent policy proposals envision offering the currently uninsured subsidies of various types that
they can use to obtain insurance in the individual market, which could greatly increase the size of
this market. But how does (or could) this market perform? In this paper we investigate search
behavior in this market, using the advent of Internet-based exchanges as an instrument to do so.
The individual health insurance market appears to have a competitive market structure, and to
earn only competitive rates of return. Yet premiums charged and paid in that market for a given
insurance product appear to vary a great deal. The precise nature of premium variation, the
contribution of search (or non-search) behavior to that variation, and whether the variation is
greater in some circumstances than in others, are not well known. The advent of electronic
exchanges for health insurance offers the promise of substantial improvements in the way health
insurance markets function. We use data from an exchange to simulate the search process both

2
before and after the arrival of Internet-based exchanges. Our analysis of the search process tests
hypotheses that have implications in other markets as well.
Empirical evidence on the effect of online price information for markets in general is
mixed. The advent of life insurance quotes on the Internet appears to have reduced premiums in
both Internet and conventional markets (Brown and Goolsbee, 2002). Online auto retailers
appear also to have lowered prices and price dispersion of cars (Scott-Morton, Zettelmeyer, and
Risso, 2000). However, the advent of the Internet in the book industry appears to have lowered
neither prices nor price dispersion (Clay, Krishnan, and Wolff, 2001). In this paper we examine
the individual health insurance market in which there has historically been both substantial price
dispersion and price inflation.
There is a strong belief that the individual health insurance market has been subject to
both high average administrative or “loading” costs and a wide dispersion of premiums for the
same product, partly because of costly search and substantial buyer ignorance (Pauly and
Herring, 1999). However, virtually all our information on individual-market premiums is based
on data about the “posted” or proposed premiums listed by a few large or selected insurance
firms; see, for example, Frogue (2001). Information on the level of dispersion of “transactions”
prices actually paid to all the firms buyers use in this market is scarce. Since no or few
transactions may be expected to occur at unusually high posted prices, a better understanding of
what actually happens would come from looking at premiums consumers actually pay, and
comparing them with premiums firms propose to charge, rather than focusing entirely on the
latter. Such a comparison will tell us both about dispersion of actual realized market prices, and
about the search behavior of consumers of different types that contributes to this outcome.