NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE CORPORATE GOVERNANCE ROLE OF THE MEDIA
Alexander Dyck
Luigi Zingales
Working Paper 9309
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9309
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2002
We thank Mehmet Beceren for assistance in preparing the data and Rakhesh Khurana, Jay Lorsch, Forest
Reinhardt, Richard Vietor, Andy Zelleke, and seminar participants at the Harvard Business School for helpful
comments on an earlier draft. Alexander Dyck gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Division
of Research of Harvard Business School and Luigi Zingales from the George Stigler Center at the University
of Chicago. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Alexander Dyck and Luigi Zingales. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Corporate Governance Role of the Media
Alexander Dyck
Luigi Zingales
NBER Working Paper No. 9309
October 2002
JEL No. G30
ABSTRACT
In this paper we discuss the role of the media in pressuring corporate managers and
directors to behave in ways that are “socially acceptable”. Sometimes this coincides with shareholders’
value maximization, others not. We provide both anecdotal and systematic evidence that media affect
companies’ policy toward the environment and the amount of corporate resources that are diverted to the
sole advantage of controlling shareholders. Our results have important consequences for the focus of the
corporate governance debate and for the feasibility of reforms aimed at improving corporate governance
around the world.
Alexander Dyck Luigi Zingales
Harvard Business School University of Chicago, GSB
289 Morgan Hall 1101 E. 58th Street
Boston, MA 02163 Chicago, IL 60637
adyck@hbs.edu luigi.zingales@gsb.uchicago.edu

In April 1992 the Wall Street Journal published a strange advertisement. It was a full-page picture of a
silhouette of the board of directors of Sears Roebuck with the title: “The non-performing assets of Sears.”
The advertisement, paid for by shareholder activist Robert Monks, exposed all the directors, who were
identified by name, as responsible for the poor performance of Sears’ stock. The directors, greatly
embarrassed by the advertisement, chose to adopt many of the proposals advanced by Robert Monks,
even though he had received only 12 percent of the votes in the previous election for board members and
had failed to get a seat on the board. The market welcomed this change with a 9.5 percent excess return
the day these changes were announced and a 37 percent excess return during the following year (Monks
and Minow 1995, pp. 399-411).
On March 8, 1988, all the major U.S. networks broadcast a tape of a Panamanian tuna boat, the
Maria Luisa, killing hundreds of dolphins while fishing for tuna. Building on public outrage, the Earth
Island Institute, Greenpeace, and the Humane Society launched a boycott of tuna. Restaurant chains took
tuna off the menu and school boards across the country stopped using tuna until it was “dolphin safe,”
that is, fished with nets that were not killing tuna. On April 12, 1990, Heinz announced that it would only
sell dolphin-safe tuna. Within hours the two other largest tuna producers made a similar commitment
(Reinhardt and Vietor 1994a,b).
These episodes suggest that the media may play a role in shaping corporate policy. Are these
isolated incidents or are they representative of the media’s influence? If the media do have such an
influence, why do they have it? As the media do not vote and do not set managers’ compensation, what
mechanisms force directors to pay attention to what the media say? How does the media’s power relate to
and interact with other corporate governance mechanisms, such as the legal and competitive
environment? In what direction does media influence lead corporate policy?
These two examples alone suggest that an answer to these questions is not straightforward. In
both examples the media play the role of a lever, but a lever used by two very different groups:
disenfranchised shareholders in the first case, environmentalists in the second. The way the media were
used is also different. In the first case a dissenting shareholder paid out of his own pocket for an
2

advertisement that communicated his position about the shortcomings of managers and directors. In the
second case the television networks included a tape filmed by an environmental group in their regular
programming.
Finally, the outcome is also different. In the first example the public pressure resulting from the
advertisement ended up forcing the directors of Sears to increase shareholders’ value, an objective they
should have pursued to begin with. In the second case it forced them to bow to environmentalist groups, a
constituency to which they have no fiduciary duty. One could argue that Heinz managers responded to
their customers’ preferences and that the media were simply instrumental in bringing crucial facts to the
attention of customers. In this case, however, we have evidence that contradicts this hypothesis. As some
marketing studies show, a big gap exists between consumer complaints communicated through the press
and their willingness to pay. “If there is a dolphin-safe can of tuna next to a regular can, people choose the
cheaper product even if the difference is just one penny” (Reinhardt and Vietor 1994a, p. 3). It is not even
clear that the media forced the directors to behave in society’s interest. There is no evidence that the
societal loss caused by the killed dolphins is compensated for by the additional cost of fishing dolphin-
safe tuna. In fact, some environmentalists have criticized this decision by claiming that it has reduced
biodiversity, because it shifted tuna fishing entirely to the western Pacific, where catching tuna does not
kill dolphins, but does kill many other species that, unlike dolphins, are on the endangered species list.
All these questions regarding the media’s role receive limited attention in the academic
literature.1 This is no accident. The process of diffusion of information plays a small role in economic
models. Agents are assumed to be informed or not. If not, sometimes they are given the option of
acquiring information at a prespecified cost. There is no role for information aggregators, which
selectively reduce the cost of acquiring information. In the real world the media play this role. People
obtain much of their information from the media, which play an important part in selecting which pieces
1 In his survey of the state-of-the-art in corporate finance, Zingales (2000) mentions this as one important force that
has been neglected. Skeel (2001) analyzed the role of shaming in corporate law. Baron (1996, 2001) investigated the
role of the media in lobbying efforts and in private politics more generally. Djankov and others (2001) studied the
effects of the ownership of the press.
3