NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE FLIGHT-TO-LIQUIDITY PREMIUM IN U.S. TREASURY
BOND PRICES
Francis A. Longstaff
Working Paper 9312
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9312
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2002
I am grateful for helpful discussions with Jun Liu, Yoshihiro Mikami, Pedro Santa-Clara, Eduardo Schwartz,
Abraham Thomas, Toshiki Yotsuzuka, and seminar participants at Greenwich Capital Markets and Simplex
Asset Management. I am particularly grateful for the many valuable comments and insights of an anonymous
referee. All errors are my responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Francis A. Longstaff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Flight-to-Liquidity Premium in U.S. Treasury Bond Prices
NBER Working Paper No. 9312
Francis A. Longstaff
October 2002
ABSTRACT
We examine whether there is a flight-to-liquidity premium in Treasury bond prices by comparing them
with prices of bonds issued by Refcorp, a U.S. Government agency, which are guaranteed by the
Treasury. We find a large liquidity premium in Treasury bonds, which can be more than fifteen percent
of the value of some Treasury bonds. This liquidity premium is related to changes in consumer
confidence, the amount of Treasury debt available to investors, and flows into equity and money market
mutual funds. This suggests that the popularity of Treasury bonds directly a.ects their value.
Francis A. Longstaff
UCLA
Anderson Graduate School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
francis.longstaff@anderson.ucla.edu

But what is crucial about this distinction is that the individuals who were moving
from, let’s assume, the illiquid U.S. Treasuries to the liquid on-the-run liquid issues,
are basically saying, “I want out. I don’t want to know anything about whether a
particular investment is risky or not. I just want to disengage.” And the reason
you go into these liquid instruments is that that is the vehicle which enables one to
disengage as quickly as possible.
– Alan Greenspan, October 7, 1998.
1. INTRODUCTION
Historically, fixed income markets have often experienced what are termed flights
to quality where some market participants abruptly want to decrease their portfolio
exposure to securities bearing credit risk. Bank runs and panics, credit crunches, and
sudden declines in the market values of corporate bonds are all examples of the effects
of a flight to quality.1 From an asset pricing perspective, of course, the decrease in the
value of risky debt resulting from a flight to quality can readily be explained in terms
of changes in perceived default probabilities and in the equilibrium required premium
for bearing credit risk.2
In recent years, however, a related but distinct phenomenon has been observed in
the world’s financial markets: flights to liquidity. In a flight to liquidity, some market
participants suddenly prefer to hold highly-liquid securities such as U.S. Treasury
bonds rather than less-liquid securities. This is consistent with recent papers by
Woodford (1990), and Holmstr¨om and Tirole (1996, 1998) who examine the role of the
public sector inprovidingliquiditytofinancial markets. Arecentexample ofa flight to
liquidity was in the wake of the 1998 Russian default where Treasury bonds suddenly
1As examples, see Diamond and Dybvig (1983) and Bernanke and Gertler (1995).
2As examples, see Duffie and Singleton (1997, 1999), Duffee (1999), and Liu, Long-
staff, and Mandell (2001).
1

increased in value relative to less-liquid debt instruments, causing credit spreads to
widen and resulting in major losses at Long Term Capital Management and many
other highly-leveraged hedge funds. Of course, there may have been elements of both
a flight to quality and to liquidity during the 1998 hedge fund crisis.
Given that flights to liquidity may occur, however, it is important to consider
what effects a pure flight to liquidity may have on security prices. Standard asset
pricing theory implies that the value of a security should equal the present value of
its cash flows, and should not depend on how popular the security is as a trading
vehicle. More specifically, if two securities have identical cash flows in all states of
the world, then the two securities should have the same value even if one suddenly
becomes more popular among investors during a flight to liquidity. Finding evidence
of a significant flight-to-liquidity premium in the price of the more popular security
would pose a challenge to traditional asset pricing theory.
This paper examines whether there are flight-to-liquidity premia in U.S. Treasury
bond prices. In doing this, we compare Treasury bond prices with the prices of bonds
issuedbytheResolutionFundingCorporation(Refcorp), agovernment agencycreated
by the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement act of 1989 (FIR-
REA). Refcorp bonds differ from most other agency bonds (which usually bear some
small credit risk) in that their principal is fully collateralized by Treasury bonds, and
that full payment of coupons is guaranteed by the Treasury under the provisions of
FIRREA.3 Thus, Refcorp bonds literally have the same credit risk as Treasury bonds.
Since Treasury bonds are more liquid and thus popular among investors (particularly
during flights to liquidity), comparing their prices with those of Refcorp bonds pro-
vides an ideal way of testing whether there are flight-to-liquidity premia in Treasury
bond prices.
The results are surprising. We find that during the past decade, there are often
large liquidity premia in Treasury bond prices. In some cases, these premia can repre-
sent as much as 10 to 15 percent of the value of the Treasury bond.4 An exploratory
3In general, bonds issued by government sponsored enterprises such as Fannie Mae,
Freddie Mac, and the Federal Home Loan Bank are not explicitly guaranteed by the
U.S. Treasury and presumably carry some small amount of credit risk.
4Althoughourfocusisdifferent, theseresultsalsoparallelandcomplementthefindings
2