NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW COUNTRY AND SAFETY-NET CHARACTERISTICS AFFECT
BANK RISK-SHIFTING
Armen Hovakimian
Edward J. Kane
Luc Laeven
Working Paper 9322
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9322
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2002
The authors would like to thank Robert Bliss, Gerard Caprio, Stijn Claessens, James Thomson, and seminar
participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Hitotsubashi and Depaul Universities, and the Seventh
Annual Meeting fo the Latin American and Caribbean Economic Association in Madrid, for helpful
comments on earlier drafts of the paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Armen Hovakimian, Edward J. Kane and Luc Laeven. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

How Country and Safety-Net Characteristics Affect Bank Risk-Shifting
Armen Hovakimian, Edward J. Kane and Luc Laeven
NBER Working Paper No. 9322
November 2002
JEL No. G21, G28, F33
ABSTRACT
Risk-shifting occurs when creditors or guarantors are exposed to loss without receiving adequate
compensation. This paper seeks to measure and compare how well authorities in 56 countries controlled
bank risk shifting during the 1990s. Although significant risk shifting occurs on average, substantial
variation exists in the effectiveness of risk control across countries. We find that the tendency for explicit
deposit insurance to exacerbate risk shifting is tempered by incorporating loss-control features such as
risk-sensitive premiums, coverage limits, and coinsurance. Introducing explicit deposit insurance has had
adverse effects in environments that are low in political and economic freedom and high in corruption.
Edward J. Kane Armen Hovakimian Luc Laeven
Boston College Baruch College World Bank
Finance Department
Fulton Hall 330A
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
edward.kane@bc.edu

October 11, 2002
How Country and Deposit Insurance Characteristics Affect Bank
Risk-Shifting
Even when its long-run effects are adverse, instituting deposit insurance can
benefit short-horizoned policymakers and politicians. As long as its guarantees remain
credible, explicit insurance promises to eliminate the threat of depositor runs and to
protect depositors from harm with only a smidgen of its true economic cost actually
registering on the official government budget.
Part of the long-run cost of deposit insurance is that it reduces incentives for
depositors to monitor and police their banks. In countries that have not introduced
deposit insurance explicitly, insurance still exists in an implicit form. The costs and
benefits society experiences from either type of guarantees depend on how effectively
government regulators can control bank risk-shifting (Buser, Chen, and Kane, 1981;
Brickley and James, 1988; Calomiris, 1992; Kane, 1995; Honohan and Klingebiel, 2001).
Risk-shifting occurs whenever a contractual counterparty is exposed to loss from
fraud, leverage or earnings volatility without receiving adequate compensation for the
risk entailed. Other things equal, a bank can shift risk onto its deposit insurer in two
principal ways: by increasing its leverage and by increasing the volatility of its return on
assets. Risk-shifting is subsidized whenever the value of the explicit and implicit deposit
guarantees a country’s banks enjoy exceeds the implicit and explicit premiums the
insurer imposes on them. To avoid subsidizing bank risk taking, a deposit insurer must
monitor increases in volatility and leverage and police them appropriately.
1

The empirical literature on bank risk-shifting begins with Marcus and Shaked
(1984). Employing U.S. data and a single-equation framework, these authors use a one-
year put option model to estimate a risk-adjusted “fair” value for a bank’s deposit
insurance premium. These authors and subsequent research by Ronn and Verma (1986)
find that on average FDIC insurance was overpriced, but that the distribution of fair
premiums was strongly skewed to the right. Pennacchi (1987a and b) shows that this
skewness gains importance when deposit insurance is analyzed in a multiperiod context
inasmuch as evidence of average underpricing emerges in long-maturity models.
Improving on these single-equation models, Duan, Moreau and Sealey (1992)
separate the effects of leverage and return volatility in testing for risk shifting during
1976-1986 using a sample of thirty large U.S. banks, they found that twenty percent
showed risk-shifting behavior. Using this triangular two-equation framework and fitting
both single-period and infinite-maturity option models of deposit-insurance value,
Hovakimian and Kane (2000) examine risk-shifting in 1985-1994 for a sample of 123
U.S. banks. They find that on average capital regulation did not prevent sample banks
from shifting risk. Risk-shifting proved particularly strong for poorly capitalized banks
and for banks with high ratios of insured deposits to insured debt.
Laeven (2002a) fits the single-equation option model to a sample of banks in
several countries. He interprets estimates of the fair (i.e., properly priced) deposit
insurance premium (IPP) as a proxy for bank risk and shows that this proxy helps to
forecast bank distress in different countries. Laeven (2002b) investigates how country-
specific and bank-specific features contribute to the value of insurance services. The
opportunity-cost value of deposit insurance services proves higher in countries with
2