NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HORSES AND RABBITS? OPTIMAL DYNAMIC CAPITAL
STRUCTURE FROM SHAREHOLDER
AND MANAGER PERSPECTIVES
Nengjiu Ju
Robert Parrino
Allen M. Poteshman
Michael S. Weisbach
Working Paper 9327
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9327
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2002
We would like to thank participants at seminars at Arizona State University, DePaul University, University
of Illinois, Koc University, the New York Federal Reserve Bank, Princeton University, University of South
Carolina, University of Texas at Austin, and Washington State University for helpful suggestions. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2002 by Nengjiu Ju, Robert Parrino, Allen M. Poteshman, and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Horses and Rabbits? Optimal Dynamic Capital Structure
from Shareholder and Manager Perspectives
Nengjiu Ju, Robert Parrino, Allen M. Poteshman, and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 9327
November 2002
JEL No. G32, G33, H250
ABSTRACT
This paper examines optimal capital structure choice using a dynamic capital structure model that
is calibrated to reflect actual firm characteristics. The model uses contingent-claim methods to value
interest tax shields, allows for reorganization in bankruptcy, and maintains a long-run target debt/equity
ratio by refinancing maturing debt. Using this model we calculate optimal capital structures in a realistic
representation of the traditional ‘tradeoff’ model. In contrast to previous research, the resulting optimal
capital structures do not imply that firms tend to use too little leverage in practice. We also estimate the
costs borne by a firm whose capital structure deviates from its optimal, ‘target’ debt/equity ratio. The
costs of moderate deviations are relatively small, suggesting that a policy of adjusting leverage only when
it deviates substantially from a target debt/equity ratio is likely to be reasonable for most firms.
Nengjiu Ju Robert Parrino
Department of Finance Deprtment of Finance
Smith School of Business McCombs School of Business
University of Maryland University of Texas at Austin
College Park, MD 20742 Austin, TX 78712-1179
nju@rhsmith.umd.edu parrino@mail.utexas.edu
Allen M. Poteshman Michael S. Weisbach
Department of Finance Department of Finance
College of Commerce College of Commerce
and Business Administration and Business Administration
University of Illinois University of Illinois
Champaign, IL 6182 Champaign, IL 61820
poteshma@uiuc.edu and NBER
weisbach@uiuc.edu

Horses and Rabbits? Optimal Dynamic Capital Structure
from Shareholder and Manager Perspectives
1. Introduction
A central issue in corporate finance research is the question of why, despite the large tax
advantage enjoyed by debt, actual firms have fairly low leverage ratios. This question motivated much of
the early research on agency theory (Jensen and Meckling, 1976; Myers, 1977), important work on
information asymmetries (Myers and Majluf, 1984), three American Finance Association presidential
addresses (Miller, 1977; Myers, 1984; and Leland, 1998), and some well-regarded recent research
(Graham, 2000). The consensus view underlying this vast literature is that bankruptcy costs alone are too
small to offset the value of tax shields, and that other factors, such as agency costs, must be introduced
into the cost-benefit analysis to explain actual capital structures. Miller (1977, p. 264) memorably
characterizes the discrepancy by comparing the trade-off between tax gains and bankruptcy costs as “like
the recipe for the fabled horse-and-rabbit stew – one horse and one rabbit”.
The underlying logic of this widespread view is that, while tax shields are large (about 9.7 percent
of firm value according to Graham, 2000), expected bankruptcy costs are small because they are incurred
infrequently and represent only a small fraction of firm value when they are incurred. Yet, the tradeoff
theory does not contain any predictions about the relative level of tax shields and bankruptcy costs; rather,
it states that at the margin, adding a small amount of debt will not change firm value. Evaluating the
extent to which Miller’s intuition captures the essence of the capital structure problem requires a formal
model, calibrated to reflect actual data.
This paper estimates optimal capital structure from a calibrated continuous-time contingent claim
model. The model is based on the dynamic framework of Ju (2001), which corresponds to a traditional
tradeoff approach insofar as the only explicitly modeled factors affecting capital structure are tax shields
and bankruptcy costs. In our model, the manager of an unlevered firm undertakes a fairly priced
debt/equity swap, in which the manager selects the fraction of equity to be exchanged for debt with the

objective of maximizing either the per-share value of the firm’s equity or his own utility. The swap that
maximizes the per-share value of equity is optimal from the shareholders’ perspective, and the swap that
maximizes the manager’s utility is optimal from his perspective.
We find that the optimal debt to total capital ratio is 14.42 percent when we maximize share value
for a firm that is calibrated to be similar to the median firm on the Standard and Poors’ Computstat
database. In comparison, the median firm in Compustat had a debt to total capital ratio of 22.6 percent in
2000. The fact that our estimate of the optimal predicted debt to total capital ratio is below the median
value of 22.6 percent implies that, contrary to the dominant view in the literature, the typical firm is over-
leveraged. For, example, a number of recent papers (e.g., Leland, 1994; Leland and Toft, 1996;
Goldstein, Ju, and Leland, 2001), that calibrate continuous-time contingent claim models and characterize
optimal leverage as the capital structure at which adding a small amount of debt does not change firm
value, predict leverage ratios that are substantially higher than those observed in practice.
Several features of our approach cause our model to predict lower levels of debt in the optimal
capital structure than the previous continuous-time contingent claim models. First, the model is dynamic
in the sense that finite maturity debt is repeatedly issued and re-financed upon maturity at a pre-specified
target debt to total capital ratio. The opportunity to increase debt in the future, if firm value increases,
lowers the optimal initial leverage ratio because firms issue debt less aggressively than they would if the
debt level could not be adjusted with changes in firm value (e.g., Leland, 1994 and Leland and Toft,
1996). Second, in some previous models (e.g., Leland, 1994), debt is perpetual so firms only make tax-
deductible interest payments. In contrast, issuers of debt in our model make both tax-deductible interest
payments and non-deductible principal payments. An implication of this difference is that interest
deductions are relatively less valuable in our model, leading firms to use less leverage ex ante. Finally,
like the other continuous-time contingent claim models, we specify the value of the unlevered assets as an
2