NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MINIMUM ASSET REQUIREMENTS
Steven Shavell
Working Paper 9335
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9335
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2002
I thank Louis Kaplow for comments, Sergey Lagodinsky, Frederick Pollock III, and Ziv Preis for research
assistance, and the John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and Business at Harvard Law School for
research support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Steven Shavell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Minimum Asset Requirements
Steven Shavell
NBER Working Paper No. 9335
November 2002
JEL No. G28, K13, K20, L51
ABSTRACT
Requirements that parties have assets of at least a minimum level in order to participate in an
activity are frequently imposed. A principal rationale for minimum asset requirements is considered
in this article – potential injurers have stronger incentives to prevent harm, or not to engage in harmful
activities, provided that they have at least the required level of assets at stake if they are sued for
causing harm. The optimal minimum asset requirement generally reflects a tradeoff between this
advantage and the disadvantage that some parties with assets below a required level ought to engage
in the activity (because the benefits they would obtain exceed the expected harm they would cause).
Additionally, it is emphasized that minimum asset requirements are socially desirable only when the
victims of harm are not customers of firms. When victims of harm are customers of firms, minimum
asset requirements are socially undesirable.
Steven Shavell
Samuel R. Rosenthal Professor of Law and Economics
Harvard Law School
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
shavell@law.harvard.edu

1. Introduction
Requirements that parties have assets of at least a minimum level in order to participate
in an activity are frequently imposed. Business entities must satisfy minimum asset requirements
to engage in a wide range of enterprises, including transportation of hazardous wastes, building
of homes, pesticide application, insurance activity, and banking operation, and individuals must
sometimes meet financial responsibility requirements as well.1 In this article, a principal
rationale for minimum asset requirements is considered: Potential injurers have stronger
incentives to prevent harm, or not to engage in harmful activities, provided that they have at least
the required level of assets at stake if they are sued for causing harm.2
Minimum asset requirements are first investigated here employing a standard model in
which individuals choose whether to engage in a harmful activity, individuals are able to reduce
the risk of harm by exercising care, and individuals are held liable for harm caused. If
individuals have assets at least equal to the harm they might create, their incentives will be
optimal: They will engage in the activity if and only if their benefits would exceed the expected
harm caused; and if they engage in the activity, they will choose the optimal level of care. If
individuals’ assets are less than the potential harm, however, they will engage too often in the
harmful activity, as they will not then face expected liability equal to the full expected harm, and
they will similarly lack incentives to take optimal care.
A minimum asset requirement alleviates the problems that individuals might engage in
the activity too often and that they would take inadequate care when doing so. However, a
minimum asset requirement has a disadvantageous effect: Some of the individuals with assets
below the required level ought to engage in the activity, because the benefits they would obtain
exceed the expected harm they would cause, even though this harm is higher than is optimal due
to their dulled incentives to take care. The optimal minimum asset requirement reflects the
tradeoff between this disadvantageous effect and its advantages.
Minimum asset requirements are then examined when firms that produce a good or
service (as opposed to individuals who engage in an activity) are the potential injurers, and when
the victims of harm are strangers to firms, such as victims of pollution from the spill of a
hazardous waste. In this case, minimum asset requirements have analogous advantages to those
just mentioned; they lead to lower and more appropriate levels of production, because the asset
requirement implies that expected liability payments are higher than otherwise, and hence that
product prices are higher; and the asset requirement means that firms that produce exercise
greater care in the process. But minimum asset requirements also exert a disadvantageous effect;
they prevent production by some relatively efficient firms with low assets that ought to produce
because their costs plus accident losses generated are less than value consumers place on their
1On hazardous wastes, see for example FLA. STAT. Ch. 403.724 (2002); on building of homes, see for example
WIS. ADMIN. CODE §5.31 (2002); on pesticide application, see for example MASS. REGS. CODE tit. 333, §10.13
(2002); on insurance activity, see Jackson and Symons 1999, pp. 443-445; and on banking operations, see Jackson
and Symons 1999, pp. 184-207. It should be noted that parties are often allowed to obtain liability insurance (or to
post a bond) in lieu of satisfying a minimum asset requirement, as is generally the case with drivers’ licenses; see
Jerry 1996, pp. 859-63. I discuss minimum liability insurance requirements in the concluding section.
2Another rationale for minimum asset requirements is to increase victims’ ability to gain compensation through
suit for their losses, on which I comment in the concluding section.
1

output. The optimal minimum asset requirement reflects a balancing of these factors.
Then minimum asset requirements are studied when firms are the injurers and the victims
are the customers of the firms. In this case, minimum asset requirements are generally socially
undesirable. The underlying reason is that because customers bear any losses that firms with
assets less than harm are unable to pay in liability judgments, a customer will not make a
purchase unless the value obtained exceeds the social cost. In particular, a firm with low assets
that would take little care and produce a risky good, such that the full cost of the good including
expected losses exceeds its value to a potential customer, would not be purchased by the
customer -- meaning that the customer does not need a minimum asset requirement to protect
him. At the same time, a minimum asset requirement would prevent certain efficient firms with
low assets from producing, so that it is socially undesirable.
The details of this argument, and whether a first-best outcome is obtained in equilibrium,
depend on whether product risks are or are not observable and on whether the assets of firms are
directly observable. It is assumed that, if assets are not directly observable, they can be credibly
revealed by a firm (for instance, through an accountant’s certified report). As is emphasized,
when firms’ assets are not directly observable, they will be voluntarily revealed in equilibrium.
High asset firms will have an incentive to reveal their assets in order to obtain a better price
(high asset firms can pay more if liable for causing harm, and also have an incentive to produce
less risky goods, so customers will pay a higher price to such firms). That high asset firms want
to reveal their assets causes an “unraveling” phenomenon among firms that would otherwise be
silent about their assets, so that in equilibrium essentially all firms reveal their assets.
In the concluding section several issues relevant to the analysis are discussed, including
the observability of assets and the regulation of liability insurance coverage.
2. Injurers are Individuals
Assume that injurers are risk-neutral individuals who may choose to engage in an activity
from which they would obtain a gain but that might also result in harm, with a probability
depending on their level of care. Define the following notation.
g = gain to an individual from engaging in the activity; g $ 0;
w(g) = probability density of g across individuals; and w(g) > 0;3
x = level of care exercised by an individual; x $ 0;
p(x) = probability of harm; pN(x) < 0; pO(x) > 0;
h = level of harm; h > 0.
Social welfare S is the gains that individuals obtain from engaging in the activity minus the cost
of care4 exercised by them and expected harm caused; that is, social welfare is the integral of g -
(x + p(x)h) over all individuals who engage in the activity.
Socially optimal behavior is easily described: If an individual engages in the activity, he
should choose x to minimize the costs of care plus expected harm,
3A particular individual’s gain is certain; different individuals obtain different gains.
4The term “cost” of care will be used interchangeably with “level” of care.
2