NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PERSONAL BANKRUPTCY AND THE LEVEL
OF ENTREPRENEURIAL ACTIVITY
Wei Fan
Michelle J. White
Working Paper 9340
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9340
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2002
We are grateful for comments from Mitchell Berlin, Charlie Brown, David de Meza, Alan Schwartz, and
participants at seminars at Berkeley, Columbia, Michigan, Tilburg, the Philadelphia Fed, the Bank of England,
the ALEA Annual Conference, and the NBER Summer Institute in Law and Economics. The N.S.F. provided
financial support under grant number NSF-SBR-9617712. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Wei Fan and Michelle J. White. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Personal Bankruptcy and the Level of Entrepreneurial Activity
Wei Fan and Michelle J. White
NBER Working Paper No. 9340
November 2002
JEL No. E6, K2, M13, L5
ABSTRACT
The U.S. personal bankruptcy system functions as a bankruptcy system for small businesses as
well as consumers, because debts of non-corporate firms are personal liabilities of the firms’ owners.
If the firm fails, the owner has an incentive to file for bankruptcy, since both business debts and the
owner’s personal debts will be discharged. In bankruptcy, the owner must give up assets above a
fixed exemption level. Because exemption levels are set by the states, they vary widely.
We show that higher bankruptcy exemption levels benefit potential entrepreneurs who are risk
averse by providing partial wealth insurance and therefore the probability of owning a business
increases as the exemption level rises. We test this prediction and find that the probability of
households owning businesses is 35% higher if they live in states with unlimited rather than low
exemptions. We also find that the probability of starting a business and the probability of owning a
corporate rather than non-corporate business are higher for households that live in high exemption
states.
Wei Fan Michelle J. White
J.D. Powers, Inc. Department of Economics
5435 Corporate Drive, Suite 300 University of California, San Diego
Troy, MI 48098 9500 Gilman Dr.
La Jolla CA 92093-0508
and NBER
miwhite@ucsd.edu

Personal Bankruptcy and the Level of Entrepreneurial Activity1
Wei Fan and Michelle J. White
The U.S. personal bankruptcy system is primarily intended as a bankruptcy procedure
for consumers, but also is the de facto bankruptcy procedure for small firms. When firms
are non-corporate, debts of the firm are personal liabilities of the entrepreneur/owner. If
the firm fails, entrepreneurs have an incentive to file for personal bankruptcy under the
procedure known as Chapter 7, because both their business and personal debts will be
discharged. Entrepreneurs filing under Chapter 7 must give up all assets they own in
excess of an exemption level, but all of their future earnings are exempt from the
obligation to repay--this is known as the “fresh start” in bankruptcy. Bankruptcy
exemption levels are set by the states and they vary widely. Higher exemption levels
make it more attractive for potential entrepreneurs who are risk averse to go into
business, because more of their assets are sheltered from creditors if the firm fails. The
fact that 20% of personal bankruptcy filings list business debts suggests how important
personal bankruptcy procedures are for entrepreneurs (Sullivan et al, 1989).
In this paper we examine whether individuals are more likely to become entrepreneurs
if they live in states with higher bankruptcy exemptions. There is a large literature
explaining whether workers choose self-employment versus working for others and, in
this paper, we test whether the bankruptcy system is a important part of the decision. We
first develop a model of how variations in exemption levels affect incentives to own, start
and end small businesses. We show that higher exemption levels provide partial wealth
insurance, which makes potential entrepreneurs who are risk averse more likely to choose
self-employment. However the relationship can turn negative if exemption levels are
sufficiently high. We test the model empirically and find that families are more likely to
own and start businesses if they live in states with higher bankruptcy exemption levels.
1 We are grateful for comments from Mitchell Berlin, Charlie Brown, David de Meza, Alan Schwartz, and
participants at seminars at Berkeley, Columbia, Michigan, Tilburg, the Philadelphia Fed, the Bank of
England, the ALEA Annual Conference, and the NBER Summer Institute in Law and Economics. The
N.S.F. provided financial support under grant number NSF-SBR-9617712.
2

Section 1 of the paper discusses bankruptcy law, section 2 reviews the prior literature,
section 3 contains the model and, in section 4, we discuss our data and empirical results.
Section 5 concludes and discusses policy implications.
I. Bankruptcy Law
The U.S. Constitution reserves for the Federal government the power to make laws
concerning bankruptcy, so that bankruptcy law is uniform across the U.S. However in
the Bankruptcy Code of 1978, Congress adopted a uniform set of bankruptcy exemptions
but gave the states the right to opt out and set their own exemption levels. As a result,
exemption levels are the only aspect of bankruptcy law that varies across states.
There are two different personal bankruptcy procedures—known as Chapters 7 and
13--and debtors are allowed to choose between them. As noted above, Chapter 7 requires
debtors to give up all of their assets above their state’s exemption level, but debtors’
future earnings are completely exempt. All unsecured debts are discharged. Under the
second personal bankruptcy procedure, Chapter 13, debtors are not obliged to give up any
of their assets, but instead they must propose a multi-year plan to repay part of their
unsecured debts from future earnings. If they fulfill the repayment plan, then the unpaid
portion of the debt is discharged. For debtors in general, filing under Chapter 7 is more
favorable because they often have no non-exempt assets. (About 70% of all bankruptcy
filings occur under Chapter 7.) For entrepreneurs, filing under Chapter 7 is particularly
favorable, because they usually have large debts from their failed businesses and both
their business and personal debts will be discharged under Chapter 7. If they instead filed
under Chapter 13, the obligation to use part of their future earnings to repay debt would
severely hamper their ability to obtain credit and start new businesses. From creditors’
viewpoint, there is little difference between Chapters 7 and 13, since creditors are entitled
to receive under Chapter 13 only the amount they would receive if the debtor filed under
Chapter 7. We therefore model incentives to file for bankruptcy generally as a decision
to file under Chapter 7.2
2 There are other differences between the two Chapters, which we ignore. For example, debts incurred by
fraud are only dischargeable under Chapter 13. See White (1998) for discussion of personal bankruptcy
law and additional references.
3