NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SOVEREIGN RISK, CREDIBILITY AND THE GOLD STANDARD:
1870-1913 VERSUS 1925-31
Maurice Obstfeld
Alan M. Taylor
Working Paper 9345
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9345
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2002
This paper is forthcoming in The Economic Journal. For help with data we thank Pranab Bardhan, Luis
Bértola, Michael Bordo, Guillermo Bózzoli, Charles Calomiris, Gregory Clark, Niall Ferguson, Albert
Fishlow, Stephen Haber, Ian McLean, Lawrence Officer, Sevket Pamuk, Leandro Prados de la Escosura,
Jaime Reis, Gail Triner and Tarik Yousef. For outstanding research assistance we thank Miguel Fuentes and
David Jacks. We received very helpful comments from participants at the joint Money, Macro and
Finance/Understanding the Evolving Macroeconomy conference held at the University ofWarwick in
September 2002. All errors are our own. Obstfeld gratefully acknowledges the support of the United States
National Science Foundation, through a grant to the National Bureau of Economic Research. Taylor gratefully
acknowledges the support of the Chancellor’s Fellowship at the University of California, Davis. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2002 by Maurice Obstfeld and Alan M. Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Sovereign Risk, Credibility and the Gold Standard: 1870-1913 versus 1925-31
Maurice Obstfeld and Alan M. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 9345
November 2002
JEL No. F2, F33, F36, F41, N10, N20
ABSTRACT
What determines sovereign risk? We study the London bondmarket from the 1870s to the
1930s. Our findings support conventional wisdom concerning the low credibility of the interwar gold
standard. Before 1914 gold standard adherence effectively signalled credibility and shaved 40 to 60
basis points from country borrowing spreads. In the 1920s, however, simply resuming prewar gold
parities was insufficient to secure such benefits. Countries that devalued before resumption were
treated favorably, and markets scrutinized other signals. Public debt and British Empire membership
were important determinants of spreads after World War One, but not before.
Maurice Obstfeld Alan M. Taylor
Department of Economics Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall University of California
University of California One Shields Avenue
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880 Davis, CA 95616-8578
NBER and CEPR and NBER
obstfeld@econ.berkeley.edu amtaylor@ucdavis.edu

1 Introduction
Can macroeconomic policymakers enhance credibility, and thus performance, by
theadoptionofahardcurrencypeg? Theexperimentisoftenattempted. Inrecent
years many countries have tried to end histories of macroeconomic instability
through reform programs based on a fixed exchange rate. The variants of fixed
exchangerateshaverangedfromconventionalcurrencypegstocurrencyboardsto
currencyunionstodollarisation,sometimesaccompaniedbyelaborateinstitutional
engineeringmeantto enhancecredibilitywiththemarkets.
Yet the success of these efforts has varied a great deal across countries. In
particular,theArgentinepeso’sdiastrouscollapseaftertenyearsofparitywiththe
United States dollar illustrates the difficulty nowadays of establishing credibility
even through some of the “harder” variants of currency peg. How should we
interpretsuchanoutcome? Wethinkthatanexplorationofalargesetofhistorical
episodes could be informative. This paper aims to thow light on the relationship
betweenexchangerateregimesandcredibilitybycloselyexaminingtwoadjacent
but very different historical epochs ofwidespread exchange rate stabilisation,the
classical pre-World War One gold standard period and the years 1925–31 of the
interwargoldstandard.
Itisnowwidelybelievedthatpriorto1914,goldstandardorthodoxyconferred
credibilityandwasasinequanonforaccesstoglobalcapitalmarketsonfavorable
terms. Apath-breakingstudybyBordoandRockoff(1996)foundthatadherenceto
goldstandardrulesactedasa“sealofapproval”forsovereigndebt. Goldstandard
countrieshadlowercountryrisk,measuredbytheirbondspreadsinLondonrelative
to the British consol. By the time the interwar gold standard was reconstituted
startingin1925,however,theunderlyingpoliticalequilibriuminmosteconomies
had changed, with morepoliticalpowerin the hands ofpreviouslydisadvantaged
working class parties and a greater awareness of government’s role in steering
economic outcomes (Polanyi, 1944; Temin, 1989; Eichengreen, 1996). Indeed,
divergentinterest-grouppositionson macroeconomicpolicywere reflected in the
highinflationratesrampantintheearly1920sandinthenationaldebatesoverthe
appropriateexchangeparity—devaluedornot—atwhich toreturn togold.
Hard evidenceofanewpoliticaldynamicmightbesoughtinachangingrela-
tionship between country risk and gold after 1925. With the rules of the game in
question after World War One, perhaps investors doubted that the mere adoption
of a gold standard regime would ensure the repayment of public debts. Consis-
tent with such imperfect credibility, other indicators that could reassure foreign
investorsaboutpublicsolvency(suchasthedebt-GDPratio)orprotectionofcapi-
1

tal(suchasmembershipintheBritishEmpire)mighthavehadabiggerimpacton
international bond spreads under the reconstituted gold standard than before. Do
thedataindeed supporttheseconjectures?
There isno uniformand comprehensivestudyofbondspreads across thepre-
1914 and interwar gold standards that would allowus definitivelyto answer such
questions. A study of interwar spreads by Bordo, Edelstein, and Rockoff (1999),
however, came to a conclusion that was surprising, even by the authors’ own
admission.1 Looking solely at 1920s bond yields, they found continued evidence
that the gold standard remained a seal of approval when a country returned to its
prewarexchangeparitywithgold,loweringbondspreadssignificantlyinthatcase.
Devaluerswerenotsoluckywiththeirbondspreads: forthem,theeffectofbeing
on gold was found to be small and statistically insignificant. Such findings seem
to challenge the conventional wisdom that the interwar gold standard was a pale
and lesscredibleshadowofitspredecessor.
These are two pioneering studies, but they are not ideal for comparativework
across regimes because of differences in the type of data that each employs. The
formerstudylookedatlong-termgovernmentbondsinthesecondarymarket,and
examinedtheiryieldtomaturity;thelatterexaminednewissuesandtheiryieldat
themomentofflotationonly. Theformerstudythereforehadcompletetimeseries,
whereasthelatterhadasmallsamplethatwasofteninterruptedbymissingdatain
yearswhennoissuestookplace—anotuncommoneventinthe1920s,andonethat
raisesapotentialsample-selectionissue(presumably,bondstendnottobefloated
when conditions are unfavorable). Finally, the former study examined prices in
London,thelatterpricesinNewYork,adefensibleswitchasthehegemoniccentre
ofglobalcapitalmarketsshiftedacrosstheAtlanticaroundthistime,andonethat
allowedtheuseofCleonaLewis’s(1938)figures onnewissuesduringthe1920s.
Toovercomethedifferencesbetweenthesetwoearlierinvestigations,wecom-
pare the determinants of bond spreads in the pre-1914 and interwar years using
a consistent set of data for a larger sample of countries from 1870 through 1939.
Wefocusonasampleofmorethan20diversecountries—somewithintheBritish
Empire, some outside, some in the core and some in the periphery—to see how
theircountryriskevolved. Thisallowsustofocusonthesametypeofriskmeasure
acrossbothprewarandinterwareras. Toisolatetheeffectsofdefault(as opposed
toexchangerate)risk,spreadsoverLondonareexclusivelyforbondsdenominated
1SeealsoFerguson(2001,p. 333),whosuggeststhatthesurprisingconclusionoftheinterwar
studythrowsdoubtonthefindingsintheoriginalBordo-Rockoffstudyofpre-1914yields.However,
thetwostudiesuseverydifferentsourcesfortheiryielddata,asweexplaininamoment.
2