NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PRICING THE GLOBAL INDUSTRY PORTFOLIOS
Stefano Cavaglia
Robert J. Hodrick
Moroz Vadim
Xiaoyan Zhang
Working Paper 9344
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9344
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2002
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2002 by Stefano Cavaglia, Robert J. Hodrick, Moroz Vadim, and Xiaoyan Zhang. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Pricing the Global Industry Portfolios
Stefano Cavaglia, Robert J. Hodrick, Moroz Vadim, and Xiaoyan Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 9344
November 2002
JEL No. G12, F3
ABSTRACT
We investigate the ability of several international asset pricing models to price the returns on 36 FTSE
global industry portfolios. The models are the international capital asset pricing model (ICAPM), the ICAPM
with exchange risks, and global two-factor and three-factor Fama-French (1996, 1998) models. We apply the
methodology of Hansen and Jagannathan (1997). While all of the models can correctly price the basic assets,
exchange risks are unimportant and only the global three-factor Fama-French model passes a robustness check
which requires the models to also price portfolios sorted by book-to-market ratio.
Stefano Cavaglia Robert J. Hodrick
Brinson Partners Columbia Business School
209 LaSalle Street Uris Hall
Chicago, IL 60604 3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
rh169@columbia.edu
Moroz Vadim Xiaoyan Zhang
Brinson Partners Johnson Graduate School of Management
209 LaSalle Street Cornell University
Chicago, IL 60604 Ithaca, NY 14850

1. Introduction
World financial markets are becoming more integrated. Under the market
integration hypothesis, only global risks are priced, and assets with the same risk
characteristics, which arise from their correlations with global risks, receive the same
prices irrespective of their nationalities. Consistent with this view, Cavaglia, Brightman,
and Aked (2000) demonstrate that the returns on the national industry portfolios are
decided by industry-specific factors rather than by country-specific factors. This article
explores whether simple international asset pricing models can price the global industry
returns. Byproducts of this investigation include an exploration of investment strategies
that can be implemented to beat the asset pricing benchmarks and an analysis of the gains
to diversifying internationally across the global industry portfolios.
2. Industry Portfolio Returns and International Asset Pricing Models
We examine weekly excess returns on the 36 global industry indices complied by
the FTSE, which cover the top 85%-95% market capitalization of 22 developed countries.
Table 1 provides the names of the individual industries. The excess returns are currency
hedged because they are local-currency returns in excess of the local-eurocurrency
deposit rate (from Standard & Poor’s DRI database). We examine the pricing of returns
on portfolios that are either equal-weighted (EW) returns or value-weighted (VW). We
also include the gross return on the U.S. Treasury-bill as a risk free asset that pins down
the scale of excess returns. The sample period is from 1986:01 to 2001:05 for a total of
800 observations.
Figure 1 provides summary statistics for the global industry portfolios. The line
with diamonds displays the mean excess weekly returns; the line without diamonds
displays the two standard error band. Mean returns that exceed the standard error band
2

are significantly different from zero. Although big spreads exist between the average
returns of different industry portfolios, especially for EW returns, the noisiness of returns
inflates the standard errors and makes statistical inference difficult, which lowers the
power of our tests. Industry 20, business services/computer software, has the highest and
the most significant mean return, and industry 34, precious metal/minerals, has the lowest
mean return.
If world equity markets are integrated, differences in the average returns should
be attributable to differences in the assets’ exposures to global risk factors specified in
international asset pricing models. One benchmark model is the International Capital
Asset Pricing Model (ICAPM) as in Grauer, Litzenberger and Stehle (1976), who assume
Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) holds and demonstrate that the covariance of a return with
the global market return is the only priced risk. We use the global value-weighted market
excess return (WRVW) as the global market risk factor.
When PPP does not hold, covariances with exchange rates become potential
sources of risk in international asset pricing models as first noted in Adler and Dumas
(1983). Our second model (ICAPMEX) includes exchange risks, as in Dumas and Solnik
(1995). We use exchange-rate data from the DRI database, and we consider exposures to
the Dollar/Pound (EXUK), Dollar/Mark (EXGE), and Dollar/Yen (EXJP) exchange rates.
We calculate the exchange risks as the excess dollar returns on foreign currency deposits.
Finally, Fama and French (1998) document that exposures only to market risk (as
in the ICAPM) do not explain average returns across countries, especially on country
portfolios sorted by the ratio of a firm’s book value to its market value. Fama and French
(1998) add a second factor, the global excess return of high book-to-market firms over
low book-to-market firms (WHML), and they demonstrate that this multifactor
3