DEBT POLICY, CORPORATE TAXES, AND DISCOUNT RATES
Mark Grinblatt
Jun Liu
Working Paper 9353

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DEBT POLICY, CORPORATE TAXES, AND DISCOUNT RATES
Mark Grinblatt
Jun Liu
Working Paper 9353
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9353
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2002
The authors thank the UCLA Academic Senate and the Harold Price Center for Entrepreneurial Studies for
financial support and seminar participants at the University of Arizona, the University of Kentucky, and the
2002 Financial Management Association meeting for comments on earlier drafts. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Mark Grinblatt and Jun Liu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Debt Policy, Corporate Taxes, and Discount Rates
Mark Grinblatt and Jun Liu
NBER Working Paper No. 9353
November 2002
JEL No. G0, G1
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the valuation of assets with debt tax shields when debt policy is a general
time-dependent function of the asset's unlevered cash flows, value, and history. In a continuous-time
setting, it shows that the value of a project's debt tax shield satisfies a partial differential equation,
which simplifies to an easily solved ordinary differential equation for most plausible debt policies.
A large class of cases exhibits closed-form solutions for the value of a levered asset, the value of its
tax shield, and the appropriate tax-adjusted cost of capital for discounting unlevered cash flows.
Mark Grinblatt Jun Liu
Anderson Graduate School of Management Anderson Graduate School of Management
UCLA UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza 110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481 Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER jliu@anderson.ucla.edu
mark.grinblatt@anderson.ucla.edu

Perhaps the most popular application of financial theory is capital budgeting. Virtually
every student of finance starts his education in the field by learning how to discount future
cash flows. By the end of a first course, the student has developed the basic tools to imple-
ment a discounted cash flow analysis in a real world setting. Because the real world setting
must account for the relative advantage of debt financing, arising from the debt interest
tax subsidy, students of finance generally learn that such subsidies can be accounted for by
discounting unlevered cash flows (also referred to as “free cash flows”) at a tax-adjusted
weighted average cost of capital (or WACC). Such tax adjustments to the discount rate
generate a value for levered assets that exceed the value they would have if they were not
levered with debt financing.1
Despite the central importance of this topic, research on how to do a proper valuation
for capital budgeting purposes is sparse and largely ancient, particularly when it comes to
debt tax shields. An intrinsic difficulty associated with the valuation of debt tax shields
is identifying the risk of the tax deductions arising from the stream of future debt interest
expenses. The rate at which one discounts the future stream of interest-related tax shields,
and hence the value of those tax shields, has eluded prior research, except for the simplest
of cases.
These cases impose stringent restrictions on the cash flow process and debt policy to cir-
cumvent the complex issue of risk and valuation. Among these are the models of Modigliani
and Miller (1958) and Miles and Ezzell (1985). The Modigliani and Miller debt policy is
one where the debt level is constant and debt is both perpetual and default-free. This debt
policy implies that one can discount the stream of future interest-based tax shields at the
risk-free rate. If the tax rate is constant, as they assume, the debt tax shield’s present value
is necessarily proportional to the present value of the debt because the cash flow stream from
debt and the tax shield are proportional to one another. Here, since the constant of propor-
tionality is the corporate tax rate, the present value of the debt tax shield is the product of
the corporate tax rate and the present value of the debt. Modigliani and Miller (1958) also
use this model to develop formulas for discount rates that account for the value of the tax
shield when cash flows have no tendency to grow.
The interesting case studied by Miles and Ezzell focuses on the dynamic issuance of
perpetual risk-free debt. This case assumes: 1) the unlevered cash flow realization at each
date follows a random walk with no drift, which is paid out upon its realization (hence there
is no expected growth), 2) the unlevered cash flow stream is valued by applying a constant
discount rate, and 3) the debt-to-asset ratio is constant. Under these assumptions, the cash
flow from each date’s tax shield is of the same risk as the one period lagged unlevered cash
flow. As Grinblatt and Titman (1997, 2002) and Brealey and Meyers (2000) point out,
1Despite attempts to introduce the Adjusted Present Value method into the classroom, the Weighted
Average Cost of Capital approach still vastly dominates the practitioner landscape. For example, Graham
and Harvey (2001) observe that of twelve capital budgeting techniques, many of which are long out of favor
with finance academics, the Adjusted Present Value method is the least-used method.
1