NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
JUDGING FUND MANAGERS BY
THE COMPANY THEY KEEP
Randolph Cohen
Joshua Coval
Luboš Pástor
Working Paper 9359
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9359
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2002
We thank George Chacko, Aida Charoenrook, Gene Fama, Owen Lamont, Rob Stambaugh, Pietro Veronesi,
Tuomo Vuolteenaho, and seminar participants at Arizona State University, Dartmouth College, Emory
University, Harvard University, Indiana University, Michigan State University, Northwestern University,
University of Chicago, University of Pennsylvania, and Vanderbilt University for helpful comments. Huong
Trieu provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Randolph Cohen, Joshua Coval, and Luboš Pástor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Judging Fund Managers by the Company They Keep
Randolph Cohen, Joshua Coval, and Luboš Pástor
NBER Working Paper No. 9359
November 2002
JEL No. G1
ABSTRACT
We develop a performance evaluation approach in which a fund manager's skill is judged
by the extent to which his investment decisions resemble the decisions of managers with
distinguished performance records. The proposed performance measures are estimated more
precisely than standard measures, because they use historical returns and holdings of many funds
to evaluate the performance of a single fund. According to one of our measures, funds with
significantly positive ability considerably outnumber funds with significantly negative ability at the
end of our sample. Simulations demonstrate that our measures are particularly useful in ranking
managers. In an application that relies on such ranking, we find only weak persistence in the
performance of U.S. equity funds after accounting for momentum in stock returns.
Randolph Cohen Joshua Coval
Harvard Business School Harvard Business School
Baker Library Baker Library
Boston, MA 02163 Boston, MA 02163
Luboš Pástor
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
lubos.pastor@gsb.uchicago.edu

Introduction
People are often judged by the company they keep. Various human characteristics that
are di±cult to observe directly are commonly inferred from the characteristics of others
who behave in a similar manner. For example, a bored air traveler eager to chat about
Madonna's life story is more likely to turn to a fellow passenger reading the National
Enquirer than to a passenger reading the Wall Street Journal, because the readership of
the former periodical is generally known to be more interested in celebrity gossip.
When people compete, their success is often predicted by their techniques, and the
quality of a given technique is frequently evaluated based on the track records of the
technique's followers. As an example, suppose a group of basketball players, some of
whom shoot with both hands and some with only one hand, have been taking 10 shots
each at the basket. So far, the average score of the two-handers is 8/10, while the
one-handers' average is only 4/10. Two players, one one-hander and one two-hander,
have completed only half of their shots so far, and both have scored 4/5. Suppose you
are to bet on which of the two players is going to achieve a higher score out of 10.
Although the track records of both players are identical, it seems sensible to bet on
the two-hander, because the track records of the other players show that two-handed
shooters tend to score higher. The one-hander, who is employing what appears to be an
inferior technique, is more likely to have been lucky in his ¯rst ¯ve shots.
Similar to basketball players, active mutual fund managers rely on a variety of tech-
niques when trying to beat their benchmarks, and many of these techniques are common
to groups of managers. Forexample, managers collect information from di®erentsources
and use di®erent valuation methods, but there are clusters of managers who use simi-
lar sources and similar methods. Managers using similar techniques are likely to make
similar investment decisions and also to have similar performance. This paper focuses
on the aspect of performance that is due to commonality in the managers' techniques.
In this paper, a fund manager's ability to select outperforming stocks is judged by
the extentto whichhisinvestmentdecisions resemblethose of othersuccessfulmanagers.
One way to assess the similarity of the managers' investment decisions is to compare
the compositions of their portfolios. For example, consider two managers with equally
impressive past returns, where one manager currently keeps a big chunk of his portfolio
1

in the stock of Intel, while the other manager holds mostly Microsoft. Suppose also
that Intel is currently held especially by managers with good past performance, whereas
Microsoft is held mostly by managers with undistinguished records. It seems reasonable
to rule that the ¯rst manager, whose decision to hold Intel is shared by a higher-caliber
set of managers, has superior ability to select stocks, while the second manager, whose
techniques coincide with those of subpar managers, has been merely fortunate.
The performance measure proposed in the paper is de¯ned with respect to some
simpler reference measure, for which we choose the traditional Jensen's alpha. We
show that our measure of a manager's skill is a weighted average of the traditional skill
measures across all managers, where the weights are essentially the covariances between
themanager'sportfolio weightsandtheweightsof theothermanagers. Putdi®erently, if
two managers have highly similar portfolio weights, then one manager's skill contributes
substantially to our measure of the other manager's skill.
Another way of comparing the managers' investment decisions is to compare their
trades. Amodi¯ed\trade-based"versionofourperformancemeasurejudgesamanager's
skill by the extent to which recent changes in his holdings match those of managers with
outstanding past performance. This measure is also a weighted average of the tradi-
tional skill measures, but now the weights are essentially the covariances between the
concurrent changes in the manager's portfolio weights and those of the other managers.
According to the trade-based measure, the manager is skilled if he tends to buy stocks
that are concurrently purchased by other managers who have performed well, and sell
stocks that are concurrently purchased by managers who have performed poorly.
The extent to which fund managers tend to buy and sell stocks at the same time is
analyzed by Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1992), Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers
(1995), and Wermers (1999), among others. However, this literature on \herding" does
not propose using the degree of similarity in the managers' trading activities to evaluate
their performance. Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2002) show that fund managers from the
same city are more likely to hold, buy, or sell the same stock at the same time than are
managers from di®erent cities. Given this evidence, managers from the same city are
likely to be assigned more similar skill according to our measure than managers from
di®erent cities. This seems appropriate. Hong, Kubik, and Stein attribute their ¯nding
to word-of-mouth information di®usion, and it seems sensible to assign similar skill to
2