NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ASSET PRICES AND BUSINESS CYCLES
WITH COSTLY EXTERNAL FINANCE
Joao Gomes
Amir Yaron
Lu Zhang
Working Paper 9364
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9364
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2002
We have benefited from helpful comments from Ellen McGrattan, two anonymous referees, and Andy Abel,
Joao Ejarque, Skander van den Heuvel, Urban Jermann, Sidney Ludvigson, Victor Rios-Rull, and seminar
participants at Rochester, Wharton and at the C.V. Starr Conference in Macroeconomics and Finance. We
are also indebted to Maria Vassalou and Chris Polk for providing us with their data. Financial support from
the Rodney L. White Center for Financial Research is gratefully acknowledged. All remaining errors are our
own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Joao Gomes, Amir Yaron, and Lu Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Asset Prices and Business Cycles with Costly External Finance
Joao Gomes, Amir Yaron, and Lu Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 9364
December 2002
ABSTRACT
This paper asks whether the asset pricing fluctuations induced by the presence of costly external
finance are empirically plausible. To accomplish this, we incorporate costly external finance into
a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model and explore its implications for the properties of
the returns on key financial assets, such as stocks, bonds and risky loans. We find that the mean and
volatility of the equity premium, although small, are significantly higher than those in comparable
adjustment cost models. However, we also show that these results require a procyclical financing
premium, a property that seems at odds with the data.
Joao Gomes Amir Yaron
Finance Department Finance Department
The Wharton School The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104 Philadelphia, PA 19104
gomesj@wharton.upenn.edu and NBER
yaron@wharton.upenn.edu
Lu Zhang
William E. Simon Graduate School of Business Administration
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
zhanglu@simon.rochester.edu

1 Introduction
Models of costly external finance have enhanced the empirical performance of dynamic
stochastic general equilibrium models. The richer internal propagation and amplification
mechanism, induced by the presence of financing frictions, is typically able to replicate the
observed hump-shape responses of the main macroeconomic aggregates to the underlying
shocks in the economy.
In this paper we investigate the properties of the basic propagation mechanism in models
of costly external finance. Specifically, we ask whether the asset pricing fluctuations induced
by the presence of financing frictions are empirically plausible. Since the richer dynamics in
this class of models are essentially driven by fluctuations in the value of financial assets, our
approach provides an important alternative dimension for analyzing the properties of the
propagation mechanism.
To accomplish this, we incorporate costly external finance into a specific dynamic
stochasticgeneralequilibriummodel, developedbyBernankeandGertler(1989), andstudied
in detail by Carlstrom and Fuerst (1997), and explore its implications for the properties of
the returns on the key financial assets, such as stocks, bonds and risky loans. We then
compare our findings with those of standard frictionless environments, with and without
adjustment costs of investment.
Our findings are as follows. First, models with costly external finance deliver a premium
on equity returns that is higher by a factor of 10 to 20, than comparable frictionless models,
with or without adjustment costs. While this is still far from matching the observed equity
premium, it does improve the performance of the baseline model significantly. Second, while
the presence of financing frictions changes the dynamic properties of consumption, and hence
of the relevant stochastic discount factor, the main force behind the larger premium is the
1

much larger variations in stock returns in the presence of financing frictions. Third, as in
a standard neoclassical model with convex adjustment costs in investment, the amplified
fluctuations in stock returns are induced by movements in the price of capital, associated
with the changes in the marginal costs to investment. Finally, however, we show that this
behavior of marginal costs, which is also at the heart of the business cycle implications of the
financing frictions model, requires procyclical movements in the default premium, a property
not evident in the data.
The intuition for our results is simple. The empirical success of the costly external
financemodelliesinpartinthefactthat, forfixedamountofinternalfunds, moreinvestment
requiresmoreborrowing,whichraisesmonitoringcostsand,consequently,thecostofexternal
funds. It is this positive relation between investment and borrowing costs that generates
an increase in marginal adjustment costs, and slows down capital accumulation, in the
early stages of an expansion, thus making it possible to obtain hump-shaped responses
to underlying shocks. However, while this rise in marginal costs helps to generate a large
volatility in stock returns, it is necessarily associated with a procyclical rise in the default
premium. Thus, the very mechanism behind the realistic movements in the key aggregates
is also responsible for the models’ shortcoming along the asset pricing dimension.
Our findings highlight the intimate link between the behavior of asset prices and the
dynamic pattern of macro-economic aggregates. Accordingly, focusing on asset prices places
important restrictions on the nature of the underlying financing frictions. Specifically, in
the model studied here, financing constraints help generate richer dynamics for the typical
macroeconomic aggregates; however, these constraints also seem to strain the model’s ability
to match certain key financial data.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the model.
2