NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FINANCIAL SECTOR PROFITABILITY AND
DOUBLE-GEARING
Mitsuhiro Fukao
Working Paper 9368
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9368
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2002
This paper is forthcoming in “Structural Impediments to Growth in Japan”, edited by Magnus Blomstrom,
Jennifer Corbett, Fumio Hayashi and Anil Kashyap, for the University of Chicago Press. The author would
like to thank Anil Kashyap, Larry Meissner and other participants of the “Structural Impediments to Growth
in Japan” conference for valuable comments on an earlier draft. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Mitsuhiro Fukao. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Financial Sector Profitability and Double-Gearing
Mitsuhiro Fukao
NBER Working Paper No. 9368
December 2002
JEL No. G28, G21, G22, O16
ABSTRACT
In this paper, I show that Japan will not be able to have a viable banking sector without
stopping deflation. The banking industry has not shown a profit since fiscal 1993 (ended March
1994) if one excludes capital gains from stock and real estate portfolios. I quantify the financial
condition of the sector and show that interest margins have been too low to cover the increase in
loan losses brought about by the weak economy.
Banks cannot raise margins for several reasons: competition with subsidized government
sponsored financial institutions (GFIs); intense political pressure, backed by the Financial Services
Agency (FSA), to make new loans to small and medium companies; and deflation-weakened
borrowers. I expect that the Japanese government will have to nationalize most of the banking sector
by 2005. Capital injections will not solve the problems.
Established Japanese life insurance companies are also troubled because they over-promised
the amount that they could pay. This can be corrected through a reorganization where the promised
interest rates are cut. But this is complicated because Japanese banks and life insurance companies
are providing each other capital – a practice called double-gearing. Weakened banks ask insurance
companies to provide equity capital and subordinated loans. In return, the mutual life insurers ask
banks to subscribe their surplus notes (similar to non-voting redeemable preferred shares) and
subordinated debt. The risks of double-gearing are analyzed.
Mitsuhiro Fukao
Faculty of Business and Commerce, Keio University
2-15-45 Mita, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8345, Japan
fukao@fbc.keio.ac.jp

The Japanese economy's average annual real growth rate was only 0.8% from 1991 to 2001.
Reflecting the weak economy, Japan has not been able to restore stability in its financial
sector even though more than a decade has passed since the 1980s bubble. The Bank of
Japan (BOJ) has had a zero nominal interest rate policy most of the time since February 1999,
but it has been ineffective because of deflation. By the end of 2001, the GDP deflator was
about 7% below its 1994 peak when adjusted for the 1997 consumption tax hike. The index
was falling at annual rate of 1.5% at the end of 2001. Given the estimated 6% deflationary
GDP gap and expected negative real growth in 2002, deflation is likely to accelerate to more
than 2.0% by early 2003. (See JCER 2002, ch 1).
In this chapter, I show that Japan will not be able to have a viable banking sector
without stopping deflation. The banking industry has not shown a profit since fiscal 1993
(ended March 1994) if one excludes capital gains from stock and real estate portfolios.
Interest margins have been too low to cover the increase in loan losses brought about by the
weak economy.
Banks cannot raise margins for several reasons: competition with subsidized
government sponsored financial institutions (GFIs); intense political pressure, backed by the
Financial Services Agency (FSA), to make new loans to small and medium companies; and
deflation-weakened borrowers. I expect that the Japanese government will have to
nationalize most of the banking sector by 2005. Capital injections will not solve the
problems.
Established Japanese life insurance companies also face a serious situation. In the
1980s and early 1990s they promised high minimum yields on long-term contracts. For
whatever reason, the companies did not match these long-term liabilities with long-term
fixed-income investments. Under the BOJ zero-interest rate policy, insurers thus are
suffering large negative carry. (Carry is the industry term for the difference between a
product's income and its associated costs).
A complicating factor in this dire picture is banks and life insurance companies
providing each other capital – a practice called double-gearing. Weakened banks ask
insurance companies to provide equity capital and subordinated loans. In return, the mutual
life insurers ask banks to subscribe their surplus notes (similar to non-voting redeemable
preferred shares) and subordinated debt. When Chiyoda Life failed in October 2000, Tokai
Bank lost ¥74 billion. The Financial Services Agency (FSA) actively encourages this
dangerous practice. Thus, Shokichi Takagi, Director of FSA's Supervision Department, has
2

publicly stated that double-gearing among financial institutions is highly beneficial to
enhance public confidence (Nihon Keizai Shinbun, 27 Nov 2001).
The life insurers' problem is easier to solve than the banks' problem. Using a
reorganization procedure, life insurance companies can fail, and cut promised interest rates
on their policies. On the other hand, banks runs would ensue if the government did not
fully pay the depositors of a failed large bank because a large part of the banking sector is
either insolvent or very nearly so. In such a situation, the government would have to bear
the full brunt of defaulting loans at a time when its own debt to GDP ratio is rising by 10
percentage points a year. If things continue as they are, the Japanese government is unlikely
to maintain investment-grade credit ratings on its bonds.
The chapter continues with an analysis of banks' bad loans and their under-reserving
for them. The deteriorating condition of banks is then considered, and the causes of bank
unprofitability examined. As part of this, the effects of deregulation and the role of
government-sponsored financial institutions is considered. Turning to life insurance
companies, their problems and weak supervision are discussed. The risks of the banks and
insurers engaging in double-gearing is then analyzed.
1 Banks' Bad Loans
Table 1 and Table 2 show data on problem loans of Japanese banks. Japanese banks have
acknowledged ¥82 trillion in losses from bad loans for the ten years through March 2002.
In spite of this enormous loss, they still have more than ¥42 trillion of disclosed bad loans,
about 8% of their loan portfolios.
I am one of the many who feel the disclosed figures understate the real situation.
The FSA collects data on "classified loans", a broader concept of problem loans, but does not
discloses it for individual banks. Under the FSA's Bank Examination Manual, banks are
required to rate their loans, taking account of default risk and quality of collateral. There are
four grades: normal, substandard, doubtful, and estimated-loss loans. The last three are
considered "classified" loans. Banks then estimate their loan-loss reserves and the amount of
write-offs. Because of the broader definition, the amount of classified loans is almost twice
that of disclosed bad loans. Total classified loans for all banks was ¥71.1 trillion in March
2002.
3