NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DEBT RELIEF: WHAT DO THE MARKETS THINK?
Serkan Arslanalp
Peter Blair Henry
Working Paper 9369
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9369
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2002
We thank Jeremy Bulow for helpful conversations and Rania A. Eltom for able research assistance. Henry
gratefully acknowledges financial support from an NSF CAREER Award and the Stanford Institute for
Economic Policy Research (SIEPR). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Serkan Arslanalp and Peter Blair Henry. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Debt Relief: What Do the Markets Think?
Serkan Arslanalp and Peter Blair Henry
NBER Working Paper No. 9369
December 2002
ABSTRACT
The stock market appreciates by an average of 60 percent in real dollar terms when countries
announce debt relief agreements under the Brady Plan. In contrast, there is no significant increase
in market value for a control group of countries that do not sign agreements. The results persist after
controlling for IMF agreements, trade liberalizations, capital account liberalizations, and
privatization programs. The stock market revaluations forecast higher future net resource transfers
and GDP growth. While markets respond favorably to debt relief in the Brady countries, there is no
evidence to suggest that current debt relief efforts for the Highly-Indebted Poor Countries (HIPCs)
will achieve similar results.
Serkan Arslanalp Peter Blair Henry
Stanford University Stanford University
Department of Economics Graduate School of Business
Landau Economics Building Stanford, CA 94305-5015
579 Serra Mall and NBER
Stanford, CA 94305-6072 pbhenry@stanford.edu
serkan@stanford.edu

I. Introduction
Bono and Jesse Helms want debt relief for highly indebted poor countries
(HIPCs). The Pope and 17 million people are behind them. On June 17, 1999, the lead
singer of U2 presented 17 million signatures in support of the Jubilee 2000 Debt Relief
Initiative to Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder at a meeting of G8 leaders in Cologne,
Germany. In a Papal Bull on November 29, 1998, Pope John Paul II called on wealthy
nations to relieve the debts of developing nations in order to “remove the shadow of
death.”
Opponents of debt relief occupy less hallowed ground but are no less zealous
about their cause, citing at least three reasons why the debt relief campaign is misguided.
First, debt relief alone cannot solve the problem of third world debt. Even if all debt
were forgiven, it will accumulate again if income does not grow faster than expenditure
(O’Neill, 2002). Second, debt relief can create perverse incentives for debtor countries—
by relaxing budget constraints, debt relief may induce governments into prolonging bad
economic policies (Easterly, 2001a). Third, rewriting debt contracts may hurt a debtor’s
reputation and hinder its ability to obtain future loans (Easterly, 2001b).
Moral proponents of debt relief can point to three counterarguments in their
defense. First, some debts are illegitimate. There is a precedent for canceling debt that is
odious— incurred without the consent of the people and not for their benefit— and
Kremer and Jayachandran (2002) present a feasible way of doing so. Second, debt relief
can benefit both creditors and debtors (Krugman, 1988; Sachs, 1989). Third, and related
to the second point, it is good accounting practice to write off debts that cannot be
1

collected. That way, future loans can be given on a sounder economic basis (Sachs and
Huizinga, 1987; Summers, 2000).
Does debt relief help or hurt the recipient? This paper takes a new approach. We
ask the stock market to opine. In March of 1989 the United States government formally
approved an initiative by Treasury Secretary Nicolas Brady calling for debt relief for
third world countries. Between 1989 and 1995, sixteen developing countries reached
debt relief agreements under the Brady plan. This paper examines the response of each
debtor country’s stock market to the news of its own Brady agreement. Figure 1 conveys
the central fact. The stock market appreciates by an average of 60 percent in real dollar
terms when countries announce the signing of a Brady debt relief agreement.
The stock market is forward looking. It asks what discount rates and cash flows
lie ahead. The effect of debt relief on discount rates and cash flows follows from the
collective action problem that it is designed to solve. If each creditor would agree to
forgive some of its claims, then the debtor country would be better able to service the
debt owed to each creditor. Consequently, the expected value of all creditors’ claims
would rise. Forgiveness will not happen without coordination, however, because any
individual creditor would prefer to free ride, maintaining the full value of its claims while
others write off some debt (Krugman, 1988; Sachs, 1989). By forcing all creditors to
take a haircut, debt relief solves the collective action problem and paves the way for
profitable new lending (Cline, 1995). The new capital inflow reduces discount rates in
the debtor country by relaxing the intertemporal budget constraint (Obstfeld and Rogoff,
1996). Also, to the extent that a country suffers from debt overhang, debt relief increases
2