NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TIME INCONSISTENCY AND FREE-RIDING IN A
MONETARY UNION
V. V. Chari
Patrick J. Kehoe
Working Paper 9370
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9370
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2002
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by V. V. Chari and Patrick J. Kehoe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Time Inconsistency and Free-Riding in a Monetary Union
V. V. Chari and Patrick J. Kehoe
NBER Working Paper No. 9370
December 2002
JEL No. F3, F31, F33, F34, E4, E42, E58, E61, E63
ABSTRACT
We analyze the setting of monetary and nonmonetary policies in monetary unions. We show
that in these unions a time inconsistency problem in monetary policy leads to a novel type of free-
rider problem in the setting of nonmonetary policies, such as labor market policy, fiscal policy, and
bank regulation. The free-rider problem leads the union’s members to pursue lax nonmonetary
policies that induce the monetary authority to generate high inflation. The free-rider problem can
be mitigated by imposing constraints on the nonmonetary policies, like unionwide rules on labor
market policy, debt constraints on members’ fiscal policy, and unionwide regulation of banks. When
there is no time inconsistency problem, there is no free-rider problem, and constraints on
nonmonetary policies are unnecessary and possibly harmful.
V. V. Chari Patrick J. Kehoe
Department of Economics Research Department
University of Minnesota Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Minneapolis, MN 55455 90 Hennepin Avenue
and Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Minneapolis, MN 55480
and NBER and University of Minnesota
chari@res.mpls.frb.fed.us and NBER
pkehoe@res.mpls.frb.fed.us

In the last decade, there has been growing interest in the design of monetary unions–
groups of political units (countries or states or provinces) that have a great deal of indepen-
dence in setting fiscal and other nonmonetary policies, but that share a central monetary
authority, which sets a single monetary policy for all the members of the union. In practice,
some monetary unions have worked poorly while others have worked well. Argentina is an
example of an unsuccessful one; the United States, a successful one; and the jury is still out
on the European Union. Why are some monetary unions successful and others not? Here
we develop a theory that answers this question.
The time inconsistency problem in monetary policy is at the heart of our theory.
We argue that this monetary policy problem leads to a free-rider problem in the setting
of nonmonetary policies. Free-riding union members pursue inefficiently lax nonmonetary
policies that benefit them individually, but that induce the monetary authority to generate
highinflation. Onewaytoeliminatebothproblemsistodirectlysolvethetimeinconsistency
problem in monetary policy. As is well-known, this problem can be eliminated with either
commitment or reputational mechanisms. When either type of mechanism is in place, there
is no free-rider problem, so that solving the time inconsistency problem indirectly eliminates
the free-rider problem. In practice, of course, it is difficult to change the degree of effective
commitment,say,bydevelopingareputation. Forourpurposes,wewilltakeasgivenwhether
or not a monetary authority has a time inconsistency problem.
More interestingly, solving the free-rider problem helps mitigate the time inconsistency
problem in monetary policy. The free-rider problem can be solved by imposing constraints
on nonmonetary policies, such as unionwide rules on labor market policies, debt constraints
on fiscal policy, and unionwide regulation of banks.
We first make these points in a general theoretical setup. Our setup has governments
whoset nonmonetary policies noncooperatively, competitive private agents and a benevolent
monetary authority that chooses inflation. The monetary authority’s optimal inflation rate

depends on the decisions of private agents and on the nonmonetary policies. Private agents
make their decisions anticipating the choice of the monetary authority. Governments choose
their nonmonetary policies anticipating the choices of both private agents and the monetary
authority.
We show that the free-rider problem in our setup is quite different from those in the
literature. In the standard free-rider problem the agents are directly linked because the
actions of each agent directly affect the payoffs of otheragents. We have nosuch direct links.
In our setup the nonmonetary policies of the governments affect the common inflation rate
andthusindirectlyaffectthepayoffsofothergovernments. Onemightthinkthatthisindirect
link suffices to generate a free-rider problem. It does not because of an envelope argument:
the monetary authority chooses inflation optimally so that, at the margin, an incremental
change in inflation has no effect on welfare. Thus, when a government is contemplating
a change in its nonmonetary policies away from the cooperative benchmark, the induced
effects of its policies on the welfare of other countries is zero.
In our setup forward-looking private agents are the source of the free-rider problem. A
change in government policy in some country makes the private agents in all the countries
predict a change in inflation, and this predicted change makes them change their actions.
Because each government cares about the decisions of its private agents, a change in gov-
ernment policy in any country affects welfare in all countries. This indirect link results in a
free-rider problem. If private agents’ decisions do not depend on their forecasts of inflation
then this link is broken and there is no free-rider problem. Of course, if private agents’
decisions do not depend on their forecasts of inflation then there is no time inconsistency
problem to begin with.
With commitment by the monetary authority, the setting of nonmonetary policies
does not induce changes in the inflation rate, and there is no free-rider problem. Thus, the
presence or absence of a free-rider problem in nonmonetary policies is intimately connected
2