NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LAW AND FINANCE:
WHY DOES LEGAL ORIGIN MATTER?
Thorsten Beck
Asli Demirgüç-Kunt
Ross Levine
Working Paper 9379
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9379
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2002
We thank Pam Gill for excellent research assistance. We thank without implicating Daron Acemoglu, Maria
Carkovic, Simeon Djankov, Tim Guinnane, Simon Johnson, Paul Mahoney, Richard Messick, Jean-Laurent
Rosenthal, Andrei Shleifer, and two anonymous referees. Parts of this paper were originally part of a working
paper titled “Law, Politics, and Finance,” which was a background paper for the 2002 World Development
Report. This paper’s findings, interpretations, and conclusions are entirely those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2002 by Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Law and Finance: Why Does Legal Origin Matter?
Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 9379
December 2002
JEL No. G2, K2, K4, O16, P5
ABSTRACT
New research suggests that cross-country differences in legal origin help explain differences
in financial development. This paper empirically assesses two theories of why legal origin influences
financial development. First, the “political” channel stresses that (i) legal traditions differ in the
priority they give to the rights of individual investors vis-à-vis the state and (ii) this has
repercussions for the development of property rights and financial markets. Second, the
“adaptability” channel holds that (i) legal traditions differ in their ability to adjust to changing
commercial circumstances and (ii) legal systems that adapt quickly to minimize the gap between the
contracting needs of the economy and the legal system’s capabilities will foster financial
development more effectively than would more rigid legal traditions. We use historical comparisons
and cross-country regressions to assess the validity of these two channels. We find that legal origin
matters for financial development because legal traditions differ in their ability to adapt efficiently
to evolving economic conditions.
Thorsten Beck Asli Demirgüç-Kunt Ross Levine
World Bank World Bank Carlson School
Washington, DC 20433 Washington, DC of Management
tbeck@worldbank.org ademirguckunt@worldbank.org University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
rlevine@csom.umn.edu

1
1. Introduction
A growing body of work suggests that cross-country differences in legal origin help explain
cross-country differences in financial development. La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny
(1998, henceforth LLSV) show that whether a country’s Commercial/Company law is based on
British, French, German, or Scandinavian legal origins is important for explaining the country’s laws
on creditor rights, shareholder rights, and private property rights as well as the country’s level of
bank and stock market development. Subsequent research relates legal institutions to corporate
valuations and ownership concentration (LLSV, 2002a; Himmelberg, Hubbard, and Love, 2002),
firm’s debt maturity structure, access to external finance and growth (Demirguc-Kunt and
Maksimovic, 1998, 1999), cross-firm and cross-industry capital allocation (Wurgler, 2000; Beck and
Levine, 2002; Claessens and Laeven, 2003), the informational efficiency of stock prices (Morck,
Yeung, and Yu, 2000), and financial fragility (Johnson, et al., 2000). Furthermore, Levine (1998,
1999) traces the effect of legal origin on financial development through to long-run economic growth,
suggesting that legal origin influences economic growth by shaping national financial systems.
While LLSV and others show that legal origin explains financial development, the profession
has not empirically explained why legal origin matters. North (1988), for instance, argues that
Britain has better institutions than France does. According to this view, British colonies are likely to
inherit better institutions than French colonies with positive ramifications on financial development.
Thus, legal origin may proxy for institutions that are not fundamentally related to the legal system.
Similarly, Stulz and Williamson (2003) note that British origin countries are primarily Protestant,
while French origin countries are overwhelmingly Catholic. They argue that legal origin proxies for
religious and cultural differences that influence financial development and that differences in legal
tradition, per se, are not crucial for explaining current levels of financial development. Beck,

2
Demirguc-Kunt and Levine (2003), however, show that legal origin remains robustly linked with
financial development when controlling for religious composition and other national characteristics.1
While legal origin is robustly linked with financial development, the literature has not shown the
channels via which legal origin shapes finance. Consequently, this paper (1) discusses and
empirically assesses two theories of why legal origin matters for financial development and (2)
assesses whether legal origin explains financial development only through these two channels.
Legal theories emphasize two inter-related channels through which legal origin influences
finance. First, the “political” channel contends that (a) legal traditions differ in terms of the priority
they attach to private property rights versus the rights of the State and (b) the protection of private
contracting rights forms the basis of financial development (LLSV, 1999). According to this view,
the English common law evolved to protect private property owners against the crown. This
facilitated the ability of private property owners to transact confidently, with positive repercussions
on financial development (North and Weingast, 1989). In contrast, the political channel holds that
the French and German civil codes in the 19th century were constructed to solidify State power by
placing the “prince above the law” (Hayek, 1960, 166-7).2 Over time, State dominance of the
judiciary produced legal traditions that focus more on the power of the State and less on the rights of
individual investors [Mahoney, 2001]. More generally, the political channel stresses that the civil
law tradition promotes the development of institutions that advance State power with adverse
implications on financial development. Thus, the political channel highlights the degree to which the
State controls the judiciary and emphasizes the difference between common and civil law countries.
Second, the “adaptability” channel stresses that (a) legal traditions differ in their ability to
evolve with changing conditions (Hayek, 1960) and (b) legal traditions that adapt efficiently to
minimize the gap between the contracting needs of the economy and the legal system’s capabilities