NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HEALTH INSURANCE AND HOUSEHOLDS’
PRECAUTIONARY BEHAVIORS -
AN UNUSUAL NATURAL EXPERIMENT
Shin-Yi Chou
Jin-Tan Liu
James K. Hammitt
Working Paper 9394
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9394
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2002
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2002 by Shin-Yi Chou, Jin-Tan Liu, and James K. Hammitt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including, ©
notice, is given to the source.

Health Insurance and Households’ Precautionary Behaviors -
An Unusual Natural Experiment
Shin-Yi Chou, Jin-Tan Liu, and James K. Hammitt
NBER Working Paper No. 9394
December 2002
JEL No. D1, H4, I1
ABSTRACT
By reducing risk of large out-of-pocket medical expenses, comprehensive social health
insurance may reduce households’ motivation to engage in precautionary behaviors such as
saving, procurement of private insurance, and spousal labor-force participation. We use the
natural experiment provided by the 1995 introduction of National Health Insurance in Taiwan to
examine these effects, using pre-existing differences in access to health insurance (tied to the
household head’s and spouse’s joint employment status) to identify the effects of increasing
insurance coverage. We find that comprehensive health insurance has a statistically significant
and large effect on household savings and purchase of private accident insurance, but no
significant effect on spousal employment.
Shin-Yi Chou Jin-Tan Liu
Department of Humanities Department of Economics
and Social Sciences National Taiwan University
New Jersey Institute of Technology 21 Hsu-Chow Road
Newark, NJ 07102 Taipei (100), Taiwan
and NBER and NBER
chou@admin.njit.edu liujt@ccms.ntu.edu.tw
James K. Hammitt
Department of Health Policy
and Management
Harvard School of Public Health
718 Huntington Avenue
Boston, MA 02155-5294
jkh@hsph.harvard.edu

I. Introduction
Over the last century, both developed and developing countries have implemented
a wide range of social insurance programs.1 The introduction, expansion and reform of
these programs raise important questions about the effects of the programs on the
behavior of economic agents. One important question is the extent to which these
programs crowd out private precautionary behaviors, such as saving, purchasing private
insurance, or sending other household members to work.
Understanding the motivations for household precautionary behaviors and the
relationship with insurance has important policy implications. If precautionary motives
are significant, economic models that ignore them, such as simple life-cycle models, will
tend to miscalculate the optimal size of government policy. Hubbard et al. (1995)
demonstrated the importance of accounting for precautionary savings to explain the
effects of asset-based, means-tested social insurance on patterns in wealth accumulation.
In the presence of precautionary motives, government policy may have unintended
effects on individuals’ welfare. For example, it may increase efficiency by pooling health
risks through insurance rather than relying on individuals’ precautionary saving, since
those who reduce consumption today may not necessarily be ill in the future.2
While using theoretical models incorporating precautionary motives to explain
economic behaviors when social insurance programs are introduced is appealing, the
limited empirical work that is available provides mixed evidence about the strength of
precautionary motives.3 The difficulty that researchers typically face is that the variation
of insurance programs owned by individuals is inevitably correlated with the individuals’
unobserved preferences. For example, those who are highly risk-averse are more likely to
1 U.S. examples include social security, unemployment insurance, Medicaid, and
Medicare.
2 For example, Gruber (1997) found strong evidence that unemployment insurance
smooths individual consumption. Gertler and Gruber (2001) found that households in
developing countries are not able to fully insure their consumption; their results suggest
larger welfare gains in terms of consumption smoothing from public subsidies for
medical care.
3

have better health insurance and engage in various precautionary behaviors. Instrumental
variables based on arbitrary exclusion restrictions (such as occupation or education) may
provide no solution since these variables are likely to be correlated with personal
preferences. This paper contributes to this emerging literature by providing empirical
evidence on the impact of a significant change in social health insurance on households’
precautionary behaviors in Taiwan. Specifically, we will examine the effects of health
insurance on households’ saving, purchase of accident insurance, and spousal labor
supply.
We exploit a unique natural experiment. In March 1995, the Taiwan government
inaugurated National Health Insurance to cover health expenses for the entire population.
Prior to implementation, there were three major health insurance programs—Government
Employee’s Insurance, Labor Insurance, and Farmer Health Insurance, which were tied to
employment status. Only Government Employee’s Insurance provided coverage to the
insured’s spouse, children and parents. The introduction of the comprehensive NHI
coverage had a smaller impact on households where at least one spouse worked in the
government sector and could obtain insurance coverage for the entire household before
NHI. By comparing changes in behavior between households with no government
employees and households with at least one government employee, we are able to
identify the impact of NHI. This is a difference-in-differences strategy.4 Moreover, we
employ a unique data set to exploit the underlying variation in benefits across households
within treatment and control groups. Unlike the difference-in-differences method, this
strategy allows us to take full advantage of the variation of insurance benefits within
households at a point in time and to calculate the elasticity of response to the change in
insurance benefits.
3 For example, Guiso et al. (1992) and Dynan (1993) found no support for the
precautionary motive, while Skinner (1988), Carroll and Samwick (1998) and Kazarosian
(1997) found more support for the precautionary view.
4 Chou, Liu and Hammitt (forthcoming) use the difference-in-differences method to
estimate the impacts of NHI on saving behavior in Taiwan. Their results suggest that the
precautionary motive is an important determinant of household saving and consumption
behaviors, and that NHI causes a considerable reduction in private saving.
4