NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MUTUAL FUND PERFORMANCE WITH
LEARNING ACROSS FUNDS
Christopher S. Jones
Jay Shanken
Working Paper 9392
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9392
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2002
We thank K. Baks, N. Jegadeesh, and seminar participants at Emory University for helpful comments and
the BSI Gamma Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Christopher S. Jones and Jay Shanken. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including, © notice, is
given to the source.

Mutual Fund Performance with Learning Across Funds
Christopher S. Jones and Jay Shanken
NBER Working Paper No. 9392
December 2002
JEL No. G11, G12, G14
ABSTRACT
This paper is based on the premise that knowledge about the alphas of one set of funds will
influence an investor’s beliefs about other funds. This will be true insofar as an investor’s
expectation about the performance of a fund is partly a belief about the abilities of mutual fund
managers as a group and, more generally, a belief about the degree to which financial markets are
efficient. We develop a simple framework for incorporating this “prior dependence” and find that
it can have a substantial impact on the cross-section of posterior beliefs about fund performance as
well as asset allocation. Under independence, the maximum posterior mean alpha increases without
bound as the number of funds increases and “extremely large” estimates are randomly observed.
This is true even when fund managers have no skill. In contrast, with prior dependence, investors
aggregate information across funds to form a general belief about the potential for abnormal
performance. Each fund’s alpha estimate is shrunk toward the aggregate estimate, mitigating
extreme views. An additional implication is that restricting the estimation to surviving funds, a
common practice in this literature, imparts an upward bias to the average fund alpha.
Christopher S. Jones Jay Shanken
Marshall School of Business Goizueta Business School
University of Southern California Emory University
Hoffman Hall 701 1300 Clifton Road
Los Angeles, CA 9089 Atlanta, GA 30322
christopher.jones@marshall.usc.edu and NBER
jay_shanken@bus.emory.edu

Mutual Fund Performance with Learning Across Funds
1. Introduction
With trillions of dollars invested in actively managed equity mutual funds, it is of
great importance to investors to determine the optimal asset allocation to funds. Many
studies, starting with Jensen (1968), have concluded that fund managers are unable to
“beat the market,” suggesting that investors might want to restrict their portfolios to
passive index funds. Others have argued that, while the average manager may have no
particular skill, ex ante variables like past performance and manager characteristics can
be used to identify investment skill.1 It is well known among academics that the standard
measure of fund performance, “alpha,” is typically not estimated with much precision. In
this context, an investor’s prior beliefs about market efficiency and the possibility of
superior investment performance can play an important role in the asset allocation
decision.
Recent papers by Baks, Metrick, and Wachter (2001) and Pastor and Stambaugh
(2002) analyze these issues in a Bayesian statistical framework.2 The BMW paper
focuses on the question of whether any investment in actively managed funds can be
justified. They conclude that, even when investors are initially quite skeptical about the
possibility of management skill, some active investment is appropriate. The PS paper
evaluates the optimal portfolio of funds for an investor with given beliefs about
investment skill as well as the ability of asset pricing models to correctly “price” passive
investment assets.
In this project, we build on these important studies by developing a richer
representation of investor prior beliefs about management skill. While this might initially
sound like a minor mechanical extension, we believe it is more fundamental than that.
Although prior beliefs are by their nature subjective, it is important to ask whether the
properties of a given prior or family of priors are indeed consistent in essential respects
1 See Chevalier and Ellison (1999) and Carhart (1997), for instance.
2 Perhaps the first important application of the Bayesian perspective in investment research was Merton’s
(1980) estimation of the market expected return. Bayesian methods were first used in testing asset pricing
relations in Shanken (1987). Kandel and Stambaugh (1996) examine aggregate return predictability in a
Bayesian framework. Their paper has stimulated much recent research. See Shanken and Tamayo (2001)
for additional references.
3

with the actual learning process of investors or researchers. At issue here is the manner
in which fund returns data are processed in deriving conclusions about performance.
Should the alpha estimates of other funds influence our belief about the likely
performance of a given fund or not? Technical issues aside, that is the basic question
addressed here.3
As with any joint distribution, one can talk about the prior for one set of (true)
fund alphas conditional on the alphas for other funds. Though BMW and PS model
priors in different ways, a common feature is that the prior belief about a given fund’s
alpha is taken to be independent of the prior for all other fund alphas. In conjunction
with the assumption that fund residual returns are independent, this greatly simplifies the
analyses. While such simplification is natural in papers breaking new ground, we would
argue that it is important to consider dependence across funds in these priors.
To develop some intuition about this issue, consider the following hypothetical
scenario. Assume that a marginal prior distribution has been formulated for a typical
fund. In the BMW model, this would include a prior probability that a random manager
is skilled, as well as a standard deviation that relates to the possible range of alphas for a
skilled manager. Now, suppose an investor is considering a particular fund and is given
the (prior) information that the true alphas of all other funds in the market are identically
zero, i.e., none of those fund managers is able to beat the market. Alternatively, the
information might be that half of all funds have positive alphas in excess of 5% per
annum. In this context, the prior independence assumption across funds implies that
none of this information would affect the investor’s belief about the given fund’s alpha.
More formally, the conditional prior for the fund, given other fund alphas, equals the
marginal prior.
It seems more plausible, to us, that a typical investor’s beliefs would be affected
by such information about other funds. The underlying premise is that an investor, or a
researcher, comes to the situation with a basic uncertainty about the possibility and extent
of management skill in general. Such a belief would be tied to a perception about the
degree to which financial markets are efficient. Information about the universe of funds
3
Readers who are interested in fund performance, but are uncomfortable with thinking in terms of prior
distributions, may want to simply focus on our results for “diffuse” priors, which let the data completely
dominate the analysis.
4