NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHY IS THERE SO LITTLE MONEY IN U.S. POLITICS?
Stephen Ansolabehere
John M. de Figueiredo
James M. Snyder, Jr.
Working Paper 9409
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9409
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2002
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2002 by Stephen Ansolabehere, John M. de Figueiredo, and James M. Snyder. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit including, © notice, is given to the source.

Why Is There So Little Money in U.S. Politics?
Stephen Ansolabehere, John M. de Figueiredo, and James M. Snyder
NBER Working Paper No. 9409
December 2002
JEL No. H4, K0, P1
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we argue that campaign contributions are not a form of policy-buying, but are
rather a form of political participation and consumption. We summarize the data on campaign
spending, and show through our descriptive statistics and our econometric analysis that individuals,
not special interests, are the main source of campaign contributions. Moreover, we demonstrate that
campaign giving is a normal good, dependent upon income, and campaign contributions as a percent
of GDP have not risen appreciably in over 100 years; if anything, they have probably fallen. We
then show that only one in four studies from the previous literature support the popular notion that
contributions buy legislators’ votes. Finally, we illustrate that when one controls for unobserved
constituent and legislator effects, there is little relationship between money and legislator votes.
Thus, the question is not why there is so little money politics, but rather why organized interests give
at all. We conclude by offering potential answers to this question.
Stephen Ansolobehere John M. de Figueiredo
Department of Political Science Sloan School of Management
MIT, E53-461 MIT, E52-545
50 Memorial Drive 50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142 Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
sda@mit.edu and NBER
jdefig@mit.edu
James M. Snyder
Department of Economics
MIT, E53-461
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
millett@mit.edu

Two extreme views bracket the range of thinking about the amount of money in U.S.
political campaigns. At one extreme is the theory that contributors wield considerable influence
over legislators. Even modest contributions may be cause for concern and regulation, given the
extremely large costs and benefits that are levied and granted by government. An alternative
view holds that contributors gain relatively little political leverage from their donations, since the
links from an individual campaign contribution to the election prospects of candidates and to the
decisions of an individual legislators are not very firm.2 Although these theories have different
implications, they share a common perspective that campaign contributions should be considered
as investments in a political marketplace, where a return on that investment is expected.
In this paper, we begin by offering an overview of the sources and amounts of campaign
contributions in the U.S. In light of these facts, we explore the assumption that the amount of
money in U.S. campaigns mainly reflects political investment. We then offer our perspective that
campaign contributions should be viewed primarily as a type of consumption good, rather than
as a market for buying political benefits. Although this perspective helps to explain the levels of
campaign contributions by individuals and organizations, it opens up new research questions of
its own.
Sources and Sums of Campaign Contributions
For most of the last century, campaign contributions have been regulated in the United
States. In 1911, Congress banned corporate contributions to parties and candidates and provided
for disclosure of expenditures and contributions. Over the subsequent 60 years, that ban was
extended to other organizations, including unions and trade associations. But these rules lacked
3

enforcement and were far from comprehensive. Individuals, for instance, could give unlimited
amounts.
The Federal Election Campaign Act of 1974 (FECA) created a comprehensive system of
disclosure and contribution limits. Under FECA, there are two main types of campaign
organizations: candidate campaign committees and party committees. FECA also specifies two
sources of funds: individuals and interest groups, which in turn may include firms, unions, trade
associations and other interest groups. (Parties and candidates may also give to each other, but
such transfers account for a trivial percent of total funds.) It is also permissible for individuals
and groups to raise their own money and to run their own advocacy or independent campaigns on
behalf of or against individual candidates, but in practice such campaign expenditures pale in
comparison with the activities of candidates and political parties. Candidates, party committee
and any individuals and groups must report all contributions, receipts, and expenditures to the
Federal Elections Commission (FEC).
FECA constrains how money can be raised and how much can be given. Sorauf (1988,
1992) provides an excellent overview of the FECA system and its rules. Briefly, the rules are as
follows.
First, to ensure transparency in accounting, organizations wishing to contribute to federal
candidates and parties must create “separate and segregated funds,” commonly known as
political action committees (PACs). Organizations may cover the start-up, administrative and
fund-rising expenses of their PACs, but they may not give money directly from the
organization’s treasury to the PAC for the purpose of contributing to a federal campaign.
Instead, PACs must raise voluntary donations from individuals. Thus, corporate PAC
contributions come almost entirely from a corporation’s managers, while union PAC
4