NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FOREIGN FIRMS AND INDONESIAN
MANUFACTURING WAGES:
AN ANALYSIS WITH PANEL DATA
Robert E. Lipsey
Frederik Sjöholm
Working Paper 9417
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9417
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2002
The authors wish to thank participants at an ICSEAD seminar in Japan, a CEPR conference in Greece, the
IT&FA meeting in Bangkok, the EAEA conference in Kuala Lumpur and a workshop on “Technology and
Foreign Ownership” in Norway. An earlier version of this paper was prepared as part of an ICSEAD project
on “Foreign Multinational Corporations and Host-Country Labor Markets in Asia”. We are grateful to
Sadayuki Takii for cleaning the data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Robert E. Lipsey and Frederik Sjöholm. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including, © notice, is
given to the source.

Foreign Firms and Indonesian Manufacturing Wages: An Analysis With Panel Data
Robert E. Lipsey and Fredrik Sjöholm
NBER Working Paper No. 9416
December 2002, Revised June 2006
JEL No. O12, F23, J31
ABSTRACT
Wages in domestically- owned Indonesian manufacturing plants taken over by foreign firms
increased sharply between the year before takeover and two years after takeover, relative to plants
remaining in domestic ownership. Blue- collar wage levels in these plants had been less than 10 per
cent above and white- collar wages more than 10 per cent below those in their industries a year
before takeover. Two years after takeover both were more than 50 per cent above average. Wages
in foreign plants taken over by domestic owners tended to rise less than average for their industries,
although they remained above the domestic average. Thus, foreign firms did not select particularly
high- wage plants to take over and it was foreign takeovers, rather than takeovers in general, that led
to large wage increases and high wages.
An econometric analysis of the whole panel found that both foreign ownership throughout
the period and foreign takeover resulted in higher wages relative to domestically- owned plants. The
wage effects for white- collar employees were typically around twice those for blue- collar
employees. Foreign takeovers were associated with large increases in blue- collar employment and
both foreign and domestic takeovers with declines in white- collar employment. However, the
employment changes were not strongly related to the wage changes.
Robert E. Lipsey Fredrik Sjöholm
National Bureau of Economic Research European Institute for Japanese Studies
365 Fifth Ave. Suite 5318 Stockholm School of Economics
New York, NY 10016 P.O. Box 6501, S-113 83 Stockholm
and NBER SWEDEN
Rlipsey@gc.cuny.edu Fredrik.Sjoholm@hhs.se

FOREIGN FIRMS AND INDONESIAN MANUFACTURING WAGES:
AN ANALYSIS WITH PANEL DATA
Fredrik Sjöholm and Robert E. Lipsey
I. Introduction
Many studies have found that affiliates of foreign firms pay higher wages than locally-
owned firms in their host countries. That is generally true in both developed and developing host
countries.1 In most cases, some margin in favor of employees of foreign- owned firms remains
even after industry, location, and establishment characteristics are taken into account.2 In one of
the few cases in which labor quality could be taken into account, beyond the distinction between
production and non- production workers, it still seemed clear that foreign firms in Indonesia paid
a wage premium in 1996 (Lipsey and Sjöholm 2004).
There are several suggestions as to why foreign firms would pay higher wages than
domestic firms. For instance, foreign firms might try to prevent technological spillovers through
labor turnover by paying a wage premium (Fosfuri, Motta, and Ronde 2001); the wage premium
might be caused by rent-sharing arrangements between foreign firms and their employees (Budd,
Konings, and Slaughter 2005); as compensation for a higher labor demand volatility in foreign
plants (Fabri, Haskel, and Slaughter 2003); or as compensation for a higher foreign plant closure
rate (Bernard and Sjöholm 2003).
1 See for instance Aitken, Harrison, and Lipsey (1997), Doms and Jensen (1998), Feliciano and
Lipsey (2006), and Girma, Greenaway, and Wakelin (2001).
2 See Lipsey (2004) for a summary of the literature on FDI and wages.
1

However, while the existence of higher wages in foreign- owned plants is well
documented, it would be premature to conclude from that fact alone that foreign ownership
causes high wages. For example, the correlation between foreign ownership and wages is
sometimes attributed to selectivity bias: the selection of high- wage establishments for
acquisition by foreign firms, so called “cherry-picking”. There may be unmeasured
characteristics of individual firms or establishments that are associated with both high wages and
foreign ownership. From a host-country policy perspective, it is clearly the question of whether
FDI causes high wages that is of interest.
Another possibility is that wages in foreign-owned firms are higher than those in
domestically-owned firms because many of the cases of foreign ownership result from takeovers
of existing firms, rather than new establishments, and there is a considerable literature, mainly
referring to developed countries, that finds that acquisitions themselves result in wage increases,
regardless of the nationality of the acquiring firms. For instance, Brown and Medoff (1988) find
a positive wage effect of acquisitions in the state of Michigan in the US, as do McGuckin,
Nguyen, Sang, and Reznek (1995) for acquisitions in the American food industry. Lichtenberg
and Siegel (1992), in a study of acquisitions in the American manufacturing sector find a
negative effect on white collar wages and no effect on blue collar wages. One possible
explanation to a general positive effect of takeovers on wages could be a strategy by new owners
to keep personnel and their firm specific knowledge in the company (Heyman, Sjöholm, and
Tingvall 2006, p.18). Such knowledge of the firm and its networks might be essential if the new
owners are to make a profit from a new firm. Secondly, an acquisition might also be taken as an
opportunity to renegotiate contracts and to perform organizational changes (Schleifer and
Summers, 1988; Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2003). Ownership changes are typically followed
2