NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LIMITED ARBITRAGE AND SHORT SALES
RESTRICTIONS: EVIDENCE FROM
THE OPTIONS MARKETS
Eli Ofek
Matthew Richardson
Robert F. Whitelaw
Working Paper 9423
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9423
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2002
We would like to thank Michael Brandt, Steve Figlewski, Francis Longstaff, Lasse Pedersen and Eduardo
Schwartz for helpful suggestions and David Hait (Option Metrics) for providing the options data. We are
especially grateful to comments from Owen Lamont, Jeff Wurgler, the anonymous referee and seminar
participants at UBC, NYU, USC and the NBER. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Eli Ofek, Matthew Richardson, and Robert F. Whitelaw. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit
including, © notice, is given to the source.

Limited Arbitrage and Short Sales Restrictions: Evidence from the Options Markets
Eli Ofek, Matthew Richardson, and Robert F. Whitelaw
NBER Working Paper No. 9423
December 2002
JEL No. G13, G14
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we investigate empirically the well-known put-call parity no-arbitrage relation
in the presence of short sale restrictions. We use a new and comprehensive sample of options on
individual stocks in combination with a measure of the cost and difficulty of short selling,
specifically the spread between the rate a short-seller earns on the proceeds from the sale relative
to the standard rate (the rebate rate spread). We find that violations of put-call parity are asymmetric
in the direction of short sales constraints, their magnitudes are strongly related to the rebate rate
spread, and they are maintained even in the presence of transactions costs both in the options and
equity lending market. These violations appear to be related to both the maturity of the option and
the level of valuations in the stock market, consistent with a behavioral finance theory that relies on
over-optimistic investors in the stock market and segmentation between the stock and options
markets. Moreover, the extent of violations of put-call parity and the rebate rate spread for
individual stocks are significant predictors of future stock returns. For example, cumulative
abnormal returns, net of borrowing costs, over a 2½-year sample period can exceed 65%.
Eli Ofek Matthew Richardson
NYU, Stern School of Business NYU, Stern School of Business
44 W. 4th St. 44 W. 4th St.
New York, NY 10012 New York, NY 10012
and NBER
mrichardson@stern.nyu.edu
Robert F. Whitelaw
NYU, Stern School of Business
44 W. 4th St.
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
rwhitela@stern.nyu.edu

I. Introduction
The concept of no arbitrage is at the core of our beliefs about finance theory. In
particular, two assets with the same payoffs should have the same price. If this restriction
is violated, then at least two conditions must be met. First, there must be some limits to
arbitrage that prevent the convergence of these two prices (e.g., Shleifer (2000) and
Barberis and Thaler (2002)). Second, there must exist a reason why these assets have
diverging prices in the first place. The goal of our paper is to analyze the impact of these
two conditions in an obvious no-arbitrage framework.
There is perhaps no better example in finance than the case of redundant assets, for
example, stocks and options on those stocks. One of the most commonly cited no-
arbitrage relations using stocks and options is that of put-call parity. The put-call parity
condition assumes that investors can short the underlying securities. If short sales are not
allowed, then this no-arbitrage relation can breakdown. Of course, even without short
sales, the condition does not necessarily fail. Suppose that the stock is priced too high on
a relative basis. Then one could form a portfolio by buying a call, writing an equivalent
put, and owning a bond; the return on this portfolio would exceed the return on the stock
in all possible circumstances. This is a difficult phenomenon to explain in “rational”
equilibrium asset pricing models.
There is a considerable, and growing, literature that looks at the impact of short sales
restrictions on the equity market. (See, for example, Lintner (1969), Miller (1977),
Harrison and Kreps (1978), Jarrow (1981), Figlewski (1981), Chen, Hong and Stein
(2000), D’Avolio (2001), Geczy, Musto and Reed (2001), Mitchell, Pulvino and Stafford
(2001), Ofek and Richardson (2001), Jones and Lamont (2001), and Duffie, Garleanu and
Pedersen (2002), among others.) However, there has been much less attention paid to
understanding the direct links between short sales and the options market (Figlewski and
Webb (1993), Danielson and Sorescu (2001) and Lamont and Thaler (2000) are notable
exceptions). Of particular interest to this paper, Lamont and Thaler (2000) document
severe violations of put-call parity for a small sample of three stocks that have gone
through an equity carve-out and the parent sells for less than its ownership stake in the
1

carve-out. Lamont and Thaler (2000) view this evidence as consistent with high costs of
shorting these stocks.
This paper provides a comprehensive analysis of put-call parity in the context of short
sales restrictions. We employ two novel databases from which we construct matched
pairs of call and put options and stock prices across the universe of equities, as well as a
direct measure of the shorting costs of each of these stocks, namely their rebate rate.1 We
report several interesting results. First, consistent with the theory of limited arbitrage, we
find that the violations of the put-call parity no-arbitrage restriction are asymmetric in the
direction of short sales restrictions.2 These violations still persist even after incorporating
shorting costs and/or extreme assumptions about transactions costs (i.e., all options
transactions take place at ask and bid prices). For example, after shorting costs, 13.63%
of stock prices still exceed the upper bound from the options market while only 4.36%
are below the lower bound. Moreover, the mean difference between the option-implied
stock price and the actual stock price for these violations is 2.71%.
Second, under the assumption that the rebate rate maps one-to-one with the difficulty
of shorting, we find a strong general relation between violations of no arbitrage and short
sales restrictions. In particular, both the probability and magnitude of the violations can
be linked directly to the magnitude of the rebate rate, or, in other words, the degree of
specialness of the stock. In a regression context, a one standard deviation decrease in the
rebate rate spread implies a 0.67% increase in the deviation between the prices in the
stock and options markets. This result is robust to other measures such as liquidity in
either the equity or options markets, stock and option characteristics and transactions
costs.
The above results suggest that the relative prices of similar assets (i.e., ones with
identical payoffs) can deviate from each other when arbitrage is not possible. If we take
the view that these deviations rule out our most standard asset pricing models, then what
possible explanations exist? If markets are sufficiently incomplete, and there is diversity
1 In particular, when an investor shorts a stock, he (i.e., the borrower) must place a cash deposit equal to the
proceeds of the shorted stock. That deposit carries an interest rate referred to as the rebate rate.
2 Related phenomena exist in other markets. For example, short-sellers of gold must pay a fee called the
lease rate in order to borrow gold. This short-selling cost enters the no-arbitrage relation between forward
and spot prices of gold as a convenience yield (see McDonald and Shimko (1998)). Longstaff (1995)
2