NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW DO MARKETS FUNCTION?
AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF GAMBLING
ON THE NATIONAL FOOTBALL LEAGUE
Steven D. Levitt
Working Paper 9422
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9422
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2002
I thank John Cochrane, Roland Fryer, Lars Hansen, Casey Mulligan, and Koleman Strumpf for helpful
discussions and comments. I also gratefully acknowledge Casey Mulligan and Koleman Strumpf for
providing some of the data used in this paper. Trung Nguyen provided excellent research assistance. Portions
of this paper were written while the author was a Spencer Foundation fellow at the Center for Advanced
Studies of Behavioral Sciences. This research was partially funded by a grant from the National Science
Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Steven D. Levitt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including, © notice, is given to the source.

How Do Markets Function? An Empirical Analysis of
Gambling on the National Football League
Steven D. Levitt
NBER Working Paper No. 9422
December 2002
JEL No. G12, G14, D81
ABSTRACT
The market for sports gambling is structured very differently than the typical financial
market. In sports betting, bookmakers announce a price, after which adjustments are small and
infrequent. As a consequence, bookmakers do not play the traditional role of market makers whose
primary function is to match buyers and sellers, but rather, take large positions with respect to the
outcome of game. Using a unique data set that includes both prices and quantities of bets placed over
the course of an NFL season, I demonstrate that this peculiar price-setting mechanism allows
bookmakers to achieve substantially higher profits than would be possible if they played the role of
the typical market maker. Bookmakers are more skilled at predicting the outcomes of games than
bettors and are able to systematically exploit bettor biases by choosing prices that deviate from the
market clearing price. While this strategy exposes the bookmaker to risk on any particular game, in
aggregate the risk borne is minimal. Bookmaker profit maximization provides a simple explanation
for heretofore puzzling deviations from market efficiency that were observed in past empirical work.
I find little evidence that there exist bettors who are systematically able to beat the bookmaker, even
given the distorted prices that bookmakers set. The results concerning whether aggregating across
bettor preferences improves the ability to forecast outcomes are inconclusive.
Steven D. Levitt
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
slevitt@midway.uchicago.edu

There are many parallels between trading in financial markets and sports wagering.
First, in both settings, investors with heterogeneous beliefs and information seek to profit
through trading as uncertainty is resolved over time. Second, sports betting, like trading in
financial derivatives, is a zero-sum game with one trader on each side of the transaction. Finally,
large amounts of money are potentially at stake. Americans are estimated to wager as much as
$380 billion annually on sporting events (National Gambling Impact Study Commission 1999).
In light of these similarities, it is surprising that these two types of markets are organized
so differently. In most financial markets, prices change frequently. The prevailing price is that
which equilibrates supply and demand. The primary role of market makers is to match buyers
with sellers. With sports wagering, however, market makers (casinos and bookmakers) simply
announce a “price” (which takes the form of a point spread, e.g., the home team to win a football
game by at least 3.5 points), after which adjustments are typically small and infrequent.2 If that
price is not the market clearing price, then the bookmakers may be exposed to substantial risk. If
bettors are able to recognize and exploit mispricing on the part of the bookmaker, the bookmaker
can sustain large losses. The risk borne by bookmakers on sports betting is categorically
different than the casino’s risk on other games of chance such as roulette, keno, or slot machines.
In those games of chance, the odds are stacked in favor of the casino and the law of large
numbers dictates profits for the house. In contrast, however, if the bookmaker sets the wrong
line on sporting events, it can lose money in the long run. The presence of even a small number
2 In the five days preceding a game, the posted price changes an average of 1.4 times per
game. When the price does change, in 85 percent of the cases the line moves by the minimum
increment of one-half of a point. Thus, the posted spread on Tuesday is within one point of the
posted spread at kickoff on Sunday in 90 percent of all games. These calculations are based on
information on changes in the casino lines reported at www.wagerline.com.
1

of bettors whose skills allow them to achieve positive expected profits could prove financially
disastrous to the bookmaker. Such bettors could either amass large bankrolls, or in the presence
of credit constraints, sell their information to others.
Although the mechanism used for price-setting in sports betting seems peculiar, there are
at least three scenarios in which the bookmaker can sustain profits implementing it. In the first
scenario, bookmakers are extremely good at determining in advance the price which equalizes
the quantity of money wagered on each side of the bet. If this occurs, the bookmaker makes
money regardless of who wins the game since the bookmaker charges a commission (known as
the “vig”) on bets.3 Following this strategy, bookmakers do not have to have any particular skill
in picking the actual outcome of sporting events, they simply need to be good at forecasting how
bettors behave. Popular depictions of bookmaker behavior have stressed this explanation.4
An alternative scenario under which this price-setting mechanism could persist is if
bookmakers are systematically better than gamblers in predicting the outcomes of games. If that
were the case, the bookmaker could set the “correct” price (i.e. the one which equalizes the
3 Typically, bettors must pay the casino 110 units if a bet loses, but are paid only 100
units if the bet wins.
4
For instance, a website devoted to educating novice gamblers (www.nfl-betting.org)
writes, “A sports bettor needs to realize that the point spread on a game is NOT a prediction by
an oddsmaker on the outcome of a game. Rather, the odds are designed so that equal money is
bet on both sides of the game. If more money is bet on one of the teams, the sports book runs the
risk of losing money if that team were to win. Bookmakers are not gamblers--they want to make
money on every bet regardless of the outcome of the game.” Similarly, Lee and Smith
(forthcoming) write, “
Bookies do not want their profits to depend on the outcome of the game.
Their objective is to set the pointspread to equalize the number of dollars wagered on each team
and to set the total line to equalize the number of dollars wagered over and under. If they achieve
this objective, then the losers pay the winners $10 and pay the bookmaker $1, no matter how the
game turns out. This $1 profit (the “vigorish”) presumably compensates bookmakers for making
a market and for the risk they bear that the pointspread or total line may be set incorrectly.
2