NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE COSTS OF WRONGFUL-DISCHARGE LAWS
David H. Autor
John J. Donohue III
Stewart J. Schwab
Working Paper 9425
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9425
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2002
We are indebted to Joshua Angrist, David Card, Lawrence Katz, Alan Krueger, Thomas Miles, Andrew
Morriss and seminar participants at the NBER Labor Studies Summer Institute, UC Berkeley, NYU Law
School, Stanford Law School, and the American Law and Economics Association for excellent suggestions.
We gratefully acknowledge the excellent research assistance of Rashida Adams, Michael Anderson, Simone
Berkowitz, Sarah Bernett, Douglas Bosley, Craig Estes, Rose Francis, Scott Hemphill, Carolyn Heyman,
Joshua Linn, Joshua Mayes, Marci Reichbach, and Leslie West, and the research coordination of Rose
Merendino. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by David H. Autor, John J. Donohue III, and Stewart J. Schwab. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit
including, © notice, is given to the source.

The Costs of Wrongful-Discharge Laws
David H. Autor, John J. Donohue III, and Stewart J. Schwab
NBER Working Paper No. 9425
December 2002
JEL No. E24, J23, J32, J38, J83, K12, K31
ABSTRACT
We estimate the effects on employment and wages of wrongful-discharge protections in the
United States. Over the last three decades, most U.S. state courts have adopted one or more
common law wrongful discharge doctrines that limit employers’ discretion to terminate workers at-
will. Using this cross-state variation with a difference-in-difference framework, we find robust
evidence of a modest negative impact (–0.8 to –1.6 percentage points) of one wrongful-discharge
doctrine, the implied-contract exception, on employment to population rates in state labor markets.
The short-term impact is most pronounced for female, younger, and less-skilled workers, while the
longer term costs appear to be borne by older and more-educated workers – those most likely to
litigate under this doctrine. We find no robust employment or wage effects of two other widely
recognized wrongful-discharge laws: the public -policy and good-faith exceptions. Published
findings in the literature range from no effect to very large negative effects. We reanalyze the two
leading studies and find the discrepancies can be explained by methodological shortcomings in the
one case and limitations in the coding of key court decisions in the other.
David H. Autor John J. Donohue III Stewart J. Schwab
Department of Economics School of Law School of Law
MIT, E52-371 Stanford University Cornell University
50 Memorial Drive Stanford, CA 94305-8610 Ithaca, NY 14583
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347 and NBER
and NBER jjd@stanford.edu
dautor@mit.edu

What is the price of protection? This paper estimates the social costs, in terms of potentially lower
employment and wages, of common law efforts to protect American workers from wrongful-discharge. The
cost of employment protection is a controversial issue. It is virtually received wisdom that the stagnant
employment performance of many European economies during the 1980s and 1990s – ‘Eurosclerosis’ – can
be attributed to the significant employment protection given European workers (cf., Lazear, 1991;
Blanchard and Wolfers, 1999). According to this argument, employment protection is a double-edged
sword. It provides employment security to incumbent workers but makes employers reluctant to hire,
leading to a stagnant labor market with potentially lower employment and wage levels. Among the
obstacles to testing this hypothesis is the difficulty in obtaining high quality data for cross-country
comparisons.
In this paper, we study the impacts of employment protection in the U.S. setting. Several scholars have
examined the effects of American federal employment laws on employment and unemployment. Acemoglu
and Angrist (2001) and DeLeire (2000) present evidence that the Americans with Disabilities Act decreased
employment of disabled persons. Oyer and Schaefer (2000, 2002) conclude that the federal Civil Rights Act
of 1991 increased the frequency of mass layoffs and raised the returns to experience for workers who have a
downward sloping ‘age-litigation’ profile. Hahn, Todd, and van der Klaauw (2001) also evaluate the costs
of federal anti-discrimination laws. A major hurdle for each of these studies is that the federal statutes at
issue apply all at once to the entire country. It is difficult to separate the effects of the statute from all other
changes occurring at that time (cf., Donohue, 1998; Donohue and Heckman, 1991).
This paper overcomes some of these methodological challenges by evaluating employment protections
that arise in various U.S. states at various times, thus providing greater variation with which to more
accurately establish causal relationships. The United States, uniquely in the industrialized world, has long
had a legal presumption that workers can be fired “at will” – that is, for any time and for any reason, good
or bad. In the last two to three decades, however, most state courts have adopted one or more common law
‘wrongful-discharge’ protections that weaken the employment-at-will presumption. States vary greatly in
the timing and extent of their recognition of these wrongful-discharge laws. Three states – Florida, Georgia,
1

and Rhode Island – have never altered the employment at will doctrine. Ten states now recognize each of
three broad classes of exception to the at-will doctrine: the Implied-contract, Public-policy, and Good-faith
exceptions (their precise meaning is defined below). A few states have rejected prior adoptions (see
Appendix Table 1).1 This variability in the extent and timing of states’ recognition of wrongful-discharge
laws allows for empirical testing of their impacts on employment and wages.
We are not the first to explore these effects. In a widely cited line of research, Dertouzos and Karoly
(1992 and 1993) used an instrumental variables framework to test whether wrongful-discharge laws
affected state-level employment. They found surprisingly large impacts. Dertouzos and Karoly estimate that
states adopting a tort-based cause of action (that is, one in which plaintiffs may sue employers for punitive
damages) suffered a 3 percent reduction in aggregate state employment – roughly equivalent to a 10 percent
employer side tax on wages – with an additional 1 or 2 percent employment decline for states also adopting
a contract-based protection (that is, one in which plaintiffs may sue only for economic losses).2 These
findings have not gone unchallenged. Morriss (1995) criticized Dertouzos and Karoly’s legal variables.
More recently, Thomas Miles (2000) used a differences-in-differences approach to estimate the impact of
the wrongful-discharge doctrines. He reports “no statistically significant effects on either employment or
unemployment,” but does not comment on the source of the discrepancy between his findings and those of
Dertouzos and Karoly.3
Our paper joins this debate at two points. First, we provide a comprehensive reevaluation of the impacts
1 To date, only Montana (in 1987) has passed a statute establishing a good-cause standard for all employment
terminations. All other employment at will exceptions are common law doctrines, i.e., case law. In 1991, the Uniform
Law Commissioners proposed a Model Employment Termination Act similar to the Montana statute, but no state has
yet adopted it. In 1996, the Arizona legislature passed a statute affirming employment at will. Krueger (1991) provides
a perceptive econometric study of the consideration of exceptions to the doctrine of employment at will by state
legislatures.
2 Dertouzos and Karoly (1988) earlier examined the direct costs of wrongful-discharge litigation in California. They
found these direct costs to be modest, amounting to some $100 per termination. See also Dertouzos and Karoly (1992;
p. xi) (presenting findings of 1988 study).
3 In related work, Kugler and Saint-Paul (forthcoming) find that a state’s adoption of wrongful-discharge doctrines
significantly slows the job-to-job flows of unemployed relative to employed workers. Autor (2003 forthcoming) and
Miles (2000) find that employers increased demand for temporary help agency employment when states adopted
common law exceptions to employment at will.
2