NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
AN INFORMATION-BASED TRADE OFF BETWEEN
FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT AND FOREIGN
PORTFOLIO INVESTMENT:
VOLATILITY, TRANSPARENCY, AND WELFARE
Itay Goldstein
Assaf Razin
Working Paper 9426
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9426
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2002
We thank Patrick Bolton, Alexander Guembel, Oved Yosha, seminar participants in Cornell University, and
participants in the FDI conference (Tel Aviv, May 2002), the LACEA annual meeting (Madrid, October
2002), and the fall meeting of the NBER IFM research group (Camberidge, October 2002) for helpful
comments and discussions. All remaining errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Itay Goldstein and Assaf Razin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including, © notice, is given
to the source.

An Information-Based Trade Off Between Foreign Direct Investment and
Foreign Portfolio Investment: Volatility, Transparency, and Welfare
Itay Goldstein and Assaf Razin
NBER Working Paper No. 9426
December 2002
JEL No. F0, F2, F3, G0
ABSTRACT
The paper develops a model of foreign direct investments (FDI) and foreign portfolio
investments. FDI is characterized by hands-on management style which enables the owner to obtain
relatively refined information about the productivity of the firm. This superiority, relative to
portfolio investments, comes with a cost: A firm owned by the relatively well-informed FDI investor
has a low resale price because of a ”lemons” type asymmetric information between the owner and
potential buyers. Consequently, investors, who have a higher (lower) probability of getting a
liquidity shock that forces them to sell early, will invest in portfolio (direct) investments. This result
can explain the greater volatility of portfolio investments relative to direct investments. Motivated
by empirical evidence, we show that this pattern may be weaker in developed economies that have
higher levels of transparency in the capital market and better corporate governance. We also study
welfare implications of the model.
Itay Goldstein Assaf Razin
Fuqua School of Business Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Duke University Tel Aviv University
Box 90120 and
Durham, NC 27708 Department of Economics
itayg@duke.edu Cornell University
Uris Building Room 402
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
ar256@cornell.edu

1 Introduction
Foreign direct investment, FDI, has proven to be resilient during …nancial crises. For example,
FDIin East Asiancountries was remarkably stable duringthe global…nancialcrises of 1997-98. In
sharpcontrast,other forms ofprivate capital‡ows –portfolio equity anddebt ‡ows –were subject
to large reversals during the same period (as documented by Lipsey (2001)). The resilience of FDI
during…nancialcrises was alsoevident duringthe Mexicancrisisof 1994-95andtheLatinAmerican
debtcrisis ofthe1980s. As aresult,FDIin‡owsintodevelopingcountriesare oftenviewedas stable
”cold”money,whichare generated bylongtermconsiderationsoftheforeigninvestors. Incontrast,
foreign portfolio investments, FPI,are often deemed as unstable ”hot” money, which are triggered
by short term considerations of the foreign investors.
A similar conclusion follows the analysis of UNCTAD recent data on FDI net in‡ows.1 This
data shows that totalnet in‡ows of FDI into developing countries were $187 billions in 1997, $188
billions in 1998, $222 billions in 1999, and $240 billions in 2000 (UNCTAD (2001)), while at the
same time net in‡ows of portfolio investments were much more volatile (see, for example, World
Bank (2002)). Using World Bank data on 111 countries, Albuquerque (2002) shows that 89% of
the countries inhis sample have lower coe¢cient of variation of net FDI in‡ows thanthat of other
net in‡ows.2 Interestingly, Lipsey (1999) shows that the ratio of the volatility of net FDI in‡ows
to the volatility of other net long termin‡ows is smaller in developing countries than indeveloped
countries: The ratio of FDI’s volatilityto other long-term ‡ows’volatility is 0.59in LatinAmerica,
0.74 in South East Asia, 0.86 in Europe, and 0.88 in the US. Thus, the di¤erences in volatilities
between net FDI in‡ows and other types of net in‡ows are smaller in developedeconomies.3
In this paper, we try to explain why FDI in‡ows are stable, whereas FPI in‡ows are volatile
1Net in‡ows account fornet investments madebyforeign investors (thatis,new investments byforeign investors
minus withdrawals of old investments by foreigninvestors).
2See also Bachetta and van Wincop (2000).
3Theliterature alsohas plenty ofother sourcesof relatedevidence: Frankeland Rose(1996) show thatthesizeof
FDI ‡ows reduces the probability of currency crises. Chuhan,Perez-Quiros and Popper (1996) show that FDI ‡ows
are less sensitive toshocks in other countries and toshocks in other types of investments. Sarno and Taylor (1999)
show that FDI ‡ows are more persistent than other ‡ows. Claessens, Dooley, and Warner (1995) provide the only
sourceof mixed evidence. However,they studyasmaller sampleof countries,which predates therecentinternational
crises.
2

and tend to be withdrawn during liquidity crises.4 We also try to explain why the di¤erences in
volatilities betweenFDIand FPIare smallerin developedeconomiesthan indevelopingeconomies.
We do that by endogenizing the choice of foreign investors between FDI and FPI in a model of
an information-based trade o¤ between the two forms of investment. We believe that our model
sheds newlight onthedeterminants of thecompositionofinternationalcapital‡ows,andgenerates
interesting empirical predictions and policy implications.
The model highlights a key di¤erence between the two types of investment: FDI investors,
who take both ownership and control positions in the domestic …rms, are in e¤ect the managers
of the …rms under their control; whereas portfolio investors, who gain ownership without control
of domestic …rms, must delegate decisions to managers, but limit their freedom to make decisions
becausethelatter’sagendamaynotbealways consistentwiththatoftheowners. Consequently,due
to an agency problem between managers and owners, portfolio investment projects are managed
less e¢ciently than direct investment projects. To be more speci…c, direct investors, who act
e¤ectively as managers of their own projects,are more informedthan portfolio investors regarding
the changes in prospects of their projects. This informationenables them to manage their projects
more e¢ciently.5 This e¤ect generates an advantage, with an added value in the capital markets,
to direct investments relative to portfolio investments.
However, there is also a disadvantage to the information that is gained by investing directly.
In our model, investors sometimes need to sell their investments before maturity because they
face liquidity shocks. In such circumstances, the price they can get will be lower if they have
more information on the economic fundamentals of the investment project. This is because when
potentialbuyers know that the seller has more information, they may suspect that the sale results
from bad information on the prospects of the investment, and will thus be willing to pay a lower
price. Thus, if they invest directly, the investors bear the cost of getting a lower price if and when
they are forced to sell the project before maturity.
Our model, therefore, describes a key trade o¤ between management e¢ciency and liquidity.6
4In this paper we focus on the di¤erences between FDI and FPI. As we discuss in the concluding section of the
paper, our approach can be easily extended toincludedebt ‡ows as well.
5For arecent survey on agencyproblems and their e¤ect on …nancial contracting, see: Hart(2000).
6Notethattheinterpretation oftheword ”liquidity”hereisdi¤erentfrom theoneinthephrase”liquidityshock”.
Here,”liquidity”meansthat whenthey invest in FDI,investorswillfacealessliquidmarket when theywant tosell,
3