NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
OPTIMAL POLICY WITH PARTIAL INFORMATION
IN A FORWARD-LOOKING MODEL:
CERTAINTY-EQUIVALENCE REDUX
Lars E. O. Svensson
Michael Woodford
Working Paper 9430
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9430
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2003
We thank Kosuke Aoki and Ernst Schaumburg for comments on an earlier draft. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2003 by Lars E. O. Svensson and Michael Woodford. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including, ©
notice, is given to the source.

Optimal Policy with Partial Information in a Forward-Looking Model:
Certainty-Equivalence Redux
Lars E. O. Svensson and Michael Woodford
NBER Working Paper No. 9430
January 2003
JEL No. E37, E47, E52, E58
ABSTRACT
This paper proves a certainty equivalence result for optimal policy under commitment with
symmetric partial information about the state of the economy in a model with forward-looking
variables. This result is used in our previous paper, "Indicator Variables for Optimal Policy," which
synthesizes what is known about the case of symmetric partial information, and derives useful
general formulas for computation of the optimal policy response coefficients and efficient estimates
of the state of the economy in the context of a fairly general forward-looking rational-expectations
model. In particular, our proof takes into account that, under commitment, the policymaker can
affect the future evolution of the observable variables, and thereby potentially affect the future
information available.
Lars E.O. Svensson Michael Woodford
Department of Economics Department of Economics
106 Fisher Hall 111 Fisher Hall
Princeton University Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021 Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER and NBER
svensson@princeton.edu woodford@princeton.edu

1 Introduction
Monetary policy is inevitably conducted under considerable uncertainty about the state of the
economy and the nature of recent disturbances. Analyses of optimal policy that take no account
of this are therefore of doubtful practical utility. However, in the case of purely backward-
looking models of the kind exclusively used by central banks prior to the 1990s, powerful general
principles for efficient estimation of the state of the economy and for determining the optimal
usetomakeofsuchestimateshavebeenwell-understoodsinceatleastthe1970s. Inthecaseofa
lineareconomicmodel, aquadraticlossfunctionforthepolicymaker, uncertaintyonlyaboutthe
stateoftheeconomy(thatis,thecurrentvaluesofspecificadditivetermsintheeconomicmodel),
andGaussiandisturbances, aprincipleofcertaintyequivalence applies: theoptimalpolicyisthe
sameasifthestateoftheeconomywerefullyobservable, exceptthatonerespondstoanefficient
estimate of the state of the economy rather than to its actual value. Moreover, a separation
principle applies, according to which the determination of the optimal response coefficients to
be applied to one’s estimate of the state of the economy (the optimization problem) and the
estimation of the current state of the economy (the estimation or signal-extraction problem)
can be treated as separate problems. The optimal response coefficients are independent of the
specification of the central bank’s incomplete information; and the optimal weights to place
on alternative indicators in estimating the state of the economy are independent of the central
bank’s objective function.1
However, the presence of forward-looking variables in the system to be controlled — a com-
mon feature of modern macroeconomic models, including the econometric models now used by
manycentralbanks—complicatesmattersinanumberofrespects. Forexample,optimalpolicy
under commitment ceases in general to coincide with the outcome of discretionary optimization,
as demonstrated for the general linear model with quadratic objectives in Backus and Driffill [1]
and Currie and Levine [3]. Optimal policy under commitment (even in the deterministic case) is
no longer a function solely of the vector of predetermined variables that suffices to characterize
the set of possible future paths for the economy from a given date onward; thus one cannot
expect that in the case of partial information optimal policy can depend solely on the optimal
estimate of such a vector of predetermined variables.
Moreover,inthepresenceofpartialinformation,estimationofthecurrentstateofthesystem
is no longer so simple. For currently observable variables will generally depend not only on the
1 Important early treatments include Chow [2], Kalchbrenner and Tinsley [4], and Leroy and Waud [5].
1

current vector of predetermined variables and random observation error with known properties,
but also upon forward-looking variables, the values of which will depend on the private sector’s
expectations about future policy. This makes it far from obvious that a separation principle
should apply, even in a linear-quadratic Gaussian framework. Because the relation between the
unobserved state of the economy and the observable variables depends on expected policy, one
may not be able to solve the optimal filtering problem independently of the solution for the
optimal policy response to the estimated state of the economy.
Nonetheless, analogs of the classical control-theoretic results have been obtained for certain
special kinds of forward-looking models with partial information. With regard to the estima-
tion problem, Pearlman, Currie and Levine [8] have shown in a linear (non-optimizing) model
with forward-looking variables and partial information that the state of the economy can still
be estimated using a Kalman filter, although the solution is much more complex than in the
purely backward-looking case. Pearlman [7] has used this solution in an optimizing model to
demonstrate that certainty equivalence applies under both discretion and commitment in the
presence of forward-looking variables and symmetric partial information, that is, in the case
that both the central bank and the private sector have access to the same partial information.
In the case of commitment, “certainty equivalence” means that the optimal instrument settings
are the same linear function of the current estimate of the predetermined variables describing
the state of the economy and specific Lagrange multipliers (related to the value that alterna-
tive expectations would have had in the previous period’s policy problem) as in the case of the
corresponding optimal policy problem under certainty.
Our previous paper [9] synthesizes what is known about the case of symmetric partial in-
formation, and derives useful general formulas for computation of the optimal policy response
coefficients and efficient estimates of the state of the economy in the context of a fairly general
forward-looking (rational-expectations) model. We find that not only does certainty equivalence
continue to characterize optimal policy, but that a separation of the problems of optimal policy
and optimal estimation of the current state of the economy continues to be possible, in that the
coefficients of the optimal Kalman filter are again independent of the central bank’s objective
function.
The proof of certainty equivalence under commitment was not included in [9], in order to
save space. The present paper provides this proof. The proof is for a more general model than
in Pearlman [7] and more intuitive. In particular, our proof explicitly takes into account that,
2