NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW IS MACRO NEWS TRANSMITTED
TO EXCHANGE RATES?
Martin D. D. Evans
Richard K. Lyons
Working Paper 9433
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9433
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2003
This paper was circulated under the previous title “Why Order Flow Explains Exchange Rates.” We thank
the following for helpful comments: Brian Boyer, Anusha Chari, Frank Diebold, Jon Faust, Simon Gervais,
Aditya Kaul, Antonio Mello, John Rogers, Andrew Rose, and seminar participants at the Empirical Exchange
Rate Models conference (Sept. 2001), the American Finance Association meetings (Jan. 2002), the Yale
Market Microstructure conference (June 2002), U.C. Berkeley, Alberta, Michigan, London Business School,
the New York Fed, Aix-Marseille, and Virginia. Both authors thank the National Science Foundation for
financial assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2003 by Martin D. D. Evans and Richard K. Lyons. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including, ©
notice, is given to the source.

How is Macro News Transmitted to Exchange Rates?
Martin D. D. Evans and Richard K. Lyons
NBER Working Paper No. 9433
January 2003
JEL No. F31
ABSTRACT
This paper tests whether macroeconomic news is transmitted to exchange rates via the
transactions process and if so, what share occurs via transactions versus the traditional direct
channel. We identify the link between order flow and macro news using a heteroskedasticity-based
approach, a la Rigobon and Sack (2002). In both daily and intra-daily data, order flow varies
considerably with macro news flow. At least half of the effect of macro news on exchange rates is
transmitted via order flow.
Martin D. D. Evans Richard K. Lyons
Department of Economics Haas School of Business, UC Berkeley
Georgetown University Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
Washington DC 20057 and NBER
and NBER lyons@haas.berkeley.edu
evansm1@georgetown.edu

How Is Macro News Transmitted to Exchange Rates?
In macroeconomic models of exchange rates, news maps directlyinto prices. The
effect of news on currency demands in these models is common knowledge and transac-
tions—though perhaps engendered by the change in exchange rates—play no role in
causing the change. In microeconomic models of asset prices, in contrast, transactions do
play a causal role in price determination (e.g., Glosten and Milgrom 1985, Kyle 1985).
The causal role arises because transactions convey information that is not common
knowledge. In this paper we test whether anypart of the effect of news on exchange rates
is transmitted via transactions and, if so, what share is transmitted that way versus the
traditional direct channel.
That transactions might play a role is motivated by recent empirical work demon-
strating a link between signed transaction volume (order flow) and nominal exchange rate
changes.1 In the models employed by these papers, order flow affects exchange rates as a
proximate determinant. The underlying determinant, which theory labels information, is
not specified, nor is it directly tested. This leaves open the nagging question of what
really drives the order flow. This paper is an attempt to address that question by examin-
ing whether macroeconomic news might be a determinant of order flow. This question is
distinct from whether volume is determined bynews, a well-established propertyof many
speculativemarkets (see,e.g.,FlemingandRemolona1999).2
1 See, e.g., Payne (1999), Rime (2000), Evans (2002), and Evans and Lyons (2002a).
Order flow—a concept from microstructure finance—is the cumulation over time of signed
trades. Trades are signed according to whether the initiator is buying or selling. (The market-
makerpostingthequoteisthenon-initiatingside.)Forexample,asaleof1unitbyatraderacting
on a marketmaker’s quote is order flow of –1. In rational-expectations models, order flow is
undefined because all transactions in that setting are symmetric. A large empirical literature
within finance shows that signing trades this way provides considerable explanatory power (see
thereviewinLyons2001).
2 A volume effect is consistent with idiosyncratic portfolio rebalancing in response to
news. Under rational expectations, given the immediate unbiased adjustment in price that it
implies, one would not expect good news for the dollar to produce positive (or negative) order
flow in the aggregate; i.e., one would not expect a relative increase in executed transactions
initiated by dollar buyers. We return to this issue below when discussing potential simultaneity
bias.
1

We estimate a trading model that distinguishes three sources of exchange-rate
variation. The first source mirrors traditional models—macro news that is impounded in
price immediatelyand directly(i.e., with no role for order flow). The second source is the
indirect effect of news via induced order flow.3 The third source is order flow unrelated
to public news (such as that due to banks’ changing risk tolerances, firms’ changing
hedging demands, or individuals’ changing liquiditydemands; see, e.g., Evans and Lyons
2002a). We find that for the DM/$ market, all three sources of exchangeratevariationare
significant. The flow of transacted orders between marketmakers (our measure of order
flow) varies considerably with macro news flow, such that at least half of the effect of
macro news on exchange rates is transmitted via order flow, the remainder being the
direct effect of news. We also find that when news arrives, there is an increase in the
relative importance of order flow in exchange rate determination, despite intuition from
macro models to the contrary. Together, the two news channels account for about 30
percent oflong-horizonpricevariance(from intradayestimates).
Though the literature linking exchange rates and news is well-developed, we are
the first to our knowledge to use order flow to sort out the relationship. The existing
literature has two branches: the first addresses the direction of exchange-rate changes
(first moments) and the second, later branch addresses exchange-rate volatility (second
moments). Acommonfindingofthefirst branchis that directional effects from scheduled
macro announcements are difficult to detect at the daily frequency because they are
swamped by other factors affecting price. Intraday event studies find statistically signifi-
cant effects, particularly for employment and money-supply announcements, but R2
statistics are generallylow.4 The second, later branch of this literature—which focuses on
3 That this channel might be operative is another reminder that order flow and demand
are not one to one. To clarify, consider a simple counter-example. In the common-knowledge
tradition of exchange rate economics, when positive public news arrives, demand increases,
causing price to increase—without any flow of transacted orders occurring or needing to occur.
This is incompatible with demand and order flow being one to one: the demand shift occurs
withouttheoccurrenceoforderflow.
4See,forexample,Cornell(1982),EngelandFrankel(1984),HakkioandPearce(1985),
Ito and Roley (1987), Hardouvelis (1988), Ederington and Lee (1995), and Andersen et al.
(2002). The latter paper is more successful at finding systematic first-moment effects from
scheduled announcements. Note that explaining first moments within event windows for
2