NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INEFFICIENCY OF CORPORATE INVESTMENT
AND DISTORTION OF SAVINGS
BEHAVIOR IN JAPAN
Albert Ando
Dimitrios Christelis
Tsutomu Miyagawa
Working Paper 9444
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9444
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2003
Alberto Ando passed away prior to the publication of this paper. An earlier version of this paper was
presented at the Economic and Social Research Institute, the Cabinet Office on July 30, 2001 and at the
NBER/CIRJE/EIJS/CEPR Japan Project Meeting held at Swedish Embassy, Tokyo, Japan, on Sept. 13 - 15,
2001. It was finally reviewed at the NBER/CIRJE/EIJS/CEPR Japan Project Meeting held at the Research
Institute of Asian Development Bank in Tokyo, on March 18-19, 2002. We are grateful for careful and
detailed comments from Fumio Hayashi, Charles Horioka, Anil Kashyap and Larry Meissner. We also wish
to thank Monica Arellano for research assistance. Finally, we are especially indebted to members of the
National Account Division, the Economic and Social Research Institute, Cabinet Office, for their cooperation
and support in resolving a number of complex and intricate data problems. Ando was grateful for the support
provided by the ABE Foundation in the preparation of this paper. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Albert Ando, Dimitrios Christelis, and Tsutomu Miyagawa. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit
including . notice, is given to the source.

Inefficiency of Corporate Investment and Distortion of Savings Behavior in Japan
Albert Ando, Dimitrios Christelis, and Tsutomu Miyagawa
NBER Working Paper No. 9444
January 2003
JEL No. E21, E22, G31, H60
ABSTRACT
The value of corporate equity in Japan is dramatically smaller than that implied by the sum of the
reproduction cost of accumulated investment and the market value of land owned by corporations
(that is, the Tobin's average "q" is much smaller than unity). This discrepancy appears to result from
the very low rate of return earned on corporate investment and also from the extraordinarily small
and stagnant dividend payments. It has persisted at least since l965, and its size has become
progressively larger over time. If the value of corporate equity were sufficiently high to close the
discrepancy, the net worth of the household sector would have been larger than its actual value by
some 395 trillion yen in l998. Such an addition to household net worth would have generated
additional consumption demand of at least 15 trillion yen. This paper traces the development of this
valuation discrepancy over time, and explores its possible causes. In the process, we prepare an
alternative estimate of the capital stock and its depreciation to those offered in the National
Accounts. The basic difference is that the depreciation rates underlying our calculations are
substantially lower than those used in the Japanese National Accounts, and closer to values
prevailing in the United States. The qualitative characteristics of our results, however, remain
unaffected by the choice between these alternative estimates.
Dimitrios Christelis Tsutomu Miyagawa
Albert Ando
University of Pennsylvania Department of Economics Research Fellow
and NBER University of Pennsylvania Japan Center for
(Deceased) Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297 Economic Research
dimitri@ssc.upenn.edu 2-6-1, Nihonbashi Kayabacho,
CHUO-KU, TOKYO,
103-0025, JAPAN
miyakawa@jcer.or.jp

1. Introduction
Malaise and stagnation notwithstanding, Japan is a rich country and Japanese have
substantial individual wealth. However, the data suggest that somehow the accumulated
net worth of the household sector (excluding land) is smaller than its saving should have
achieved. In an earlier paper (Ando 2002a), one of us examined this capital loss and
attributed some three fourths of it to losses in the household sector holdings of corporate
equity. In this paper we examine in much further detail the components of this loss and
the features of the operations of Japanese corporations1 that can possibly lead to it.
The Japanese National Accounts are the starting point for a quantitative analysis,
but the nature of some key measures complicates this. Other measures simply are not
provided. Still, we believe that the available data and compelling circumstantial evidence
support our propositions.
The most important problem we encountered during our investigations was the
extremely high depreciation recorded in the Japanese National Accounts. Thus, we have
constructed a series of capital stock and depreciation that conforms more closely to
international practice.
After our data adjustments we find that the rate of return on assets in the corporate
sector (whether or not land is included) is very low. Another way of expressing this is
that there has been excessively large investment by the corporate sector in physical assets
that seem to have low productivity or earning capacity. This idea of “excessive”
investment is also borne out by the fact that the market value of the equity of the
corporate sector is lower than the liquidation (or replacement) value (i.e. the market sees
that the investment is of low quality). Another way to see the same point is to look at
average Tobin’s q (which is below one).
This low market valuation (and low quality investment) seems to arise because of
the corporate governance structure that permits low dividend payments. Since the level of
dividends is so small, and the historical pattern of dividends does not give any basis to
1 Please note that our discussion of corporations is in the framework of the National Accounts, so
we are looking at a much larger universe than just those firms that have equity publicly traded on stock
exchanges.
3

expect them to increase even when operating surplus and corporate profits after tax
increase over time, there is no reason for the market to increase its valuation of corporate
equities. Thus, households find themselves with very little value in their ownership of
corporations, they are not rewarded for their saving, and this results in the small value of
their net worth, other than from the value of their land. Faced with this situation,
households continue to save a large fraction of their income in an attempt to increase
their net worth to a satisfactory level.
In addition, these low dividend payments leave cash in the hands of firms, which
are then able to continue to make more low productivity investments. In other market
systems we would expect this to have been corrected by takeovers, which are very rare in
Japan, as is well known.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2.1 discusses the accumulation of net
worth of the household sector while Section 2.2 examines land as a determinant of
consumption behavior. Section 3.1 discusses corporate saving and dividend payments.
The balance sheet and the capital loss of the corporate sector are discussed in Section 3.2.
Corporate investment behavior and financing decisions are addressed in Section 3.3.
Section 4 concludes.
2. Accumulation of Net Worth by the Household Sector
2.1 Household Net Worth and Saving
This section will present the capital loss incurred by the households in more detail than
shown in Ando (2002a).2 Table 1 summarizes the accumulation of net worth by the
Japanese household sector from 1971 to 1998. Details on the data are in Box 1 and the
table notes.
Box 1
Savings and Net Worth Data in Tables 1 and 7
Parts A through D relate changes in the value of stocks to flows for four broad
components of net worth. Changes in net worth components are not computed directly.
2 Our results here are slightly different than the ones reported that paper due to small revisions in our
calculations.
4