NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ROUTINE
Daniel S. Hamermesh
Working Paper 9440
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9440
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2003
Prepared for the Conference of the International Network on the Economics of Time Use, St. Gerlach, The
Netherlands, May 26-27, 2003. Edward Everett Hale Centennial professor of economics, University of Texas
at Austin; research associate, National Bureau of Economic Research, and research fellow, Forschungsinstitut
zur Zukunft der Arbeit (IZA). I thank Namkhee Ahn, Eli Berman, Anders Klevmarken, Jay Stewart and
participants at the Pre-Conference and at several universities for helpful comments, and Abe Dunn and Elaine
Zimmerman for assistance. The National Science Foundation supported the research underlying this study
under Grant SES-9904699. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Daniel S. Hamermesh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including . notice, is given to the source.

Routine
Daniel S. Hamermesh
NBER Working Paper No. 9440
January 2003
JEL No. J22, J12
ABSTRACT
Routine— maintaining the same schedule from day to day— saves time. It is also boring and
inherently undesirable. As such, the amount of routine a person engages in is partly an economic
outcome, with variations in routine generated by variations in the price of time, household income
and the ability to generate variety. Using time-budget data from Australia, Germany, the Netherlands
and the United States, I show that men engage in more routine behavior than women, but only
because they spend more time in (routine) market work. Other things equal, more educated people
engage in less routine behavior, while higher household incomes enable people to purchase more
temporal variety. Spouses’’ temporal routines are highly complementary. The positive income
effects and impacts of schooling indicate yet another avenue by which standard measures of
inequality understate total economic inequality.
Daniel S. Hamermesh
Department of Economics
University of Texas
Austin, TX 78712-1173
and NBER
hamermes@eco.utexas.edu

I. Introduction
The unabridged dictionary defines routine as, “a customary or regular course of
procedure.” The notion of regularity is explicitly temporal in terms both of when an activity
occurs and its repetition at that same time over several time periods. The biopsychological
evidence for temporally routine behavior is immense. We know (see Moore-Ede et al, 1982) that
both plant and animal organisms have natural circadian rhythms, although (absent any visual or
aural cues) these are by no means naturally 24-hour rhythms for most organisms. Natural cues
turn species-specific rhythms into 24-hour rhythms; and among social species the evidence
suggests that individuals’ actions reinforce the behavior of other members of the same species to
generate more commonality among members than would arise if each operated in vacuo (Wever,
1982). Social interactions generate externalities in the timing of activities and market work (e.g.,
Weiss, 1996).
While biological forces and natural cues no doubt affect behavior, it is difficult to believe
that these fully determine humans’ day-to-day timing of their activities. Rather, “routine” is
almost certainly an activity that involves individual choice, and as such it is an economic activity:
It forces its practitioner to forego something (temporal variety) that may be desirable, and it
presumably enhances utility, either directly or because it is productive (enables the worker to earn
more and thus eventually consume more, or to economize on the quantity of time used in
consumption). As such, it should differ from one person to another depending on their different
abilities and incentives to engage in routine activities. It should thus be amenable to economic
analysis like any other activity that affects incentives to consume and produce.
As with other interpersonal differences in consumption, variations in the timing of
economic activities across days affect individuals’ welfare. Deducing interpersonal differences in
well being simply by examining how much people consume, or even when their consumption
occurs (as did Hamermesh, 1999a, in studying the timing of work), provides an incomplete
picture of those differences. Economic welfare also depends on the desirability of routine/variety

and on the correlations of its consumption with other components of individuals’ full income.
Thus examining the determinants of routine/variety contributes to a broader understanding of the
distribution of economic returns.
By routine I mean temporal routine—doing the same thing in each of at least two time
periods at the same time.1 I do not address routine defined in terms of variations in the kinds of
commodities produced in the household across time periods (but see Gronau and Hamermesh,
2001). The focus is exclusively on the similarities or differences in when an activity occurs
during at least two different periods of time. While studies of what and how much people
consume are ubiquitous, the literature on when they consume is almost nonexistent. The
empirical analysis here opens this area of study of human behavior by presenting some new tests
of the role of economic incentives in individuals’ use of time. It also provides evidence on how
the externalities generated within a marriage affect the behavior of husbands and wives.
In Section II I derive a theory of the demand for temporal routine. The essence of the
idea is that routine is useful, in that it enables people to economize on the set-up costs of
consumption and production, but that (at the margin) it is undesirable, since it restricts people’s
ability to enjoy temporal variety. Section III outlines the general ways in which we move from
theory to the empirical analysis of time budgets, and it presents the details of the underlying data
sets. Section IV generates tests of the theory and information on demographic patterns of
interpersonal differences in routine in the four countries whose time budgets I use.
II. A Model of Demand for Temporal Variety
Temporal variety is the opposite of routine. It is expressed in people’s behavior as
engaging in a particular activity at different times on different days. I assume that consumers find
temporal variety desirable at the margin, although I later examine how the results are affected if
1The only study of which I am aware that even measures the extent of intertemporal similarity of activity
(and that only for transport) is Rindsfüser (2001).
2