NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE CASH FLOW, RETURN AND RISK
CHARACTERISTICS OF PRIVATE EQUITY
Alexander Ljungqvist
Matthew Richardson
Working Paper 9454
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9454
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2003
We are grateful to an anonymous institutional investor for making the data used in this study available, and
to Eric Green for many helpful discussions and suggestions. We also thank the Salomon Center at NYU Stern
for generous financial assistance, and Steve Kaplan and Jeff Wurgler for many helpful comments. We are
grateful to Eric Stern for excellent research assistance. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Alexander Ljungqvist and Matthew Richardson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including notice,
is given to the source.

The cash flow, return and risk characteristics of private equity
Alexander Ljungqvist and Matthew Richardson
NBER Working Paper No. 9454
January 2003
JEL No. G0
ABSTRACT
Using a unique dataset of private equity funds over the last two decades, this paper analyzes
the cash flow, return, and risk characteristics of private equity. We document the draw down and
capital return schedules for the typical private equity fund, and show that it takes several years for
capital to be invested, and over ten years for capital to be returned to generate excess returns. We
provide several determining factors for these schedules, including existing investment opportunities
and competition amongst private equity funds. In terms of performance, we document that private
equity generates excess returns on the order of five plus percent per annum relative to the aggregate
public equity market. One interpretation of this magnitude is that it represents compensation for
holding a 10-year illiquid investment.
Alexander Ljungqvist Matthew Richardson
Department of Finance Department of Finance
Stern School of Business Stern School of Business
New York University New York University
MEC9-190 MEC9-190
44 West 4th Street 44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012-1126 New York, NY 10012-1126
aljungqv@stern.nyu.edu and NBER
mrichar0@stern.nyu.edu

1. Introduction
This paper provides the first analysis of private equity returns based on actual cash flows of
venture capital and buyout funds. Despite the important role of private equity in financing and
fostering innovative firms, and in reallocating capital to more productive sectors of the economy,
relatively little is known about the key characteristics of private equity as an asset class: liquidity,
risk, and return. Relative to other asset classes, private equity investments are illiquid, in the sense
that there is no active secondary market for such investments, investors have little control over how
the capital is invested, and the investment profile covers a long horizon. Our data allow us to
document the degree of liquidity and the resulting compensation, if any, in terms of risk-adjusted
returns provided to investors. Specifically, we empirically measure the timing and magnitude of
investment decisions throughout the ten-year life of a fund, how quickly capital is returned to
investors, and the overall performance of private equity as a function of various characteristics.
Our results complement an emerging literature in finance that has looked at the returns on
private equity. (See, for example, Cochrane (2000), Moskowitz and Vissing-Jørgensen (2002),
Kaplan and Schoar (2002), and Quigley and Woodward (2002), among others.) There is an
important caveat to this literature: prior work has not had access to very precise data about private
equity funds. In particular, rather than computing performance using the distribution of cash flows
to and from fund investors, prior work has generally relied on fund valuation data as collected by
Thomson Financial’s Venture Economics service. These data have three principal shortcomings:
they are available only in aggregate rather than fund-by-fund form (but see Kaplan and Schoar for
an important exception); the data are self-reported and thus potentially subject to selection biases;
and they are based on unrealized as well as realized investments which introduces noise and
potentially biases due to subjective accounting treatment.
In contrast, we use cash flow data for a fairly large dataset of private equity funds raised over
the period 1981 to 2001 to shed brighter light on the characteristics and performance of this asset
class. Our dataset includes, among other items, precisely dated cash flows representing investments
in portfolio companies, management fees, and distributions of capital gains to investors. We also
know the portfolio compositions in terms of the number and types of companies each fund invested
in. Using these data, we analyze the cash flow, return, and risk characteristics of private equity.
Specifically, we ask: (i) What are the capital investment and return patterns of private equity
throughout the life of the fund ? (ii) What determines the speed with which funds invest their capital
over time? (iii) How long does it take for returns to turn positive? (iv) What is the risk profile of

2
private equity funds, both in terms of systematic and unsystematic risk? And (v) are private equity
returns impressive relative to their risk profile and various benchmarks? The contribution of our
paper is to be able to provide the first definitive answers to these questions.
Beyond providing the first evidence of private equity returns based on actual cash flows, our
paper generates some new stylized facts about private equity investing. First, we document the
dynamics of both draw downs (capital investment) and capital returns over a fund’s life. These
suggest that knowledge of the timing of actual cash outflows and inflows is an important factor in
understanding the performance of private equity funds. For example, it takes six years for 90
percent of the committed capital to be invested, so simplifying assumptions about immediate up
front deployment of capital seem problematic. Moreover, we perform a cross-sectional and time-
series analysis of the determining factors of how fast or how slowly a fund invests. We empirically
identify two key factors, namely time variation in the availability of investment opportunities and
competition for deal flow with other private equity funds. In particular, we find that it is easy to
invest an existing fund when it is a good time to raise a new fund. At the same time, funds take
longer to invest when their peers have more money with which to chase the same deals.
Second, the IRR of the average fund does not turn positive until the eighth year of the fund’s
life. Thus, once the adjustment for the cost of capital is made, it is only at the very end of a life’s
fund that excess returns are realized. This highlights the illiquidity of private equity investments. It
also suggests that “interim” IRRs computed before a fund reaches maturity are not very informative.
Measuring fund performance thus requires using precisely dated cash flows over a fund’s life, rather
than relying on arbitrary assumptions about the time profile of capital returns.
Third, we find that private equity has generated substantial excess returns over the past two
decades. Specifically, for funds started between 1981 and 1993 (the “mature” funds in our dataset),
we document internal rates of return averaging 19.81 percent, net of all fees.1 In contrast,
investment in the public stock market measured using the S&P 500 index under an identical time
schedule of cash outflows yields 14.1 percent. Excess returns of close to six percent per annum no
doubt compensate investors, at least in part, for the extreme illiquidity of private equity.2 But they
1 Funds raised more recently are still in operation – either actively investing or seeking to exit portfolio companies via
IPOs or trade sales – and their eventual realized returns will include losses due to the internet bust and the recent
recession. It is conceivable that their loss rates will be higher than has been the case historically. However, the funds in
our dataset are predominantly from the buyout sector and so are less subject to the idiosyncrasies of the internet sector.
We address the behavior of recently raised funds in Section 6.
2 Alternatively, one could argue that the marginal investor places a zero price on illiquidity. That is, the clientele for
private equity may be such that investors are liquid based on their other portfolio holdings.