NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
GAUCHO BANKING REDUX
Gerardo della Paolera
Alan M. Taylor
Working Paper 9457
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9457
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2003
We thank Andrés Velasco, an anonymous referee, and conference participants at LACEA for their helpful
comments, and Carlos Bozzoli for his research assistance. Taylor gratefully acknowledges the support of the
Chancellor’s Fellowship at the University of California, Davis. All errors are ours. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Gerardo della Paolera and Alan M. Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including notice, is given
to the source.

Gauch Banking Redux
Gerardo della Paolera and Alan M. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 9457
January 2003
JEL No. E42, E44, E51, E61, E65, G21, N16, N26
ABSTRACT
Argentina’s economic crisis has strong similarities with previous crises stretching back to the
nineteenth century. A common thread runs through all these crises: the interaction of a weak,
undisciplined, or corruptible banking sector, and some other group of conspirators from the public
or private sector that hasten its collapse. This pampean propensity for crony finance was dubbed
“gaucho banking” more than one hundred years ago. What happens when such a rotten structure
interacts with a convertibility plan? We compare the 1929 and 2001 crises——the two instances
where rigid convertibility plans failed——and reach two main conclusions. First, a seemingly robust
currency-board can be devastated by an ill-conceived approach to the problems of internal and
external convertibility (or, to rephrase Gresham, “bad inside money drives out good outside
money”). Second, when modern economic orthodoxy collides with caudillo-style institutional
backwardness, a desperate regime with its hands tied in both monetary and fiscal domains will be
sorely tempted by a “capital levy” on the financial sector (for, as Willie Sutton said when asked
why he robbed banks, “because that’s where the money is”).
Gerardo della Paolera Alan M. Taylor
The American University of Paris Department of Economics
6, rue de Colonel Combes University of California, Davis
75007 Paris Davis, CA 95616
France and NBER
gerry@aup.fr amtaylor@ucdavis.edu

della Paolera and Taylor Gaucho Banking Redux
1. Argentina’s Crisis in Historical Perspective
An Argentine economic experiment has come to an ignominious end. The attempt to establish a
stable currency has given way to an unplanned float and a fourfold devaluation has rendered null
any chance of restoring the old parity. In addition to a widespread economic malaise following
some years of a boom, one of the major casualties of the crisis is the banking sector, where triage
is minimal and the search for a long-run cure has barely begun. The fiscal health of the
government remains under a cloud of suspicion. Foreign investors in government bonds, already
badly burned, are ill disposed toward the country when such assistance is badly needed. All agree
that the political class has failed and some observers have suggested that nothing less then placing
the country in “economic receivership” and turning its affairs over to an independent foreign
administrator will rectify the situation:
Investors here, with minds disorganized by the fate which has overtaken those
concerned in the reckless speculations and borrowings of the past years, seem to
conclude that Argentina is ruined because they, themselves, have lost money.
Reckless speculators in the Argentine republic have lost money because they
carried their speculation to undue lengths; but the Argentines have profited and
the country is profiting by the sowing broad-cast of [foreign] capital in the
country.
A solid administration is required under an honest President. Some
assistance in the formation of a bank upon sounds principles is needed, with
improvement in the currency. It is possible that the system of taxation might be
varied so as to provide for the provincial and municipal loans which were too
readily granted; though probabilities disincline an observer to conclude that local
taxation will be increased without great difficulty.
Suggestions have been hazarded relative to foreign financial control.
Foreign financial control may be needed, and may be possible in the case of a
feeble or a decaying state.1
As the reader may have guessed from the florid tone and antiquated style of this prose,
the year is not 2002. It is 1891. A certain W. H. Bishop is writing for a new publication called the
Economic Journal as Argentina gropes its way through the wreckage of what we have previously
characterized as the world’s first fully-fledged emerging market crisis, the Baring Crash of 1890.2
As is well known, the year 1890 has stood ever since in the Argentine historiography as a fateful
year of unmatched economic calamity.
1 In the original “foreign” reads “European.”
2 In the historical treatment our work draws on della Paolera and Taylor (2001).
1

della Paolera and Taylor Gaucho Banking Redux
Given the scale of the present crisis, and the economic, social, and political wounds it has
opened up, we think that from now on Argentine economic history will be rewritten from a very
different perspective and 2001 will be on center stage. Yet the lessons from the past are
hauntingly familiar, and, as is perhaps obvious, are here once again to be relearned. How will
history be rewritten? It is not just that we think the events of 2001–02 are more catastrophic than
those of 1890–91. Indeed, Argentina has suffered a steady stream of economic crises throughout
her history, and one purpose of this article is to highlight the common features of these episodes
and place the present debacle in some historical perspective. Yet we will also be careful to spell
out the important differences that separate the present from the past.
In this paper we argue that the inability of Argentina to ever develop sound banking
institutions doomed to failure all the attempts that were made to reform the monetary regime
using exchange-rate based stabilizations. In other words, we see the “twin crisis” problem, as
noted by Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999) as being endemic in the Argentine economy given the
underlying structures. This begs the question: what are the problematic structures that have never
been properly fixed?
At the deepest level, the “crony leadership” problem for Argentina is akin to that of other
developing countries, such as the Asian economies faulted for their “crony capitalism” after the
1997 crises, though important differences remain. The failure of key banking and financial
institutions to follow prudent, transparent, accountable, and non-corrupt practices is, we think, as
central to understanding the Argentine crisis of 2001 as the Asian crisis of 1997. It is also a
recurring theme in the long history of Argentine crises noted in Table 1. There is, in fact, a much
older name for this phenomenon. When this problem first emerged on the River Plate, a
memorable moniker was crafted by our correspondent, the same Lawson, who wrote of the
Baring Crash in his 1891 article “Gaucho Banking”:
[Argentine banks] were free banks in the freest sense of the term, for any Gaucho
who had the political open sesame to them could ask for almost anything he
pleased, and it would be given him so long as there was a piastre left in the till.3
We resurrect the term Gaucho Banking, and what we mean by that is the fragility that
results from the mix of two ingredients. First, the fiscal policy and exchange rate linkage implied
by a currency board type of regime. Second, the existence of bank created money due to a
fractional reserve banking system. Or, put another way, the internal-external convertibility
tension that exposes all such regimes to a risk of collapse due to the twin problems of no lender of
last resort and a classic “gold standard” type monetary equilibrium—because, as is occasionally
forgotten, one cannot attain two goals with a single instrument. The general message of this paper
3 Banker’s Magazine (1891, p. 38), quoted in Ford (1962, p. 100).
2