NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FEES ON FEES IN FUNDS OF FUNDS
Stephen J. Brown
William N. Goetzmann
Bing Liang
Working Paper 9464
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9464
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2003
We should like to acknowledge the very constructive comments of the Editor and of an unknown reviewer,
as well as the extremely helpful and constructive comments of Edwin Elton, Erol Emed, Martin Gruber,
Bruce Grundy, Adriaan Klop, Richard McAloney and Laurens Swinkels, without of course implicating them
in any errors of omission or commission that remain. We would also like to thank participants at the 2002
SIRCA Funds Management conference, Sydney and a presentation at Melbourne Business School for helpful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Stephen J. Brown, William N. Goetzmann, and Bing Liang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit
including notice, is given to the source.

Fees on Fees in Funds of Funds
Stephen J. Brown, William N. Goetzmann, and Bing Liang
NBER Working Paper No. 9463
January 2003
JEL No. G1
ABSTRACT
Funds of funds are an increasingly popular avenue for hedge fund investment. Despite the
increasing interest in hedge funds as an alternative asset class, the high degree of fund specific risk
and the lack of transparency may give fiduciaries pause. In addition, many of the most attractive
hedge funds are closed to new investment. Funds of funds resolve these issues by providing
investors with diversification across manaager styles and professional oversight of fund operations
that can provide the necessary degree of due diligence. In addition, many such funds hold shares in
hedge funds otherwise closed to new investment allowing smaller investors access to the most
sought-after managers. However, the diversification, oversight and access comes at the cost of a
multiplication of fees paid by the investor. One would expect that the information advantage of
funds of funds would more than compensate investors for these fees. Unfortunately, individual
hedge funds dominate fund of funds on an after-fee return or Sharpe ratio basis. In this paper we
argue that the disappointing after-fee performance of some fund of funds may be explained by the
nature of this fee arrangement. Fund of funds providers pass on individual hedge fund incentive fees
in the form of after-fee returns, although they are in a better position to hedge these fees than are
their investors. We examine a new fee arrangement emerging in the industry that may provide better
incentives at a lower cost to investors in these funds.
Stephen J. Brown William N. Goetzmann
NYU Stern School of Business Yale School of Management
44 West 4th Street International Center for Finance
New York, NY 10012-1126 Box 208200
sbrown@stern.nyu.edu 135 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
william.goetzmann@yale.edu
Bing Liang
Case Western Reserve University
Weatherhead School of Management
10900 Euclid Avenue
Department of Banking and Finance
Cleveland, OH 44106-7235
bx14@po.cwru.edu

Fees on Fees in Funds of Funds
Abstract: Funds of funds are an increasingly popular avenue for hedge fund investment. Despite the
increasing interest in hedge funds as an alternative asset class, the high degree of fund specific risk
and the lack of transparency may give fiduciaries pause. In addition, many of the most attractive
hedge funds are closed to new investment. Funds of funds resolve these issues by providing
investors with diversification across manager styles and professional oversight of fund operations
that can provide the necessary degree of due diligence. In addition, many such funds hold shares in
hedge funds otherwise closed to new investment allowing smaller investors access to the most
sought-after managers. However, the diversification, oversight and access comes at the cost of a
multiplication of the fees paid by the investor. One would expect that the information advantage of
funds of funds would more than compensate investors for these fees. Unfortunately, individual
hedge funds dominate fund of funds on an after-fee return or Sharpe ratio basis. In this paper we
argue that the disappointing after-fee performance of some fund of funds may be explained by the
nature of this fee arrangement. Fund of funds providers pass on individual hedge fund incentive fees
in the form of after-fee returns, although they are in a better position to hedge these fees than are
their investors. We examine a new fee arrangement emerging in the industry that may provide better
incentives at a lower cost to investors in these funds.
1. Introduction
Despite the growing interest in hedge funds, it is difficult for many individual and institutional
investors to participate in this area of the market. Minimum wealth levels and sophisticated
investor requirements constrain many small investors. Legal limits on the number of U.S.
investors allowed in hedge funds effectively place a lower bound on the size of investment most
hedge fund managers will accept. In fact, many otherwise attractive hedge funds are closed to
new investment. For those open to new investment, the minimum unit size is usually quite
substantial. Thus, even for smaller institutions and endowments it can be expensive and in many
cases impractical to invest in hedge funds with a prudent degree of diversification. Unlike
registered investment companies, hedge funds are not required – indeed by most legal
interpretations not allowed to publically disclose performance and holdings information that
might be construed as solicitation materials. This has the unfortunate effect of making it more
difficult for potential hedge fund investors to evaluate managers on a comparative basis. In
1

addition, little public information exists about fund operations and their holdings and investment
strategies are typically undisclosed for strategic reasons.
Funds of funds (sometimes in this context referred to as “funds-of-hedge funds”) [FOF]
are financial intermediaries established to address several of these issues. They are hedge funds
themselves which hold shares in other investment companies and charge a fee for doing so.
According to Tremont TASS (Europe) Limited (hereafter TASS), a London-based information
and research company dedicated to the alternative investment industry, FOFs comprise a
significant proportion of the hedge fund business. As of March 2000, the TASS hedge fund
database contains 2,104 hedge funds, including 1,330 survived funds and 774 dissolved funds.
The total assets under management are about $198 billion. According to TASS, there are 328
funds that are classified as FOFs, comparing to 1,442 regular hedge funds.1 The typical FOF
invests in a range of hedge funds. They allow investors to participate in hedge fund investments
that are otherwise closed, and allow for diversification across hedge funds. They also provide
professional management services and access to information that would be difficult or expensive
to obtain on a fund by fund basis by the investor. For this reason, some authors argue that the
appropriate index of hedge fund return is indeed the return on well managed FOFs.2
However, the major disadvantage of this arrangement is the cost to the investor. In
addition to the fees charged by the FOF, they effectively pass on to the investor all fees charged
by the constituent funds, since, in most cases, they report their raw returns after all of the
underlying manager fees are paid. A common concern among practitioners is that this double fee
1The remaining 334 funds are not otherwise classified by TASS.
2Fung and Hsieh(2000).
2