NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EFFICIENCY AND THE BEAR:
SHORT SALES AND MARKETS AROUND THE WORLD
Arturo Bris
William N. Goetzmann
Ning Zhu
Working Paper 9466
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9466
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2003
We thank Gerard Goetz for excellent research assistance, and to Frank Fabozzi for considerable help in
obtaining the data used in this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Arturo Bris, William N. Goetzmann and Ning Zhu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including
notice, is given to the source.

Efficiency and the Bear: Short Sales and Markets around the World
Arturo Bris, William N. Goetzmann, and Ning Zhu
NBER Working Paper No. 9466
January 2003
JEL No. G0
ABSTRACT
We analyze cross-sectional and time series information from forty-seven equity markets
around the world, to consider whether short-sales restrictions affect the efficiency of the market, and
the distributional characteristics of returns to individual stocks and market indices. Using the
approach developed in Morck et.al. (2000) we find significantly more cross-sectional variation in
equity returns in markets where short selling is feasible and practiced, controlling for a host of other
factors. This evidence is consistent with more efficient price discovery at the individual security
level. A common conjecture by regulators is that short-selling restrictions can reduce the relative
severity of a market panic. We test this conjecture by examining the skewness of market returns. We
find that in markets where short selling is either prohibited or not practiced, returns display
significantly less negative skewness, and the frequency of extreme negative returns is lower. On the
other hand, the overall volatility of individual returns and market returns is higher.
William N. Goetzmann Ning Zhu
Yale School of Management Yale School of Management
International Center for Finance International Center for Finance
Box 208200 Box 208200
135 Prospect Street 135 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06520-8200 New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER ning.zhu@yale.edu
william.goetzmann@yale.edu
Arturo Bris
Yale School of Management
International Center for Finance
Box 208200
135 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
arturo.bris@yale.edu

I. Introduction
In February of 1609, a group of well-connected Dutch businessmen, led by one of the
original subscribers to the Dutch East India Company, Isaac Le Maire, formed a secret
association, a “Groote Companie, ” to short the shares in the East India Company in anticipation
of the incorporation of a rival French-chartered trading firm. Le Maire and his colleagues sold
shares forward in a “blanco” transaction promising future delivery in one or two years. Over the
next twelve months, their profits mounted, as East India Company shares dropped by 12%,
angering shareholders who inevitably learned of their plan. In January of 1610, a year after the
formation of the “Groote Companie” and only three years after the official founding of the
Amsterdam Exchange, the first regulation against short selling was enacted. Share prices
rebounded, a rival French company was not formed and Isaac Le Maire never succeeded in
disentangling himself from the litigation that ensued.1
At various times over the next four hundred years, short–sellers have been blamed for stock
market declines, and market participants have called for regulation against short sales.2
However, despite centuries of disagreement between speculators and regulators on the topic, no
one really knows whether short–sales constraints are a good or a bad thing. As the above
example indicates, short–sales restrictions are nearly as old as organized exchanges, and yet
there is little empirical evidence on whether they prevent or facilitate market crashes, or whether
they hinder or help rational price discovery.
In this paper, we use cross-sectional and time series information from forty-seven equity
markets from around the world to examine the question of whether short–sales restrictions affect
1 This account is taken from Montias, John Michael, 1989, Vermeer and His Milieu, Princeton Press, Princeton, p.
20. The original study of the Le Maire affair may be found in J. G. van Dillen, 1930, “Isaac Le Maire en de handle
in action der Oost-Indische Companie,” Economisch-historisch Jaarboek 16:46, 107-111. For a discussion on the
legal and ethical view of short-selling in late Sixteenth Century Holland, see De Marchi and Harrison (1994).
1

the efficiency of the market and the distributional characteristics of individual as well as market
returns. We obtain information regarding the history and current practice of short–sales
restrictions from market regulators, investment banks, and institutional investors specialized in
short sales. This dataset allows us to characterize each country in terms of the legality, as well as
the practice, of short selling for the period 1990–2001. Using the approach developed in Mørck,
Yeung and Yu (2000) [MYY] we find significantly more cross-sectional variation in equity
returns in markets where short selling is feasible and practiced, controlling for a host of other
factors. This evidence is consistent with more efficient price discovery at the individual security
level.
A common conjecture by regulators is that short–sales restrictions can reduce the
severity of price declines. We test this conjecture by examining the skewness of market returns.
We find some evidence in favor of the conjecture. That is, we find that the lifting of short–sales
restrictions is associated with increased negative skewness in individual stock returns. Our result
is thus consistent with the regulatory views of Samuel Untermyer, legal counsel to the 1913
Pujo Committee of Congress investigating money trusts. In his devastating questioning of Frank
Stugis, president of the New York Stock Exchange from 1894 to 1898, Untermyer succinctly
articulated the public fear of short selling during a financial crisis.
Untermyer: Under what circumstances would you regard… short selling as legitimate
and proper?
Stugis: I should regard it so if there was a panic raging over the country and it was
desirable to protect interests which could not be sold. I think it would be a perfectly
legitimate thing to do.
Untermyer: Let us see about that. If there was a panic raging over the country and a man
sold stocks short, would not that simply add to the panic?
2 For an excellent review of the history of short-sales restrictions, see “A Short History of the Bear,” by Edward
Chancellor, October 29, 2001, copyright David W. Tice and Co.
http://www.prudentbear.com/press_room_short_selling_history.html
2