NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
OWNER-OCCUPIED HOUSING AS A
HEDGE AGAINST RENT RISK
Todd Sinai
Nicholas S. Souleles
Working Paper 9462
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9462
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2003
We are grateful to Ed Glaeser, Joe Gyourko, Matt Kahn, Chris Mayer, Robert Shiller, Jonathan Skinner, and
participants in seminars at the AEA/AREUEA 2001 annual meetings, NBER, Syracuse University, University
of Wisconsin, University of British Columbia, UC Berkeley, and Wharton for their helpful comments and
suggestions. James Knight-Dominick provided excellent research assistance. Sinai acknowledges financial
support from the Ballard Scholars Program of the Zell/Lurie Real Estate Center at Wharton. Souleles
acknowledges financial support from the Rodney L. White Center for Financial Research. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2003 by Todd Sinai and Nicholas Souleles. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including notice, is given to
the source.

Owner-Occupied Housing as a Hedge Against Rent Risk
Todd Sinai and Nicholas Souleles
NBER Working Paper No. 9462
January 2003
JEL No. R21, E21, G11, G12, J14
ABSTRACT
Many people assume that the most significant risk in the housing market is that
homeowners are exposed to fluctuations in house values. However, homeownership also
provides a hedge against fluctuations in future rent payments. This paper finds that, even though
house price risk endogenously increases with rent risk, the latter empirically dominates for most
households – so housing market risk actually increases homeownership rates and house prices.
Further, the net effect of rent risk on the demand for homeownership increases with a
household’s expected length of stay in its home, as the cumulative rent volatility rises and the
discounted house price risk falls. Using CPS data, the difference in the probability of
homeownership between households with long and short expected lengths of stay is 2.9 to 5.4
percentage points greater in high rent variance places than low rent variance places. The
sensitivity to rent risk is greatest for households that devote a larger share of their budgets to
housing, and thus face a bigger gamble. Similarly, the elderly who live in high rent variance
places are more likely to own their own homes, and their probability of homeownership falls
faster with age (as their horizon shortens). This aversion to rent risk might help explain why
older households do not consume much of their housing wealth. Finally, we find that house
prices capitalize not only expected future rents, but also the associated rent risk premia. At the
MSA level, a one standard deviation increase in rent variance increases the house price-to-rent
ratio by 2 to 4 percent.
Todd Sinai Nicholas S. Souleles
Wharton School Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania University of Pennsylvania
308 Lauder-Fischer Hall 2300 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall
256 South 37th Street Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6330 and NBER
and NBER souleles@wharton.upenn.edu
sinai@wharton.upenn.edu

According to the 2000 Decennial Census, 68 percent of U.S. households own the house
they live in. Those households commit a substantial portion of their net worth to their house, 27
percent on average [Poterba and Samwick (1997)]. For households with heads aged 65 and over,
housing wealth comprises 45 percent of their non-Social Security wealth. Conventional wisdom
holds that this substantial, undiversified exposure to real estate assets makes home owning quite
risky, since fluctuations in house prices can have a sizeable effect on households’ net worth.
However, the alternative to home owning – namely, renting – is also risky. In particular, a
renter is subject to periodic rent adjustments whereas a homeowner can lock in the cost of future
housing services. In essence, bundled into the house purchase is a hedge against rent fluctuations.
Since housing costs are the largest component of most households’ budgets, representing on
average about a third of annual income, and market rents can be quite volatile with an average
standard deviation of 2.9 percentage points per year, the ability to lock in the cost of housing
services may be valuable. Nonetheless, long-term rent contracts are rare in the U.S. Genesove
(1999) reports that 97.7 percent of all residential leases are for terms of one year or less. In
addition, one cannot purchase a “rent swap” to exchange variable rents for fixed rents.1 Thus the
only way in practice to hedge against uncertain annual housing costs is to own a house instead of
renting it.
This rent hedging benefit of owner-occupied housing must of course be compared to its
asset price risk, which itself endogenously increases with rent risk. If the rent risk on balance
dominates the asset price risk, a household should be willing to pay a premium above the value of
the service flow from a residence in order to own it rather than rent it. Depending on the elasticity
1 We can only speculate as to why more rent-hedging contracts do not exist. One possibility is that the contracting is
quite difficult. Presumably a swap would have to terminate if one party moved. But if rents fell and the renter owed a
sufficient amount of money on his half of the swap, he would simply move and exit the contract. In addition, it may be
expensive to put such a swap in place for a long term.
1

of supply of owned housing units, this hedging demand for home owning may show up in a higher
homeownership rate, higher house prices, or both.
After modeling the joint effect of both rent risk and house price risk on the tenure decision
and house prices, we find that rent risk empirically dominates for most households, in the sense that
an increase in rent volatility on net increases the demand for homeownership. Hence housing
market risk can actually increase homeownership rates and house prices. By contrast, the previous
literature on housing tenure choice has largely ignored the risks associated with renting. For
example, most studies compute a deterministic user cost of housing.2 On the other hand, some
recent contributions to the portfolio choice literature have modeled the demand for owning risky
real estate assets, but they generally neglect the tenure decision and instead focus on various costs
of the asset price risk from home owning, for example the resulting distortions to owners’ financial
portfolio allocations [Brueckner (1997), Goetzmann (1993), Flavin and Yamashita (1998), and
Fratantoni (1997)] or to their saving and consumption behavior [Engelhardt (1996), Skinner
(1989)]. 3 Hence this paper can be seen as extending the existing literatures to account for a central
but understudied element of household risk management.4
2 The traditional user cost literature, e.g. Rosen (1979), Poterba (1984), and Hendershott and Slemrod (1983), estimates
housing demand as a function of just expected returns on housing.
3 Skinner (1989) and Summers (1983) consider the asset price risk of the house, but not the value of housing as a hedge
against rent fluctuations. Davidoff (2001) measures asset price risk by how much house prices covary with labor
income but is primarily concerned with its effect on the amount of housing purchased in a portfolio context. He
assumes exogenous house prices and does not consider the tradeoff with rent risk. Only Rosen et al (1984) and
Henderson and Ioannides (1983) consider rent risk. In a time series study, Rosen et al find that one predictor of the
aggregate homeownership rate is the difference between the unforecastable volatility of the user cost of
homeownership and rents. They assume that rental housing and owner-occupied housing are independent goods, so
they do not allow for an endogenous relation between house prices and rent. In Henderson and Ioannides, the rent risk
is to the landlord, not the tenant. In their model, the tenant may not properly care for the property. This incentive
compatibility problem raises the average rent for renters but does not involve rent volatility.
4 Other papers investigate alternative sources of household risk. Cocco (2000) and Haurin (1991) investigate the
effects of income risk on housing portfolio choice. Cocco also includes interest rate risk, in a parameterized structural
model of housing investment, but he rules out the possibility of renting. Campbell and Cocco (2001) simulate the
covariance of income, interest rates, and house prices as a way of explaining whether people finance their house with
fixed or floating rate debt. However, their financing decision does not involve the tradeoff between rent expenditures
and asset price risk. Other work emphasizes the negative effects of depressed house prices and housing equity on
household mobility [Chan (2001), Genesove and Mayer (1997), Stein (1995)].
2