NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EMERGENCE OF STRONG PROPERTY RIGHTS:
SPECULATIONS FROM HISTORY
Raghuram G. Rajan
Luigi Zingales
Working Paper 9478
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9478
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2003
This paper has benefited tremendously from comments by Candice Prendergast. It is partly based on work
with Abhijit Banerjee. Much of this working paper is forthcoming as chapter 6 of Saving Capitalism from
the Capitalists (Crown Business, Random House). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Raghuram G. Rajan and Luigi Zingales. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including notice, is given
to the source.

The Emergence of Strong Property Rights: Speculations from History
Raghuram G. Rajan and Luigi Zingales
NBER Working Paper No. 9478
January 2003
JEL No. D23, D72
ABSTRACT
How did citizens acquire rights protecting their property from the depredations of the government?
In this paper, we argue that one important factor strengthening respect for property is how it is
distributed. When there is some specificity associated with property, and property is held by those
who are most productive, the distribution of property becomes relatively easy to defend. By contrast,
when property is owned by those who get rents simply by virtue of ownership, the distribution of
property becomes much harder to defend. We speculate on why some countries have been able to
develop a climate of respect for property rights while others have not.
Raghuram G. Rajan Luigi Zingales
Graduate School of Business Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street 1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637 Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER and NBER
raghuram.rajan@gsb.uchicago.edu luigi.zingales@gsb.uchicago.edu

A sine qua non for almost any institution of capitalism to work is that the property of
each citizen be respected. This means more than simply allowing and enforcing each individual’s
right to own private property: It also means respecting the rule of law more broadly by
facilitating and enforcing private contracts, preventing arbitrary coercion, and preventing
arbitrary taxation.
The critical element in ensuring security of property in most countries today is not how
covetous other citizens are – a strong government can always beat down the greedy. It is not
even how rapacious foreign invaders are – warfare in recent times has not typically been
conducted for the express purpose of pillaging the property of enemy citizens. The critical
element in ensuring security of property has been the commitment of a country’s government to
respect the property rights of its own citizens.
Some countries have come a long way. The United States or the United Kingdom, models
of rectitude in their respect for property today, routinely expropriated wealthy creditors in the
past. Others are less respectful today than in the past, suggesting that governments do not have
permanent sinecures on their ability to commit to respect their citizens’ property. Despite Rome
being the cradle of law, and Venice the source of much innovation historically in business
contracting, Italy today lags considerably behind some of its northern neighbors in measures of
respect for the rule of law and respect for property. So if it is not something immutable in a
people’s culture or psyche that causes them collectively to agree to respect property, what is it?
Should citizens in developed countries be worried about whether their governments will continue
to respect property? We seek an answer in this paper.
2

The Main Argument
A property right is a form of monopoly. It gives the owner of an asset the exclusive right
to use the asset and exclude others from its use. But what gives the owner this right? We might
be tempted to answer: “The Law”. While it is true that in modern developed societies, property
rights are enforced by the legal system, this answer begs the question of what gives the law
force. Why in certain countries is the law respected and enforced, even against the might of the
government, while in others it is not?
One possible explanation is the nature of the government. Some have argued that by
constitutionally enhancing the “countervailing” power of parliament and the judiciary, a
government can offer a credible commitment to not expropriate its citizens.i There is, however,
something incomplete in the argument that the government can show its commitment to respect
property by setting up a more democratic political process, which keeps the arbitrary powers of
the government in check. At the national level, most rules can be changed. The government can
dispense with the democratic political process. Political power is therefore not easily conferred
by legislative fiat or a change in the constitution. It is more fruitful to think of the devolution of
political power and the security of property not as a political or legal phenomenon alone, but
partly as an economic phenomenon. This is the approach we take.
To do so we need to go back in time, when legal enforcement was doubtful even in
countries where property is now well respected, and understand, step by step, how basic respect
for property emerged. To root ourselves firmly in facts, we will examine how England moved in
little over a hundred years from being a state under an arbitrary despot to being ruled by a
constitutional monarchy. Before we do so, however, it is useful to preview the logic of our
argument.
3