NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE ECONOMICS OF FOREIGN DIRECT
INVESTMENT INCENTIVES
Magnus Blomström
Ari Kokko
Working Paper 9489
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9489
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2003
The research reported here is part of the NBER program in International Studies. We thank the participants
at the Conference on "Foreign Direct Investment in the Real and Financial Sector of Industrial Countries",
organized by the Bundesbank, Frankfurt, May 3-4, 2002 and particularly Robert Lipsey and Jean-Louis
Mucchielli for valuable comments on an earlier draft of this paper. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Magnus Blomström and Ari Kokko. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including notice, is given to
the source.

The Economics of Foreign Direct Investment Incentives
Magnus Blomström and Ari Kokko
NBER Working Paper No. 9489
February 2003
JEL No. J23, O12
ABSTRACT
This paper suggests that the use of investment incentives focusing exclusively on foreign firms,
although motivated in some cases from a theoretical point of view, is generally not an efficient way
to raise national welfare. The main reason is that the strongest theoretical motive for financial
subsidies to inward FDI n spillovers of foreign technology and skills to local industry n is not an
automatic consequence of foreign investment. The potential spillover benefits are realized only if
local firms have the ability and motivation to invest in absorbing foreign technologies and skills. To
motivate subsidization of foreign investment, it is therefore necessary, at the same time, to support
learning and investment in local firms as well.
Magnus Blomström Ari Kokko
Stockholm School of Economics Stockholm School of Economics
P.O. Box 6501 P.O. Box 6501
113 83 Stockholm, Sweden 113 83 Stockholm, Sweden
NBER and CEPR ari.kokko@hhs.se
magnus.blomstrom@hhs.se

The Economics of Foreign Direct Investment Incentives
Magnus Blomström and Ari Kokko
Stockholm School of Economics
1. Introduction
The attitude towards inward foreign direct investment (FDI) has changed considerably over
the last couple of decades, as most countries have liberalized their policies to attract
investments from foreign multinational corporations (MNCs). On the expectation that foreign
MNCs will raise employment, exports, or tax revenue, or that some of the knowledge brought
by the foreign companies may spill over to the host country’s domestic firms, governments
across the world have lowered various entry barriers and opened up new sectors to foreign
investment. An increasing number of host governments also provide various forms of
investment incentives to encourage foreign owned companies to invest in their jurisdiction.1
These include fiscal incentives such as tax holidays and lower taxes for foreign investors,
financial incentives such as grants and preferential loans to MNCs, as well as measures like
market preferences, infrastructure, and sometimes even monopoly rights.2
Although some FDI promotion efforts are probably motivated by temporary
macroeconomic problems such as low growth rates and rising unemployment, there are also
more fundamental explanations for the increasing emphasis on investment promotion in
recent years. In particular, it appears that the globalization and regionalization of the
international economy have made FDI incentives more interesting and important for national
governments. Trade liberalization – be it globally, through GATT and WTO, or regionally, in
the form of EU, NAFTA, AFTA and other regional agreements – has led to increasing market
integration and reduced the importance of market size as a determinant of investment
location. Hence, even a small country may now compete for FDI, given that it can provide a
sufficiently attractive incentive package. At the same time, national decision-makers have lost
many of the instruments traditionally used to promote local competitiveness, employment,
1 UNCTAD (2001:6-7) reports that nearly 95 percent of the 1,185 changes in national FDI legislation during the
period 1991-2000 were favorable to foreign investors. A significant share of these changes focused on incentives and
FDI promotion.
2 See UNCTAD (1996) and Brewer and Young (1997) for definitions of various FDI incentives.
2

and welfare. The scope for active trade policy has diminished as a result of successful trade
liberalization, and the internationalization of capital markets has limited the possibilities to
use exchange rate policy as a tool to influence relative competitiveness. Most clearly, this has
been seen in Europe, where the Single Market program and the EMU have shifted the
responsibility for trade and exchange rate policies from national governments to the EU
Commission and the European Central Bank. However, national decision-makers remain
committed to promoting the competitiveness and welfare of their constituencies, and are
likely to put more emphasis on those policy instruments that remain at their disposal,
including FDI incentives. The fact that most others subsidize foreign investment is another
important reason why more and more countries are drawn into the “subsidy game”.
There are also more substantial theoretical arguments in favor of public support to FDI
than globalization and the wish to increase local employment and growth rates in cyclical
downturns. The strongest ones are based on the prospect for knowledge spillovers. Since the
technology and knowledge employed by foreign firms are to some extent public goods,
foreign investment can result in benefits for their host countries even if the MNCs carry out
their foreign operations in wholly-owned affiliates. These benefits take the form of various
types of externalities or “spillovers”. For instance, local firms may be able to improve their
productivity as a result of forward or backward linkages with MNC affiliates, they may
imitate MNC technologies, or hire workers trained by MNCs. The increase in competition
that occurs as a result of foreign entry may also be considered a benefit, in particular if it
forces local firms to introduce new technology and work harder. However, the foreign MNCs
will not include these spillovers in their private assessment of the costs and benefits of
investing abroad, and may therefore invest less than what would be socially optimal. The
motive for public subsidies to foreign investors is to bridge the gap between the private and
social returns, thus promoting larger inflows of FDI.
The aim of this paper is to examine whether international investment incentives can be
justified on the basis of academic research on the host country effects of FDI. In particular,
we discuss whether the externalities from the operations of foreign MNCs are strong and
systematic enough to justify subsidizing foreign investment with various fiscal and financial
incentives. We also discuss some alternative policy measures available for governments to
benefit from inward foreign investment.
3