NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INTERNATIONAL PRICE-FIXING CARTELS
AND DEVELOPING COUNTRIES:
A DISCUSSION OF EFFECTS AND POLICY REMEDIES
Margaret Levenstein
Valerie Suslow
Lynda Oswald
Working Paper 9511
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9511
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2003
Margaret Levenstein is Associate Professor of Economics, University of Massachusetts, Adjunct Associate
Professor of Business Economics and Public Policy, University of Michigan, and Faculty Research Fellow,
National Bureau of Economic Research. Valerie Suslow is Associate Professor of Business Economics and Public
Policy, University of Michigan. Lynda Oswald is Professor of Business Law, University of Michigan. An earlier
version of this paper “Private International Cartels and their Effect on Developing Countries” was written as a
background paper for the World Bank’s World Development Report 2001. We are grateful for comments from
Simon J. Evenett and participants in seminars at Yale University and the University of Massachusetts. Our thanks
to Julia DeBeers, Arjun Jayadev, Jessica Nowicki, Natalia Lukito, Kurt Rademacher, and Sukmi Sukmiwaty for
excellent research assistance. Special thanks also go to Charlie Perkins of Pipe Logix for providing data and to
Dennis McNamara for assistance with chemical industry classifications. The views expressed herein are those of
the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Margaret Levenstein, Valerie Suslow, and Lynda Oswald. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit
including ©notice, is given to the source.

International Price-Fixing Cartels and Developing Countries:
A Discussion of Effects and Policy Remedies
Margaret Levenstein, Valerie Suslow, and Lynda Oswald
NBER Working Paper No. 9511
February 2003
JEL No. L4, F1, O1
ABSTRACT
We examine the possible effects of private international cartels on developing countries by
looking in detail at three recent cartel cases, as well as at a broader cross-section of 42 recently
prosecuted international cartels. We discuss the indirect effects on developing country producers,
either as competitors or co-conspirators, as well the direct effects of cartels on developing country
consumers. By combining trade data with a sample of US and European prosecutions of
international cartels in the 1990s, we are able to estimate the order of magnitude of the consequences
of these cartels on developing countries as consumers. In 1997, the latest year for which we have
trade data, developing countries imported $54.7 billion of goods from a sub-sample of 19 industries
that contained a price-fixing conspiracy during the 1990s. These imports represented 5.2% of total
imports and 1.2% of GDP in developing countries.
Margaret Levenstein Valerie Suslow
University of Michigan Business School University of Michigan Business School
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234 Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and NBER suslow@umich.edu
maggiel@umich.edu
Lynda Oswald
University of Michigan Business School
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
ljoswald@umich.edu

I. Introduction
The U.S. Department of Justice, the European Commission, and the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development have all recently voiced concern about, and in the former two
cases, increased their prosecution of, international cartels. These recent prosecutions of
international cartels in a wide range of industries demonstrate that cartels have pernicious effects
on consumers despite the obstacles created by legal prohibitions on collusion and individual
firm’s incentives to compete rather than collude.
As with private international cartels through history, most of the cartels recently caught in the
antitrust net of the U.S. or EU competition authorities are made up of producers in industrialized,
OECD countries. Therefore, it is not surprising that most prior studies of the impact of these
cartels focused on the better-documented effects on wealthy, industrialized countries.1 This
appears to be true of both business and public policy players, as there has been little activity on
the part of developing country governments or developing country consumers to respond to these
cartels even after they have been shown to exist. This contrasts with the actions of the Canadian
government, which has consistently pursued anti-competition cases against firms who have been
investigated first by either the U.S. Department of Justice or the European Commission. One
exception to this generalization is Mexico, which took action against the lysine cartel, and is
investigating the vitamins cartel.2 The lack of action in response to these cartels also appears to
hold true of private parties in developing countries, which have, with only a few exceptions,
apparently not actively sought civil remedies against cartel participants to the extent that
consumers in western, industrialized countries have. There are a variety of reasons – legal,
political, and economic -- why this may be the case. But, as this paper demonstrates, a lack of
impact on developing countries is probably not one.
1 ORGANISATION FOR ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT, see HARD CORE CARTELS, 6 (Paris, France
2000). See also speech by Mr. Mario Monti, Member of the European Commission in charge of Competition,
Fighting Cartels: Why and How? Why should we be concerned with cartels and collusive behavior?, Address at the
Third Nordic Competition Policy Conference (Stockholm, September 11, 2000) and the U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
JUSTICE INTERNATIONAL COMPETITION POLICY ADVISORY COMMITTEE, FINAL REPORT (U.S. GPO Washington, DC
2000).
2 Brazil is also contemplating action against the lysine cartel. See Scott Kilman, European Commission Sets ADM
Fine, WALL ST. J., June 8, 2000, at A4.
2

This, in turn, suggests that a more comprehensive approach to promoting competition may be
necessary. Current regulatory institutions are neither international enough nor sufficiently
focused on promoting competition rather than simply prohibiting particular anti-competitive
techniques to assure that global markets will be competitive and open to new producers. There is
currently no competition authority that considers it within their purview to assure that developing
country producers have access to markets uninhibited by restraints from private agreements by
established producers.
The extant research on the impact of cartels on developing countries focuses on commodity price
stabilization schemes among developing country producers of primary products. In these
studies, the analysis focuses on developing countries as producers and industrialized countries as
consumers. In contrast, the cartels in our sample produce sophisticated manufactured goods or
services; their members are largely international corporations based in industrialized countries.
We examine two aspects of the impact of these cartels on developing countries. First, we look at
developing countries as producers, either competitors to or collaborators with, these international
cartels. In three case studies, we examine the creation of barriers to entry by cartels and their
impact on developing country producers or potential producers. We also examine the methods
that may be used to induce cooperation with the cartel by developing country producers.
Second, we take a cross-section sample of all international cartels prosecuted by the U.S. and EU
in the 1990s and ask how price-fixing conspiracies may have affected developing country
consumers. This two-pronged approach gives a more complete picture of the varied direct and
indirect effects of international cartels on developing countries.
Section II begins with a brief overview of basic cartel theory and outlines the possible effects of
international cartel activity on developing country producers and consumers. Section III
describes three recent cartels and their effects: the citric acid, graphite electrodes, and seamless
steel tubes cartels. Section IV presents a cross-section sample of forty-two private international
cartels from the 1990s and estimates the effect of these cartels on developing country trade.
Section V discusses the legal issues posed by foreign plaintiffs seeking antitrust remedies in U.S.
courts for the anticompetitive conduct of international cartels. Section VI presents conclusions
and policy implications.
3