NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DEFLATION, SILENT RUNS, AND BANK HOLIDAYS,
IN THE GREAT CONTRACTION
Hugh Rockoff
Working Paper 9522
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9522
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2003
The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2003 by Hugh Rockoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given to the source.

Deflation, Silent Runs, and Bank Holidays, in the Great Contraction
Hugh Rockoff
NBER Working Paper No. 9522
February 2003
JEL No. N12
ABSTRACT
This paper argues that the banking crises in the United States in the early 1930s were similar
to the "twin crises" -- banking and balance of payments crises -- which have occurred in developing
countries in recent years. The downturn that began in 1929 undermined banks that had made risky
loans in the twenties. The deflation that followed further weakened the banks, especially in rural
areas where the deflation in prices and incomes was the greatest. Depositors in those areas began
transferring their deposits to banks they regarded as safer, or purchasing bonds. These "silent runs,"
essentially a capital flight, have been neglected in many accounts of the banking crises. But evidence
from the Gold Settlement Fund (which recorded interregional gold movements) and from regional
deposit movements suggests that silent runs were important, especially in the crucial year 1930.
When the crisis worsened, state and local authorities began declaring "bank holidays," which limited
the right of depositors to make withdrawals, a movement that culminated in the declaration of a
national bank holiday by President Roosevelt.
Hugh Rockoff
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
rockoff@econ.rutgers.edu

Deflation, Silent Runs, and Bank Holidays, in the Great Contraction1
1. Separate Regions with Separate Banking Systems
The Great Contraction of 1929 to 1939, as Friedman and Schwartz (1963)
designated it, must surely be the most carefully studied episode in American monetary
history. Their work, and that of Charles Kindleberger (1973), Peter Temin (1976, 1989),
Barry Eichengreen (1995), and many other scholars focusing on particular aspects of the
contraction, has done much to clarify the causes and consequences of the collapse, and to
clarify the policy mistakes made by the Federal Reserve System. Nevertheless, the flood of
books and papers on monetary problems during the Depression shows no signs of abating,
suggesting that we have not yet reached the point where we believe that existing
explanations are entirely sufficient.
This is especially the case when we turn to the causes of the collapse of the banking
system. Important advances have been made in determining the role of panic as opposed to
fundamentals. Yet there is perhaps still room for an attempt to provide a narrative
framework for understanding the crisis. Here I will argue that the banking crises of the early
1930s were similar to the “twin crises” – banking and balance of payments crises – that have
occurred in developing countries in recent years. The rural regions of the United States were
like the developing countries today: dependent on the export of a few commodities in which
they had a comparative advantage, and with independent, and relatively weak banking
systems. Declining demand and export prices after 1929 weakened the banking systems in
rural regions because they raised doubts about the ability of bank borrowers to repay their
loans, and led to balance of payments deficits. Since the banks in rural regions were linked
by fixed exchange rates to separate banking systems in more developed regions, there was a
3

natural desire, moreover, on the part of people who had deposits in rural banks to move their
funds to stronger banks in the financial centers, a capital flight. The interregional movement
of funds further weakened the banking system in the regions experiencing the "external"
drain. Eventually, as bank failure rates rose, runs developed. In the end, governments
intervened by imposing restrictions on withdrawals.2
To be sure, the analogy between the “twin crises” in developing countries and the
banking crises of the 1930s can be taken only so far. The crises in developing regions today
have involved elements, such as short term capital flows and currency mismatches that we
do not find among regions of the United States in the 1930s. Most developing countries,
moreover, can devalue their currencies relative to others. This option was not open to
regions within the United States. Minnesota dollars were not going to be reduced to .75 in
New York dollars. Nevertheless, the analogy with the twin crises of recent years, I believe,
helps provide a vocabulary for understanding the banking crises in the early 1930s. This
paper, in other words, examines the banking crises from a regional perspective. It attempts
to demonstrate that there were important forces at work that have been somewhat neglected
because they do not show up clearly when the problem is viewed from a purely macro-
economic or purely micro-economic perspective.3
Although regional aspects of the Depression have been neglected in recent
discussions of the monetary side of the contraction, with the important exception of Wicker
(1996), regional differences were important to people at the time for a number of good
reasons. (1) During the 1930s there were important cultural barriers to the mobility of labor.
African Americans faced enormous racial discrimination wherever they went, and even
white southerners were branded as lazy and inferior workers. As Gavin Wright (1996) has
4