NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO SHAREHOLDERS OF ACQUIRING
FIRMS GAIN FROM ACQUISITIONS?
Sara B. Moeller
Frederik P. Schlingemann
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 9523
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9523
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2003
We are grateful to Harry DeAngelo and Ralph Walkling for useful comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Sara B. Moeller, Frederik P. Schlingemann, and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit
including ©notice, is given to the source.

Do Shareholders of acquiring firms gain from acquisitions?
Sara B. Moeller, Frederik P. Schlingemann, and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 9523
February 2003
JEL No. G31, G32, G34
ABSTRACT
We examine a sample of 12,023 acquisitions by public firms from 1980 to 2001.
Shareholders of these firms lost a total of $218 billion when acquisitions were announced. Though
shareholders lose throughout our sample period, losses associated with acquisition announcements
after 1997 are dramatic. Small firms gain from acquisitions, so that shareholders of small firms
gained $8 billion when acquisitions were announced and shareholders of large firms lost $226
billion. We examine the cross-sectional variation in the announcement returns of acquisitions. Small
firm shareholders earn systematically more when acquisitions are announced. This size effect is
typically more important than how an acquisition is financed and than the organizational form of the
assets acquired. The only acquisitions that have positive aggregate gains are acquisitions of
subsidiaries.
Sara B. Moeller Frederik P. Schlingemann
Department of Finance Department of Finance
Cox School of Business Katz Graduate School of Business
Southern Methodist University University of Pittsburgh
smoeller@mail.cox.smu.edu schlinge@katz.pitt.edu
René M. Stulz
Fisher College of Business
Ohio State University
806A Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBERstulz@cob.osu.edu

1. Introduction
In this paper, we examine whether shareholders of acquiring firms gain when firms announce
acquisitions of public firms, private firms, and subsidiaries. We consider these different types of
acquisitions together since corporations acquiring a public firm, a private firm, or a subsidiary
could be acquiring similar assets.1 Typically, such purchases are large investments for the firms
that undertake them. We form a sample of all such purchases for more than $1 million by public
firms recorded by SDC from 1980 to 2001. For our sample of 12,023 acquisitions, the average
announcement return for acquiring firm shareholders is 1.1%, representing a gain of $5.80 per
$100 spent on acquisitions. Assuming that the capital markets have an unbiased assessment of the
gains from acquisitions, this gain corresponds to the economic benefit of the acquisition for the
shareholders of the acquiring firm together with other information released or inferred by
investors when firms make acquisition announcements.
The average gain on acquisitions provides an incomplete, perhaps even deceiving, picture of
the impact of acquisitions on shareholder wealth. Over our sample period, the sample firms spent
roughly $3 trillion on acquisitions. The announcement of these acquisitions cost the shareholders
of these firms a total of $218 billion dollars. Acquisitions by small firms are profitable, but these
firms make small acquisitions with small dollar gains. Large firms make large acquisitions that
result in large dollar losses. Acquisitions make losses for shareholders in the aggregate because
the losses made by large firms are much larger than the gains made by small firms. Roughly,
shareholders from small firms earn $8 billion from the acquisitions they made from 1980 to 2001,
whereas the shareholders from large firms lose $226 billion. Shareholders would have made
aggregate losses ignoring the latest merger wave, but the latest merger wave contributes
overwhelmingly to the total amount spent on acquisitions and to the dollar amount of losses.
1 Kaplan and Weisbach (1992) have a sample of 282 large acquisitions. They find that almost 44% of the
acquisitions are subsequently divested. 216 of their acquisitions were acquisitions of public companies. The
acquired assets were then spun off in some cases and acquired by other companies in most cases. Hence, in
their sample, the same assets most likely were first acquired as a public firm acquisition and then as a
division acquisition in the divestiture.
1

Roughly, one quarter of the firms acquiring public firms are small firms whereas half of the
firms acquiring private firms are small firms. The small firms that acquire public firms on average
increase shareholder wealth doing so; the large firms do not. Whether an acquiring firm is a small
firm explains more of the return to shareholders than how the acquisition is paid for and at least
as much as whether a public company, a private company, or a subsidiary is acquired. An
acquisition made by a small firm, regardless of form of payment and regardless of the
organizational form of the assets acquired, has an announcement return that is 2.24% higher than
a comparable acquisition made by a large firm. In contrast, acquisitions of public firms made by
large firms make losses for the shareholders of the acquiring firm irrespective of how they are
paid for.
Fuller, Netter, and Stegemoller (2002) show that for a sample of firms that make five or more
acquisitions in the 1990s the returns to acquiring firm shareholders differ across organizational
form of the acquired assets. In our sample of acquisitions through the 1980s and 1990s, we find
that the shareholders of the acquiring firm gain the most when the firm acquires a subsidiary or a
private firm. The announcement abnormal return for the acquisition of a subsidiary is 2%. In
contrast, the acquiring firm shareholders gain 1.5% when a private firm is acquired and lose 1%
when a public firm is acquired. However, the only acquisitions that have positive aggregate dollar
gains for shareholders are acquisitions of subsidiaries.
The literature has identified many determinants of bidder returns. Much evidence has been
produced showing a sharp difference in bidder returns between acquisitions of public targets paid
for with cash and acquisitions of public targets paid for with equity.2 Fuller et al. (2002) and
Chang (1998) show that these differences do not extend to acquisitions of private firms. Fuller et
al. (2002) find that acquisitions of private firms paid for with equity have a positive abnormal
return in their sample.
2 See Andrade, Mitchell, and Stafford (2001) for recent evidence and review of the literature.
2