NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CEO TURNOVER AND
FOREIGN MARKET PARTICIPATION
Bruce A. Blonigen
Rossitza B. Wooster
Working Paper 9527
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9527
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2003
The authors thank Robert Baldwin, Andrew Bernard, Lee Branstetter, Ron Davies, Don Davis, Charles Engel,
Jarrad Harford, Keith Head, Robert Lipsey, Anne van den Nouweland, Jim Rauch Karl Scholz, Robert
Staiger, Glen Waddell and participants of presentations at the Columbia University, University of Texas,
University of Wisconsin and the Western Economic Association meetings for helpful discussions on previous
versions of this paper. Blonigen gratefully acknowledges financial assistance from a University of Oregon
Richard A. Bray Award. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Bruce A. Blonigen and Rossitza B. Wooster. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including
©notice, is given to the source.

CEO Turnover and Foreign Market Participation
Bruce A. Blonigen and Rossitza B. Wooster
NBER Working Paper No. 9527
February 2003
JEL No. F2, G3
ABSTRACT
Anecdotal evidence suggests that new CEOs with foreign backgrounds direct their firms to become
more international in their operations. We examine this hypothesis formally using data on U.S. S&P-
500 manufacturing firms from 1992 through 1997 and biographical information on CEOs' birth and
education locations that allow us to identify changes from U.S.- to foreign-connected CEOs. Robust
to a variety of specifications, we find that a U.S. firm's switch from a U.S. to a foreign CEO leads
to substantial increases in the firm's proportion of its foreign assets and foreign affiliate sales. In fact,
our preferred specification indicates that foreign asset and affiliate sales proportions increase 30 and
50%, respectively, for the five years after there is CEO turnover to one with a foreign background.
This is in contrast to U.S.-to-U.S. CEO switches in our sample that show no evidence of changes
in a firms' foreign market participation. These large effects contrast with previous literature that
finds little evidence for changes in firm performance with CEO turnover.
Bruce A. Blonigen Rossitza B. Wooster
Department of Economics Department of Economics
1285 University of Oregon California State University, Sacramento
Eugene, OR 97403 6000 J Street
and NBER Sacramento, CA 95819-6082
bruceb@oregon.uoregon.edu wooster@csus.edu

1. Introduction.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that companies who wish to become more international in
their operations seek to hire or promote foreign-born persons to the position of CEO. One
example is the appointment of Egyptian-born Samir Gibara at the helm of Goodyear Tire &
Rubber Co. in January 1996. In the months leading up to the change of leadership, large
institutional investors such as Alliance Capital and Travelers Group were aggressively buying
Goodyear's stock. One reason for increasing their positions was "the confidence about Mr.
Gibara's centerpiece strategy: overseas growth" (New York Times, March 3, 1996). Another
high-profile example involved the appointment of German-born Michael H. Spindler as CEO of
Apple Computer Inc. in 1986. Facing stiff competition from IBM at the time, Mr. Spindler's
inauguration goal was to boost the company's foreign sales from 22% of revenues to 35%
(Business Week, February 10, 1986).
The first question that naturally arises from such anecdotes is whether these strategies are
truly successful or just the nature of press clippings that accompany these CEO changes. In
general, there appears to be little evidence for significant changes in firms’ operations after a
CEO turnover. Murphy and Zimmerman (1993) examine U.S. CEO turnovers from 1971
through 1989 and find little evidence that CEO turnover systematically affects important firm
performance and operations indicators, including sales, assets, accounting accruals, R&D
expenditures and advertising expenditures. When evidence for significant effects from CEO
turnover is found, it concerns financial variables that are easily manipulated through accepted
accounting practices, such as write-offs of unprofitable investments and moves to reduce
reported income (see e.g., Strong and Meyer, 1987, and Elliott and Shaw, 1988).1
1 There is a much more extensive literature on how firm performance may affect the probability of CEO turnover.
Representative papers here include Parrino (1997) and Huson et al. (2001).
2

The main contribution of this paper is to document a surprisingly large increase in U.S.
firms’ foreign operations after a CEO turnover from a U.S.-born and -educated CEO to a
foreign-born and -educated CEO. Using a sample of 211 U.S. firms that were part of the
manufacturing section of the Standard and Poor’s 500 over the period 1992-97, we examine
whether changes to CEOs with foreign backgrounds leads these firms to subsequently have
higher proportions of foreign assets or foreign-affiliate sales. Our primary measure of foreign
CEOs is whether these individuals have been either foreign-born or -educated, though we also
examine other observable indicators of CEO backgrounds to measure “foreignness.” Our
empirical results show that, holding other factors constant, the proportion of a firm’s assets and
affiliate sales that are in foreign countries (foreign affiliate asset and sales intensities) increase
when companies change from U.S. CEOs to foreign CEOs. In fact, our preferred estimates show
that foreign-affiliate assets as a proportion of the firm’s total assets rises from an average of 24%
to over 31% for the five years after the CEO change, with the majority of this increase occurring
2-3 years after switch. In similar manner, foreign-affiliate sales as a proportion of a firm’s total
sales rise from 28% to approximately 42% for the five years after the CEO change. In contrast,
foreign affiliate asset and sales intensities for firms experiencing CEO changes that involve only
U.S. born and educated individuals see no such effects.
The substantial increase in foreign operations accompanying firms’ shift to foreign CEOs
has a number of potential explanations. One explanation is network connections. Recent papers
have explored the role of personal, social, and business connections (“networks”) in overcoming
informal barriers to trade such as inadequate information or poor contract enforceability.2 As
evidence for this, Gould (1994), Head and Ries (1998), and Rauch and Trindade (2002)
document that immigrant stocks substantially increase trade flows between the immigrant’s
2 Rauch (2001) provides a literature review of the role of transnational networks in trade flows.
3