NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ANALYSTS’ CONFLICT OF INTEREST
AND BIASES IN EARNINGS FORECASTS
Louis K.C. Chan
Jason Karceski
Josef Lakonishok
Working Paper 9544
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9544
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2003
Chan is with the Department of Finance, College of Commerce and Business Administration, University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; Karceski is with the Department of Finance, Warrington College of Business
Administration, University of Florida; and Lakonishok is with the Department of Finance, College of
Commerce and Business Administration, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and NBER. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2003 by Louis K.C. Chan, Jason Karceski, and Josef Lakonishok. All rights reserved. Short sections of text
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including
©notice, is given to the source.

Analysts’ Conflict of Interest and Biases in Earnings Forecasts
Louis K.C. Chan, Jason Karceski, and Josef Lakonishok
NBER Working Paper No. 9544
March 2003
JEL No. G12, G14, G24
ABSTRACT
Analysts’ earnings forecasts are influenced by their desire to win investment banking clients. We hypothesize
that the equity bull market of the 1990s, along with the boom in investment banking business, exacerbated
analysts’ conflict of interest and their incentives to adjust strategically forecasts to avoid earnings
disappointments. We document shifts in the distribution of earnings surprises, the market’s response to
surprises and forecast revisions, and in the predictability of non-negative surprises. Further confirmation is
based on subsamples where conflicts of interest are more pronounced, including growth stocks and stocks
with consecutive non-negative surprises; however shifts are less notable in international markets.
Louis K. C. Chan Jason Karceski Josef Lakonishok
Department of Finance Department of Finance Department of Finance
College of Commerce Warrington School of Business College of Commerce
University of Illinois Administration University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign University of Florida at Urbana-Champaign
Champaign IL 61820 Gainesville FL 32611 Champaign IL 61820
and NBER
lakonish@uiuc.edu

Equity research analysts make up a highly influential part of the investment industry. Investors pore
over analysts’ research reports and recommendations in order to obtain clues about the future prospects of
astock. Firmmanagerstrytocultivatefavorablecoveragebyanalysts,soastoattractinvestorattentionand
boosttheircompany’sstockprice. Brokeragefirmsheavilypromoteresearchbytheiranalystsasameansof
solicitingtradingbusinessfrominvestors,aswellasunderwritingandmergeradvisorybusinessfromfirms.
Somuchattentionisdevotedinthefinancialnewsoutletstothepronouncementsofanalyststhatahandful
of individuals, who command high profiles and high salaries to match, have attained the status of media
celebrities. Theinfluenceofanalystsisbackedupbymanyacademicstudies(see,forexample,Givolyand
Lakonishok (1979), Womack (1996), Barber et al. (2001)) which find that changes in analysts’ earnings
forecastsandrecommendationscontaininformationaboutfuturestockreturns. BusseandGreen(2002),for
instance, study television broadcasts of analyst opinions during part of 2000, and find that traders respond
withinseconds,considerablyfasterthanthereactiontimeinearlieryears.
The rise in analysts’ fortunes is intimately intertwined with the boom in the equity market during the
1990s. Many firms, especially those in the technology, media and telecommunications sectors, took ad-
vantage of their lofty valuations during this period to raise capital. Analysts played a prominent role in
drumming up demand for these stocks (Shiller (2000)), with many analysts continuing to tout them well
afterthespeculativeexcessesoftheperiodbecameobvious. Withtheunravellingoftheboom,however,the
analystcommunityhascomeunderfire. Numerouscommentatorschidetheanalystcommunityfor“perpet-
uatingamaniathatfueleditsowndemise”(Santoli(2001)). Thecentraldamningchargeagainstanalystsis
thatinsteadofprovidingimpartialresearchtheytendtobecheerleadersforthefirmstheycover. Theabun-
dance of buy recommendations and the paucity of sell recommendations, for instance, has frequently been
cited as evidence of a lack of objectivity (Anderson and Schack (2002)). As another example, forecasts of
long-termgrowthinearningsconsistentlyovershootrealizedgrowthrates(Chan,KarceskiandLakonishok
(2002)). Public skepticism about the quality of Wall Street equity research has led to calls for increased
regulatory oversight of securities firms, including proposals to spin off the research divisions of brokerage
firms.
Analysts may not always issue objective forecasts for a number of reasons. Their opinions may be
1

colored by personal career considerations. In the past, analysts were especially reliant on firm managers
forinformation. Asaresult,theymayhavebeenreluctanttoissuenegativeopinionsthatwouldantagonize
firm management and jeopardize their access to managers. Even with recent regulations governing fair
disclosure, this motivation may still be at work. Importantly, securities firms in general do not explicitly
chargeclientsforresearch. Rather,analysts’researchcontributetoasecurityfirm’srevenuesinotherways.
Onelucrativesourceofrevenueisfrominvestmentbankingbusiness. Accompanyingthebullmarketofthe
1990swasaspurtininvestmentbankingactivity,withcompaniesraisingcapitalandengaginginmergerand
acquisitiondeals. Analystsstartedtotakeanactiveroleinsecuringunderwritingbusiness. Ananalystmay
issueabullishopinionaboutastockinordertocurryfavorwithexecutiveswhocandirectfutureinvestment
bankingbusinesstothebrokeragefirm. Anothersourceofrevenuesisfromtradingcommissions. Inorder
to draw a larger clientele into buying a stock, an analyst may be predisposed to be more optimistic. In a
nutshell, analysts are compensated for roles beyond providing accurate and timely research to investors.
Thisexposesthemtopotentialconflictsofinterestthatmayunderminetheirobjectivity.
An alternative response to these allegations is that research analysts use the existing information avail-
abletocomeupwithopinionsthatare,atleastonaverage,unbiased. However,unanticipatedeventsoccur,
or the research may have been based on faulty information, possibly deliberately supplied by managers to
tonedownexpectations(oreventomisleadthepublic). Thus,analysts’forecastsandrecommendationscan
be wide off the mark through no fault of their own. With the benefit of hindsight, nonetheless, it is easy to
find a convenient scapegoat in analysts’ research. Biases in analyst forecasts might also be attributable to
psychological factors that are unrelated to conflicts of interest. Humans are prone to a variety of cognitive
biasesthatleadtosystematicjudgmentalerrors,suchasthetendencytoextrapolatepasttrendstoofarinto
thefuture.1
There are several ways in which analysts can express their opinions about a stock. They forecast long-
term growth rates and target price levels, and they issue buy or sell recommendations for a stock. By far
the most intense and sustained attention in the media, however, is lavished on analyst estimates of earn-
1SeeKahnemanandLovallo(1993)forevidencefromexperimentalstudiesinpsychology. Inthecontextofanalystbehavior,
seeDeBondtandThaler(1990),andAbarbanellandBernard(1992).
2