NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE REALLOCATION OF COMPENSATION
IN RESPONSE TO HEALTH INSURANCE PREMIUM INCREASES
Dana P. Goldman
Neeraj Sood
Arleen A. Leibowitz
Working Paper 9540
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9540
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2003
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2003 by Dana P. Goldman, Neeraj Sood, and Arleen A. Leibowitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit
including ©notice, is given to the source.

The Reallocation of Compensation in Response to Health Insurance Premium Increases
Dana P. Goldman, Neeraj Sood, and Arleen A. Leibowitz
NBER Working Paper No. 9540
March 2003
JEL No. I2
ABSTRACT
This paper examines how compensation packages change when health insurance premiums rise. We
use data on employee choices within a single large firm with a flexible benefits plan; an increasingly
common arrangement among medium and large firms. In these companies, employees explicitly
choose how to allocate compensation between cash and various benefits such as retirement, medical
insurance, life insurance, and dental benefits. We find that a $1 increase in the price of health
insurance leads to 52-cent increase in expenditures on health insurance. Approximately 2/3 of this
increase is financed through reduced wages and 1/3 through other benefits.
Dana P. Goldman Neeraj Sood
RAND Graduate School RAND Graduate School
1700 Main Street 1700 Main Street
P.O. Box 2138 P.O. 2138
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138 Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
and NBER sood@rand.org
dgoldman@rand.org
Arleen A. Leibowitz
Department of Policy Studies
UCLA
6345 Public Policy Building
Box 951656
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1656
arleen@ucla.edu

INTRODUCTION
Many companies have redesigned their benefits plans to require employees to pay the full
marginal cost (pre-tax) of more expensive plans. Such ‘fixed subsidy’ schemes have been
discussed for over two decades (Enthoven, 1978), but have gotten more attention recently as
health insurance premiums escalate. These schemes are more efficient if workers have different
tastes for health insurance (Levy, 1997), and research has shown that employee insurance
choices are quite responsive to these arrangements (Buchmueller and Feldstein, 1996; Cutler and
Reber, 1998).
What is less clear is how the total compensation package—e.g. retirement benefits—
changes when health insurance premiums rise. If the price elasticity of demand for health
insurance is less than one — and the evidence suggests it is—then workers will increase
expenditures on health insurance as their share of premiums rise. But if labor supply and
demand remains fixed, then total compensation should not change, just its composition into
health insurance, wages, and other benefits (Smith and Ehrenberg, 1983; Summers, 1989). This
is easiest to see in cafeteria-style plans, where employers make a defined contribution to all
employer-related benefits, and higher health insurance premiums must induce changes in
composition of total compensation–either in lower after-tax wages or in decreased contributions
to other benefits.
This paper examines how workers change their compensation package in response to
changing health insurance premiums. To the extent that workers do not completely substitute
away from rising premiums, we are particularly interested in whether employees finance health
insurance by reducing current income (essentially wages) or other benefits (life insurance,
disability insurance, and other benefits).
We know of no other work in this area, although there is a substantial literature on the
tradeoff between wages and fringe benefits. Much of this work tries to estimate the substitution
between benefits and wages using data aggregated at the firm or industry level (Woodbury,

1983). These estimates are somewhat limited because the fringes are often allocated as part of a
collective bargaining agreement or a less explicit process based on worker preferences that calls
into question the underlying assumptions of flexible wages and costless mobility (Freeman,
1981; Goldstein and Pauly, 1976). Others have tried to estimate the relationship with employee-
level data from multiple firms. The implausible result that wages and benefits do not tradeoff—
holding productivity fixed—are best explained as bias due to unobserved heterogeneity (Smith &
Ehrenberg, 1983).
We try to avoid these problems by focusing on employee choices within a single large
firm with a flexible benefits plan. Under such an arrangement, employees explicitly choose how
to allocate compensation between cash and various benefits, such as retirement, medical
insurance, life insurance, and dental benefits. Such plans cover 52% of workers in medium and
large firms, and the proportion is growing, so they are interesting to study in their own right
(BLS, 1999). The effect of health insurance premiums on compensation is identified by the
substantial variation in premiums across years.
The results suggest that about two-thirds of the premium increase is financed out of cash
wages and the remaining one-thirds is financed by a reduction in benefits. However, these
findings come from only a single firm—and hence limit our ability to draw inferences to the
general population—but they do suggest that the relationship between health insurance benefits,
and wages warrants further investigation.
DATA
The original data set consists of three years (1989-1991) of earnings and benefit
information for employees under age 65 at a single U.S. company.1 While these data are 10
years old, this period is relevant to the current debate about health care costs because health
insurance premiums are rising rapidly today, as they were in the late 1980’s and early 1990’s. It
1These data were obtained from a benefits consulting firm. The terms of the data release
precluded us from providing detail about the company, including its industry.