NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DOES INSIDER TRADING RAISE MARKET VOLATILITY?
Julan Du
Shang-Jin Wei
Working Paper 9541
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9541
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2003
We thank Win-Lin Chou, Guy Meredith, Martin Feldstein, Andrew Sheng, Andrei Shleifer, Kafu Wong, and
seminar participants at an NBER meeting in China, Hong Kong Securities and Futures Commission, Hong
Kong Institute for Monetary Research, University of Hong Kong, and the Institute for International Economic
Studies in Tokyo for helpful discussion, and Hayden Smith and Yi Wu for superb research assistance. The
views in the paper are the authors’ own and may not be shared by any organization that the authors are or
have been associated with. All errors are the authors’ responsibilities. The data used in the paper will be
made available in the year after its publication. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Julan Du and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given
to the source.

Does Insider Trading Raise Market Volatility?
Julan Du and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 9541
March 2003
JEL No. I2
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the role of insider trading in explaining cross-country differences in stock market
volatility. It introduces a new measure of insider trading. The central finding is that countries with
more prevalent insider trading have more volatile stock markets, even after one controls for
liquidity/maturity of the market, and the volatility of the underlying fundamentals (volatility of real
output and of monetary and fiscal policies). Moreover, the effect of insider trading is quantitatively
significant when compared with the effect of economic fundamentals.
Shang-Jin Wei
Julan Du
Department of Economics Research Department, Room 10-700m
The Chinese University of Hong Kong International Monetary Fund
Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong 700 19th Street N.W.
julandu@cuhk.edu.hk Washington, DC 20431, USA
and Brookings Institution and NBER
swei@imf.org

3
1. Introduction
Stock markets are volatile. That is not news. But the volatility varies
substantially across countries. Suppose we use the standard deviation of the monthly
returns of a major market index as the measure, then the volatility in Italy is almost twice
as high as in the United States. The volatility in developing countries is typically even
higher. For example, the Chinese and the Russian markets, respectively, are 350% and
650% as volatile as the U.S market1.
Market volatility affects the incentive to save and to invest. In almost any model
with a representative agent maximizing utility under uncertainty, the more volatile the
asset market, holding the average return constant, the less the agent will save, and hence
the less the investment will be. A certain degree of market volatility is unavoidable,
even desirable, as one would like the stock price fluctuation to indicate changing values
across economic activities so that resources can be better allocated. However, precisely
because stock prices are supposed to serve as signals for resource allocation, excessive
volatility that is not related to economic fundamentals would diminish the signaling
function and impede resource allocation2.
The purpose of this paper is to assess the role of insider trading in explaining the
difference in market volatility across countries. As far as we know, this has not been
examined on a systematic basis. To do this, we first consider major factors other than
inside trading that could also be potential explanations for market volatility. These
factors can be grouped in several categories. First, the volatility of the underlying
fundamentals, in particular, the volatility of the real output stream whose present discount
value that the asset price is supposed to reflect, should matter. In addition, the maturity
of the asset market also matters. For example, it may be reasonable to expect a young
market to be more volatile than a long established and highly liquid one, even holding
constant the volatility of the underlying fundamentals, just because the average
1 We calculated the numbers based on a monthly sample during 1984:12 – 1998:12. The details are
explained later in the paper.
2 There is a long literature on whether stock price volatility is excessive relative to the present discounted
values of the future dividend streams. After the pioneering work by Shiller (1981) and a large volume of
subsequent work, no consensus has emerged. While this literature focuses on a single country case (most
typically, the U.S.), the current paper examines the difference in volatility across countries.

4
experience and skill of the investors and of the market regulators may improve with
market maturity.
The implication of insider trading for stock price volatility and economic
efficiency is ambiguous in theory. The first view is that, by allowing relevant
information to be reflected in the stock price faster than otherwise, insider trading should
increase the signal-to-noise ratio(Manne, 1966). Conditional on the variance of the
signals (i.e., the fundamentals), this should lead to a reduction in market volatility and an
improvement in economic efficiency A more sophisticated refinement is that, by
allowing a one-time jump in the price, insider trading may temporarily raise the price
volatility at the time of the price adjustment, but improve the overall efficiency
nonetheless (Leland, 1992). Under this view, if one measures the return volatility at an
appropriately long horizon, insider trading should not raise market volatility.
On the other end of the spectrum, it has been argued that insider trading can raise
price volatility in the long run and reduce economic efficiency. Access to inside
information is more valuable when there is either a big rise or a big fall in prices.
Therefore, there may be two channels through which insiders may choose to generate
more volatility. First, other things equal, insiders may have an incentive to choose riskier
projects than they otherwise would. Second, even holding the inherent risk
characteristics of a production process constant, insiders have an incentive to manipulate
the timing and content of the information release in a such way that will generate more
price volatility than otherwise (Brudney, 1979; Easterbrook, 1981; Allen and Gale, 1992;
and Benabou and Laroque, 1992).
Relative to the active theoretic modeling, empirical work on the subject is lagging
behind3. The small empirical literature on insider trading so far has made use of three
types of data. The first is based on self-reported legal trading by corporate insiders filed
with government regulators, mostly in the U.S. and the U.K.(see Seyhun, 1986; Elliot,
Morse, and Richardson, 1984; Givoly and Palmon, 1985; John and Lang, 1991;
Chowdhury, Howe and Lin, 1993; and Gregory, Matatko, Tonks and Purkis, 1994). Of
course, reported legal trading by insiders, by its nature, is unlikely to be associated with a
large price movement. The second type of data is a compilation of illegal insider trading
3 The discussion in this and the following paragraphs is derived from Bhattacharya and Daouk (2002).