NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PUTTING ‘M’ BACK IN MONETARY POLICY
Eric M. Leeper
Jennifer E. Roush
Working Paper 9552
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9552
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2003
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2003 by Eric M. Leeper and Jennifer E. Roush. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given
to the source.

Putting ‘M’ back in Monetary Policy
Eric M. Leeper and Jennifer E. Roush
NBER Working Paper No. 9552
March 2003
JEL No. E410, E430, E520
ABSTRACT
Money demand and the stock of money have all but disappeared from monetary policy analyses.
This paper is an empirical contribution to the debate over the role of money in monetary policy
analysis. The paper models supply and demand interactions in the money market and finds evidence
of an essential role for money in the transmission of policy. Across sub-samples, it finds evidence
consistent with the following inferences: (1) the money stock and the interest rate jointly transmit
monetary policy; (2) for a given exogenous change in the nominal interest rate, the estimated impact
of policy on economic activity increases monotonically with the response of the money supply; (3)
the path of the real rate is not sufficient for determining policy impacts.
Eric M. Leeper Jennifer E. Roush
304 Wylie Hall Federal Reserve Board
Indiana University jennifer.e.roush@frb.gov
Bloomington, IN 47405
and NBER
eleeper@indiana.edu

PUTTING ‘M’ BACK IN MONETARY POLICY
ERIC M. LEEPER AND JENNIFER E. ROUSH
1. Introduction
Money demand and the stock of money have all but disappeared from monetary
policy analyses. Reasons for the disappearance vary from the declining correlations
between conventional money measures and economic activity to the frustrating in-
stability of empirical money demand specifications. But the main reason money has
disappeared is that in the most widely used models of monetary policy, the money
stock is redundant for determining output and inflation once the short-term nomi-
nal interest rate is present. The near-universal adoption of interest rate instruments
by central banks, coupled with the belief that actual central bank behavior is well
modeled by a policy rule that sets the interest rate as a function of only output and
inflation, has led to an emphasis on theoretical models in which money supply is in-
finitely elastic [Rotemberg and Woodford (1997)]. Monetary policy without money is
so widely accepted that it now appears in pedagogical writings at the undergraduate
and graduate levels [Romer (2000), Stiglitz and Walsh (2002), or Woodford (2003)].
Even if one buys the theoretical argument that the stock of money is redundant, a
persuasive empirical case has yet to be made. This paper shows that money plays an
important role in the transmission of policy in small empirical models. In contrast to
many studies, we model the Federal Reserve’s rule for setting the Federal funds rate
as also including a broad measure of money. As long as money demand is not interest
inelastic, this implies that the money supply and the interest rate are determined
simultaneously. We show that when this simultaneity is modeled and the interest
elasticities of supply and demand for money are freely estimated, policy shocks have
significantly larger impacts on real variables and inflation than when either money
or the interest rate is treated recursively. Simultaneity also implies far less inertial
responses of inflation to policy disturbances. These findings hold across time, even in
the face of significant financial innovation and instability in empirical specifications
of short-run money demand.
Date: February 25, 2003. Prepared for Cleveland Fed/JMCB Conference, November 6-8, 2002.
We thank Dale Henderson, Ed Nelson, Anders Vredin, Mike Woodford, and the two discussants,
Marty Eichenbaum and Frank Smets, for helpful comments. The views in this paper are solely the
responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
1

PUTTING ‘M’ BACK 2
To model the money market, we pay a price in having to take a stronger stand on
money demand behavior than is typical in the identified VAR literature. But a little
economic structure goes a long way. Comparing the simultaneous model’s predictions
with those that restrict money’s role in various ways, we find that, for a given initial
change in the nominal interest rate, the strength of the output and price effects of
policy increase monotonically with the response of the money stock. Moreover, when
money and the nominal interest rate jointly transmit policy, monetary policy has
impacts that are unrelated to the path of the real interest rate. This evidence is at
oddswithNewKeynesiantheoreticalstructuresnowinwideuseforpolicyanalysis. In
thosestructures, money andthe short-termnominalinterest rate are interchangeable,
and the real interest rate is the sole channel by which policy affects real quantities
and inflation.
The paper also sheds light on two persistent puzzles in empirical work in monetary
policy. Those puzzles–the liquidity puzzle and the price puzzle–plague empirical
work on monetary policy. The liquidity puzzle arises when monetary policy distur-
bances fail to generate a negative short-run correlation between the nominal interest
rate and the money stock; the price puzzle arises when higher nominal rates, which
are interpreted as tighter monetary policy, are followed by higher prices for some
time. These puzzles are ubiquitous, appearing across empirical approaches. Absence
of liquidity effects appears in simple correlations [Christiano (1991)], distributed-
lag regressions [Melvin (1983)], recursive VARs [Leeper and Gordon (1992)], and
identified VARs [Bernanke, Boivin, and Eliasz (2002)]. Price puzzles appear in sim-
ple correlations, distributed-lag regressions [Sargent (1973)], recursive VARs [Sims
(1992), Eichenbaum (1992)], identified VARs [Leeper, Sims, and Zha (1996), Chris-
tiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (1999)], and in the narrative approach of Romer and
Romer (1989) [Leeper (1997)].
Resolutionsofthetwopuzzlesareusuallytreatedindependently. Theliquiditypuz-
zle has been solved by focusing on narrow monetary aggregates such as non-borrowed
reserves [Strongin (1995), Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (1996)]. Following
Sims (1992), the price puzzle is widely regarded as arising from the inclusion of too
littleinformationinempiricalmodels,whichconfoundsexogenouspolicydisturbances
with forecastable changes in inflation. Sims adds commodity prices to the monetary
authority’s information set, ameliorating the perverse price level responses. (But see
Hanson (2002) for a critical review of the commodity-price fix.)
Our results indicate that the puzzles have a common source: extreme assumptions
about the interest-rate elasticity of eithersupply ordemand inthe money market. By
restrictingtherolesofmoneyandinterestratesinthetransmissionofmonetarypolicy,
these assumptions confound monetary policy and money demand shocks. When we
estimate the elasticities freely, the puzzles disappear from U.S. data from 1959-2001
and various sub-samples.