NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TRADERS, COPS, AND ROBBERS
James E. Anderson
Oriana Bandiera
Working Paper 9572
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9572
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2003
An earlier version was presented to the Peace Science Society meetings, Atlanta, GA, Jan. 2002. We are
indebted to Hong-bin Cai, Herschel Grossman, Evi Pappa, Steve Redding and seminar participants at Brown
University, LSE, UCSD, Claremont, UC-Santa Cruz, and the University of British Columbia for helpful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by James E. Anderson and Oriana Bandiera. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is
given to the source.

Traders, Cops and Robbers
James E. Anderson and Oriana Bandiera
NBER Working Paper No. 9572
March 2003
JEL No. F1, K42
ABSTRACT
Why does illegal trade often flourish without formal enforcement, but sometimes fail? Why do illegal trade-
reducing policies often fail? Why do States often appear to tolerate illegal trade? A model of trade with cops and
robbers provides answers. `Safety in numbers' is a key element: the equilibrium probability of successful
shipments is increasing in trade volume. Even without conventional fixed costs, safety in numbers implies scale
economies which can explain the absence or robustness of trade subject to predation. Spilling over between
markets, safety in numbers implies that illegal trade can foster legal trade and State revenue.
James E. Anderson
Department of Economics
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
james.anderson.1@bc.edu
Oriana Bandiera
Department of Economics
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
UK
o.bandiera@lse.ac.uk

T(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:2)(cid:6), C(cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:6) (cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:4) R(cid:9)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:5)(cid:2)(cid:6) 1
Trade in illegal goods poses a number of puzzles to economic analysis.
First, State policies to reduce illegal trade often seem to fail or even to
perversely increase it. Current expenditure for anti-drugs policies is about
$40bn in the US alone and yet in the last two decades drug availability has
remained unchanged and prices have been falling steadily.1 Can attacks on
illegal trade actually be perverse under some circumstances? The problem
is highly signi$cantsince the trade in illegal drugs accountsfor about 8% of
total world trade value, more than, for instance, motor vehicles or textiles.2
Second, why do capable States tolerate illegal trade which apparently
reduces tax revenue? The US and most other OECD countries are hostile
to illegal trade, but some richand manymore poor States tolerate it. Many
States are ambivalent in their cooperation with the US war on drugs, while
local governments even in developed countries differ widely in their toler-
ance of drugs, prostitution and unlicensed gambling. The informal sector
as a whole, which includes the production of all goods and services hidden
from tax authorities, accounts for at least 30% of GDP in most developing
countries and for an average 15% of GDP in OECD economies. 3 The
British government famously tolerated massive smuggling in the American
colonies prior to 1763, (cid:30)benign neglect(cid:31).
1Fordata on anti-drugpolicy expenditure see The Economist, September 2, 2000 and
The White House 2002. Forestimatesof productionandtradevolumesee UnitedNations
Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention, Global Illicit Drug Trends, various issues.
Abt Associates, 2001provide priceestimates suggestingthat, forinstance, theretailprice
of cocaine in the US fell from $420 per pure gram to $180 per pure gram between 1981
and 1999.
2Annualrevenueswereestimatedat$400bn. SeeUnitedNationsOfficeforDrugControl
and Crime Prevention (1998).
3See Schneider and Enste (2000).

T(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:2)(cid:6), C(cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:6) (cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:4) R(cid:9)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:5)(cid:2)(cid:6) 2
Third, why does predation eliminate trade in some situations, while
impeding but not eliminating other trade? Intuition suggests that in the
absence of $xed costs there should always be some trade along with some
predation. Yet home delivery of pizza, a lawful trade, is unavailable in
some American urban neighborhoods (Raspberry, 2002) while the recent
$lm Traffic depicts illegal trade thriving despite predation. Can a simple
economic model of predator/prey relations explain both outcomes?
Our paper provides an explanation of the puzzles in a formal economic
modeloftrade, predationandenforcement. Predationisunderstoodhereas
boththeftandextortion. Enforcementisofferedbyprivate(possiblyillegal)
and governmental $rms. The illegal drugs market provides motivation,
but the model applies very widely to trade subject to predation, and to
the interaction of State and private enforcement in this setting. Trade
subjectto predation is richwith externalities whichcan: (1) cause perverse
responses of the volume of illegal trade to State policies; (2) explain why
non-corruptStatesmightrationallytolerateinformal trade, orevenactively
collude with a private monopoly enforcer; and (3) explain the vigor of
markets under predation in some cases and their collapse in other cases.
Traders in our model purchase a good from a low price location and
ship it at increasing cost to the consumers(cid:31)high price location. Shipments
are preyed on by predators drawn from the same labor pool as the traders,
hence at increasing opportunity cost.4 Resistance to predation via Lself-
enforcementM arises as traders attempt to elude predators in anonymous
4See Dixit (2001) for an analysis of the case in which the contracting parties (buyers
and sellers in this context) can cheat on one another.