NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHAT DO FINANCIAL MARKETS
THINK OF WAR IN IRAQ?
Andrew Leigh
Justin Wolfers
Eric Zitzewitz
Working Paper 9587
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9587
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2003
The authors would like to thank Lanier Benkard, Jeremy Bulow, Tim Bresnahan, Macgregor Duncan, Peter
Henry, Dean Karlan, Ilan Kremer, Lars Lefgren, Steve Levitt, Ulrike Malmendier, Alfredo Marti, John
McMillan, Paul Oyer, Jon Reuter, Andy Skrzypacz, Scott Stern, Hal Varian, Romain Wacziarg, Barry
Weingast, Jeff Zwiebel and participants at the Stanford GSB Applied Micro brownbag for stimulating
discussions. John Delaney and William Saletan provided insights into their proprietary data. Daphne Chang,
Jan Driscoll, Doug Geyser, Catherine Haga, Allison Kavanagh, Peter Latusek, Pauline Mena, Paul Reist, Nora
Richardson, Rosalind Young, and Simone Yu provided outstanding research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Andrew Leigh, Justin Wolfers, and Eric Zitzewitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including
©notice, is given to the source.

What Do Financial Markets Think of War in Iraq?
Andrew Leigh, Justin Wolfers, and Eric Zitzewitz
NBER Working Paper No. 9587
March 2003
JEL No. E6, G1, G13, G14, H56, H5
ABSTRACT
We analyze financial market data in order to produce an ex-ante assessment of the economic
consequences of war with Iraq. The novel feature of our analysis derives from the existence of a
market for “Saddam Securities,” a new future traded on an online betting exchange that pays only
if Saddam Hussein is ousted. A variety of tests suggest that this future’s price provides a plausible
estimate of the probability of war. The spot oil price has moved closely with the Saddam Security,
suggesting that war raises oil prices by around $10 per barrel. Futures prices imply that markets
expect these large immediate disruptions to dissipate quickly, with prices returning to pre-war levels
within about a year and a half. Evidence on the long-run effects is fragile, and while prices are
probably expected to fall a little as a result of war, any “ oil dividend” will be minimal. We find
large effects in equity markets: and war lowers the value of U.S. equities by around 15 percent. This
effect is concentrated in the consumer discretionary sector, airlines and IT; the prospect of war
bolsters the gold and energy sectors. Analyzing option prices, we find that the large estimated
average effects of war reflect the market pricing in a range of different scenarios - a 70 percent
probability that it will lead to market declines of 0 to 15 percent, a 20 percent chance of 15 to 30
percent declines, and a 10 percent risk of a fall in excess of 30 percent. Across countries, the most
extreme effects are on the stock markets of Turkey, Israel, and several European nations. Countries
that are highly enmeshed in the world economy, or net oil importers, are most likely to experience
adverse effects from war.
Andrew Leigh Justin Wolfers
Kennedy School of Government Department of Economics
Harvard University Stanford University
anderw_leigh@ksg02.harvard.edu 518 Memorial Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
jwolfers@stanford.edu
Eric Zitzewitz
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
ericz@stanford.edu

1. Introduction
War presents profound ethical questions. It also presents important economic questions, and the
likely consequences of a U.S.-led invasion of Iraq merit substantial scrutiny. To date we have heard
much speculation, but there have been few detailed studies. Economists have gone strangely silent
when confronted with the ambiguity of war.
Yet even if economists have been largely quiet on the economic consequences of war (with notable
exceptions including William Nordhaus and Larry Lindsey), financial markets have continued to
operate relatively smoothly, incorporating new information, assessing risks, and aggregating public
and expert opinion. This paper analyzes what the financial markets are telling us about the
consequences of war. Of course, how informative one believes these assessments to be depends on
one’s view of the efficiency of these financial markets.
Our ability to make inferences about the consequences of war derives from a novel financial
instrument that trades directly in this risk—a contingent contract we refer to as the “Saddam
Security”—an asset whose payoffs depend on the ousting of the Iraqi leader. These securities are
traded on an online betting exchange similar to the better-known Iowa Electronic Markets. The
Saddam Security is traded a little more widely and liquidly than the typical contract on the Iowa
market, and Wall Street is over-represented among market participants. Evidence from a variety of
sources suggests that these data do in fact reflect underlying war probabilities.
We track high frequency movements in the Saddam Security and compare it with movements in oil
futures markets in order to assess how war will affect the future path of oil prices. In the short run, a
ten percent rise in the probability of war with Iraq raises oil prices by about $1 per barrel (or
3-4 percent), suggesting that war leads oil prices to rise around $10 per barrel higher, relative to a
no-war counterfactual. We find suggestive evidence that oil prices may fall in the longer run,
although these effects are both small and fragile. Thus we expect the oil price impacts of war to
cause short-run economic disruption, but find little evidence that there will be a meaningful long-run
oil dividend.
Turning to aggregate stock market indices, we find that the U.S. stock market is extremely sensitive
to changes in the probability of war. A 10 percentage point rise in the probability of ousting Saddam
lowers the S&P 500 by about 1½ percent, suggesting that war lowers U.S. equity valuations by
around 15 percent. Option prices imply that this large average effect reflects a negatively skewed
distribution of possible outcomes. We estimate that option prices imply a 70 percent chance that war
will have a moderately negative effect on the market of 0 to -15 percent, a 20 percent chance of a
-15 to -30 percent effect, and a 10 percent chance of a -30 percent effect or worse. The economic
impacts of war are not confined to the U.S., and analysis of 44 other stock markets around the world
suggests that they too tend to be pricing in a risk of substantial disruptions.
The analysis in this paper makes three main contributions. First, we use financial market data to
better understand the consequences of a prospective policy decision—a U.S. led invasion of Iraq—in
real time. A financial-market-based analysis complements expert opinion in several ways. Expert
opinions tend to vary widely (from expectations of a walk-over victory to dire predictions of
terrorism and regional instability) and vary fairly directly with the ideological predisposition of the
1

predictor. Markets aggregate opinions, and by requiring a trader to put “your money where your
mouth is,” they lessen the cheap-talk problem and create incentives for individuals to reveal their
true beliefs. In addition, whereas careful experts tend to focus on the mostly easily analyzed costs of
war (e.g., the budgetary impact), financial markets are forced to price the harder-to-assess but
potentially much larger general equilibrium and political economy effects of war on the national
economy. Financial markets do not simply evaluate the cost of war today, but also incorporate the
effect of this war on the number and intensity of future conflicts. Moreover, whereas previous
studies of the effect of political events on financial markets are necessarily retrospective, our
analysis is prospective.1 Analyses like ours could conceivably be used to inform decision-making in
real time.2
Second, our analysis may provoke a reassessment of the extent to which stock market movements
can be explained by news. The conventional wisdom is that identifiable news events explain only a
small portion of market movements, suggesting a role for behavioral theories of stock price
movements. The wisdom is based in part on studies like Cutler, Poterba, and Summers (1989), who
find that first-order news events (including political and military developments) explain only a small
portion of market movements. In contrast, we find that over 30 percent of the variation in the S&P
and 75 percent of the variation in spot oil prices over the last 5 months can be explained
econometrically by changes in the probability of war (and, for oil, the Venezuelan crisis).3
A possible reconciliation of our results with previous narrative studies of financial markets is that
many political events are not surprises by the time they happen. This is likely to be the case for the
current war: by the time it starts, the market’s assessment of its probability is likely to be close to
100 percent, and its expected stock market effects should already be priced in. This was even partly
the case for a “surprise” like Pearl Harbor, since the likelihood of war with Japan and Germany was
surely somewhat foreseeable even on December 6, 1941. Without securities that quantify the news
content of the political narrative, the true impact of these events on the markets are almost
impossible to assess.
The third contribution is simply to highlight the likely utility of political securities in improving the
efficiency of markets. If some of the uncertainty about the value of the S&P over the past 5 months
reflected uncertainty about war and its impact, aggregating information about the likelihood of war
in a publicly observable market price should enhance the efficiency with which information about
the non-war component of value is incorporated into prices. For analogous reasons, Yuan (2002)
finds that the introduction of sovereign debt markets increases the liquidity of emerging market
corporate bonds. If this study upwardly revises our beliefs about the extent to which political
uncertainty contributes to uncertainty about asset values, then it should also revise our beliefs about
the utility of political risk securities.
1 Examples of retrospective analyses include studies of Swiss and Swedish government bonds during World War II by
Frey and Kucher (2000) and Waldenström and Frey (2002), and an analysis of major events since the 1940s by Cutler,
Poterba, and Summers (1989).
2 Of course, if policy makers did start basing decisions on analyses of market expectations about outcomes, this could
create an endogeneity issue, complicating the analysis. We should be so lucky.
3 The figures referred to are the R-squared from long difference regressions reported in Tables 2 and 3A.
2