NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
UNION PARTICIPATION IN STRATEGIC
DECISIONS OF CORPORATIONS
Eileen Appelbaum
Larry W. Hunter
Working Paper 9590
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9590
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2003
We thank Reena Ganju for excellent assistance with the research on strategic labor-management partnerships.
We benefited from hearing the views of Steve Early, Thomas Kochan, Larry Mishel, Richard Freeman, and
other participants in the Conference on Emerging Labor Market Institutions. We also thank the labor
representatives, managers, and researchers who shared their views on partnerships with us. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2003 by Eileen Appelbaum and Larry W. Hunter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is
given to the source.

Union Participation in Strategic Decisions of Corporations
Eileen Appelbaum and Larry W. Hunter
NBER Working Paper No. 9590
March 2003
JEL No. J53
ABSTRACT
This paper reviews workforce participation in strategic decisions - those that affect the basic
direction of the company - when workforce interests are represented collectively through unions.
We consider the problem of corporate governance and review the rationale for what we term
“strategic partnerships” between management and labor. The paper describes the prevalence of such
partnerships in the U.S., focusing on two institutions through which unions have engaged in
discussion of strategic issues: negotiated union-management partnership agreements, and union
representation on corporate boards. We offer detailed accounts of specific strategic partnerships and
of union involvement on corporate boards, showing that unions face a range of challenges in
constructing partnerships that extend possibilities for effective representations of workers’ interests.
Eileen Appelbaum Larry W. Hunter
Professor and Director Assistant Professor of Management
Center for Women and Work and Human Resources
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey School of Business
162 Ryders Lane University of Wisconsin-Madison
New Brunswick, NJ 08901 4114 Grainger Hall
eappelba@rci.rutgers.edu 975 University Avenue
Madison, WI 53717
Lhunter@bus.wisc.edu

Introduction
In the United States, the explicit representation of workforce interests in strategic
decision-making processes of corporations is rare. Participation in strategic decisions –
those that affect the basic direction of the company – is unusual even when workforce
interests are represented collectively through unions. In this chapter, we consider U.S.
labor-management experiments with two institutions through which strategic
participation for unions might be realized: negotiated union-management partnership
agreements, and union representation on corporate boards.
These types of institutions for strategic participation have emerged from private
sector initiatives, without the support of public policy. The ad hoc character of these U.S.
initiatives stands in contrast to the legally mandated works councils, and provisions for
workforce representation on corporate boards of directors (or “codetermination”), which
are characteristic of many European countries. Europeans are in the process of
constructing similar legally supported institutions for a united Europe. In the U.S.,
however, there are no legal structures that provide American workers with strategic
participation at either the level of the establishment or the corporate board.
Understanding the development of these institutions in the U.S. requires consideration of
the variety of attempts by unions and management to engage strategic decisions jointly.
This chapter examines union experiences with partnership agreements and with
board representation. We begin by considering the problem of corporate governance and
reviewing the rationale for strategic partnerships. The next section discusses the
prevalence of such partnerships in the U.S. The following sections report on specific
strategic partnerships and on union involvement in corporate boards of directors. The
1

chapter concludes with discussions of the challenges and dilemmas facing unions should
they seek partnerships at the strategic level.
Corporate Governance in the U.S.
Corporate governance is generally understood to refer to the legal and
organizational structures that govern the relationship between corporate executives and
the shareholders that are the ultimate owners of the physical capital of the company.
Through corporate governance structures, firms make decisions about investments in
plant and equipment, levels of staff and deployment of workers, location of operations,
the allocation of resources, and the distribution of earnings. In theories of the firm that
dominate U.S. legal and economic discourse, the purpose of corporate governance
structures is to align the interests of corporate executives with those of the shareholders,
and to assure that managers act in shareholders’ best interests (Shleifer and Vishny 1997).
Shareholder-based theories reduce the relationship between owners and workers
to an employment contract that specifies the wage – work effort bargain. In general, U.S.
laws follow these theories: workers have no legally guaranteed rights to participation in
corporate governance structures, or to have their interests taken into account when
strategic decisions are made. While some states have allowed directors to consider other
stakeholders (Orts 1992), most American corporate boards of directors have a primary
fiduciary responsibility to the companies’ shareholders. Shareholders in turn have legally
recognized rights to be represented on corporate boards of directors, and to have the
assets in which they have invested protected from misuse or misappropriation by the
careless or opportunistic behavior of managers.
2