NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE STATE OF U.S. CORPORATE GOVERNANCE:
WHAT’S RIGHT AND WHAT’S WRONG?
Bengt Holmstrom
Steven N. Kaplan
Working Paper 9613
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9613
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2003
Warren Batts, Don Chew, Art Kelly, Rick Melcher, Andrew Nussbaum, and Per Stromberg provided helpful
comments. Address correspondence to Steven Kaplan, Graduate School of Business, The University of
Chicago, 1101 East 58th Street, Chicago, IL 60637 or e-mail at steven.kaplan@gsb.uchicago.edu. Part of
this article draws on our earlier article, “Corporate Governance and Takeovers in the U.S.: Making Sense of
the ’80s and ’90s,” Journal of Economic Perspectives (2001), pp.121-144.The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Bengt Holmstrom and Steven N. Kaplan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is
given to the source.

The State of U.S. Corporate Governance: What’s Right and What’s Wrong?
Bengt Holmstrom and Steven N. Kaplan
NBER Working Paper No. 9613
April 2003
JEL No. G3, L2
ABSTRACT
The U.S. corporate governance system has recently been heavily criticized, largely as a result of
failures at Enron, WorldCom, Tyco and some other prominent companies. Those failures and
criticisms, in turn, have served as catalysts for legislative change (Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002) and
regulatory change (new governance guidelines from the NYSE and NASDAQ). In this paper, we
consider two questions. First, is it clear that the U.S. system has performed that poorly; is it really
that bad? Second, will the changes lead to an improved U.S. corporate governance system? We first
note that the broad evidence is not consistent with a failed U.S. system. The U.S. economy and stock
market have performed well both on an absolute basis and relative to other countries over the past
two decades. And the U.S. stock market has continued to outperform other broad indices since the
scandals broke. Our interpretation of the evidence is that while parts of the U.S. corporate
governance system failed under the exceptional strain of the 1990s, the overall system, which
includes oversight by the public and the government, reacted quickly to address the problems. We
then consider the effects that the legislative, regulatory, and market responses are likely to have in
the near future. Our assessment is that they are likely to make a good system better, though there is
a danger of overreacting to extreme events.
Bengt Holmstrom Steven N. Kaplan
Department of Economics Graduate School of Business
MIT The University of Chicago
E52-271d 1101 East 58th Street
Cambridge, MA 02139 Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER and NBER
bengt@mit.edu steven.kaplan@gsb.uchicago.edu

To a casual observer, the United States corporate governance system must seem to be in
terrible shape. The business press has focused relentlessly on the corporate board and
governance failures at Enron, WorldCom, Tyco, Adelphia, Global Crossing, and others. Top
executive compensation is also routinely criticized as excessive by the press, academics, and
even top Federal Reserve officials.1 These failures and concerns, in turn, have served as
catalysts for legislative change—in the form of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 – and regulatory
change, including new governance guidelines from the NYSE and NASDAQ.
The turmoil and the responses to it suggest two important questions that we attempt to
answer in this article. First, has the U.S. corporate governance system performed that poorly--is
it really that bad? Second, will the proposed changes lead to a more effective system?
In addressing the first question, we begin by examining two broad measures of economic
performance for evidence of failure of the U.S. system. Despite the alleged flaws in its
governance system, the U.S. economy has performed very well, both on an absolute basis and
particularly relative to other countries. U.S. productivity gains in the past decade have been
exceptional, and the U.S. stock market has consistently outperformed other world indices over
the last two decades, including the period since the scandals broke. In other words, the broad
evidence is not consistent with a failed U.S. system. If anything, it suggests a system that is well
above average.
Next, we discuss how important aspects of the U.S. corporate governance system have
evolved over the last two decades and the implications of those changes. Again, contrary to the
popular impression, the major changes in U.S. corporate governance in the past 20 years—
1 For example, see Marco Becht, Patrick Bolton, and Ailsa Roell, “Corporate Governance and Control,” in
Handbook of Economics and Finance (G. Constantinides, M. Harris, and R. Stulz, eds.). North Holland (2002),
“CEOs Are Overpaid, Says Fed Banker,” The Washington Post, September 11, 2002, and “After 10 Years,
Corporate Oversight Is Still Dismal,” by Claudia Deutsch, The New York Times, January 26, 2003.
1

notably, the dramatic increase in equity-based pay and the institutionalization of U.S.
shareholders--appear to have been positive overall. As we discuss below, such changes played a
central role in the highly productive restructuring of U.S. corporations that took place during the
1980s and 1990s. But the changes did have an unfortunate side effect. Besides spurring
productivity improvements, the rise of equity-based pay--particularly the explosion of stock
options--and the run-up in stock prices in the late ’90s created incentives for the shortsighted and
at times illegal managerial behavior that has attracted so much criticism. Our view, however, is
that the costs associated with such incentives and behavior have been far outweighed by the
benefits.
Having addressed where the U.S. system is today and how it got there, we finally
consider the probable near-term effects of the legislative, regulatory, and market responses to the
perceived governance “problem.” We conclude that the current changes are likely to make a
good U.S. system a better one, although not without imposing some unnecessary costs. In fact,
the greatest risk now facing the U.S. corporate governance system is the possibility of
overregulation.
HOW BAD IS U.S. CORPORATE GOVERNANCE?
Given the volume and intensity of criticism of U.S. corporate governance, one would
think that the U.S. stock market must have performed quite badly, particularly since the scandals
broke in 2001. But, the data summarized in Table 1 indicate otherwise. Table 1 reports the total
returns (measured in dollars) to the Morgan Stanley Capital International indices for the
aggregate U.S., European, and Pacific stock markets over five different time periods through the
end of 2002. Although the U.S. stock market has had negative returns over the last several years,
2