NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW OFTEN TO SAMPLE A CONTINUOUS-TIME
PROCESS IN THE PRESENCE OF
MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE NOISE
Yacine Aït-Sahalia
Per A. Mykland
Working Paper 9611
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9611
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2003
Financial support from the NSF under grants SBR-0111140 (Aït-Sahalia) and DMS-0204639 (Mykland) is
gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Yacine Aït-Sahalia and Per A. Mykland. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is
given to the source.

How Often to Sample a Continuous-Time Process in the Presence of
Market Microstructure Noise
Yacine Aït-Sahalia and Per A. Mykland
NBER Working Paper No. 9611
April 2003
JEL No. G12, C22
ABSTRACT
Classical statistics suggest that for inference purposes one should always use as much data as is
available. We study how the presence of market microstructure noise in high-frequency financial
data can change that result. We show that the optimal sampling frequency at which to estimate the
parameters of a discretely sampled continuous-time model can be finite when the observations are
contaminated by market microstructure effects. We then address the question of what to do about
the presence of the noise. We show that modelling the noise term explicitly restores the first order
statistical effect that sampling as often as possible is optimal. But, more surprisingly, we also
demonstrate that this is true even if one misspecifies the assumed distribution of the noise term. Not
only is it still optimal to sample as often as possible, but the estimator has the same variance as if
the noise distribution had been correctly specified, implying that attempts to incorporate the noise
into the analysis cannot do more harm than good. Finally, we study the same questions when the
observations are sampled at random time intervals, which are an essential feature of transaction-level
data.
Yacine Aït-Sahalia Per A. Mykland
Bendheim Center for Finance Department of Statistics
Princeton University University of Chicago
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021 Chicago, IL 60637-1514
and NBER Mykland@galton.uchicago.edu
yacine@princeton.edu

The notion that the observed transaction price in high frequency financial data is the unobserv-
able efficient price plus some noise component due to the imperfections of the trading process is
a well established concept in the market microstructure literature (see for instance Black (1986)).
In this paper, we study the implications of such a data generating process for the estimation of
the parameters of the continuous-time efficient price process, using discretely sampled data on the
transaction price process. In particular, we focus on the effects of the presence of the noise for the
estimation of the variance of asset returns, σ2. In the absence of noise, it is well known that the
quadratic variation of the process (i.e., the average sum of squares of log-returns measured at high
frequency) estimates σ2. In theory, sampling as often as possible will produce in the limit a perfect
estimate of σ2. We show, however, that the situation changes radically in the presence of market
microstructure noise that is not taken into account in the analysis.
We start by asking whether it remains optimal to sample the price process as often as possible
in the presence of market microstructure noise, consistently with the basic statistical principle that,
ceteris paribus, more data is preferred to less. We show that, if noise is present but unaccounted
for, then the optimal sampling frequency is finite. The intuition for this result is as follows. The
volatilityoftheunderlyingefficientpriceprocessandthemarketmicrostructurenoisetendtobehave
differently at different frequencies. Thinking in terms of signal-to-noise ratio, a log-return observed
from transaction prices over a tiny time interval is mostly composed of market microstructure noise
andbringslittleinformationregardingthevolatilityofthepriceprocesssincethelatteris(atleastin
the Brownian case) proportional to the time interval separating successive observations. As the time
interval separating the two prices in the log-return increases, the amount of market microstructure
noise remains constant, since each price is measured with error, while the informational content of
volatility increases. Hence very high frequency data are mostly composed of market microstructure
noise, while the volatility of the price process is more apparent in longer horizon returns. Running
counter to this effect is the basic statistical principle mentioned above: in an idealized setting where
the data are observed without error, sampling more frequently cannot hurt. What we show is that
these two effects compensate each other and result in a finite optimal sampling frequency (in the
root mean squared error sense).
We then address the question of what to do about the presence of the noise. If, convinced by
either the empirical evidence and/or the theoretical market microstructure models, one decides to
account for the presence of the noise, how should one go about doing it? We show that modelling
1

the noise term explicitly restores the first order statistical effect that sampling as often as possible
is optimal. But, more surprisingly, we also demonstrate that this is true even if one misspecifies
the assumed distribution of the noise term. If the econometrician assumes that the noise terms are
normally distributed when in fact they are not, not only is it still optimal to sample as often as
possible (unlike the result when no allowance is made for the presence of noise), but the estimator
has the same variance as if the noise distribution had been correctly specified. Put differently,
attempts to include a noise term in the econometric analysis cannot do more harm than good. This
robustness result, we think, is a major argument in favor of incorporating the presence of the noise
when estimating continuous time models with high frequency financial data, even if one is unsure
about what is the true distribution of the noise term. Finally, we study the same questions when the
observationsaresampledat randomtime intervals, whichareanessentialfeature oftransaction-level
data.
Our results also have implications for the two parallel tracks that have developed in the recent
financial econometrics literature dealing with discretely observed continuous-time processes. One
strand of the literature has argued that estimation methods should be robust to the potential issues
arising in the presence of high frequency data and, consequently, be asymptotically valid without
requiring that the sampling interval ∆ separating successive observations tend to zero (see, e.g.,
Hansen and Scheinkman (1995), Aït-Sahalia (1996) and Aït-Sahalia (2002)). Another strand of the
literature has dispensed with that constraint, and the asymptotic validity of these methods requires
that ∆ tend to zero instead of or in addition to, an increasing length of time T over which these
observations are recorded (see, e.g., Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold, and Labys (2003), Bandi and
Phillips (2003) and Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard (2002)).
The first strand of literature has been informally warning about the potential dangers of using
high frequency financial data without accounting for their inherent noise (see e.g., page 529 of Aït-
Sahalia (1996)), and we propose a formal modelization of that phenomenon. The implications of our
analysisaremostsalientforthesecondstrandoftheliterature,whichispredicatedontheuseofhigh
frequency data but does not account for the presence of market microstructure noise. Our results
show that the properties of estimators basedonthe local sample pathpropertiesofthe process (such
as the quadratic variation to estimate σ2) change dramatically in the presence of noise, while at
the same time we suggest a robust approach to correcting for the presence of market microstructure
noise.
2