NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DEFLATION: PREVENTION AND CURE
Willem H. Buiter
Working Paper 9623
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9623
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2003
This paper is an extended version of the 2003 JSG Wilson Lecture in Economics, given at the University of
Hull, 5th February 2003, under the title “The return of deflation: What can central banks do?” I would like
to thank Anne Sibert for helpful comments and Toshiaki Sakatsume for able research assistance. The views
and opinions expressed are those of the author. They do not necessarily represent the views and opinions of
the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Willem H Buiter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given to the source.

Deflation: Prevention and Cure
Willem H. Buiter
NBER Working Paper No. 9623
April 2003
JEL No. E31, E62, E63, F41
ABSTRACT
After an absence of almost half a century, the spectre of deflation is once again haunting the
corridors of central banks and finance ministries in the industrial world. While preventing or
combating deflation poses some unique difficulties not present in preventing or combating inflation,
deflation can be prevented and, if it has taken hold, can be overcome, using conventional
instruments of monetary and fiscal policy. These include open market purchases of government
securities and monetary financing of government deficits caused by expansionary fiscal measures.
Base money-financed tax cuts or transfer payments n the mundane version of Friedman’s helicopter
drop of money n will always boost aggregate demand.
Unconventional monetary and fiscal measures are also available. These include open market
purchases of private and foreign securities, negative nominal interest rates (through a carry tax on
currency) and temporary tax measures aimed at shifting private consumption from the future to the
present, by tilting the intertemporal terms of trade. An example is a cut in VAT today coupled to the
credible commitment of a VAT increase in the future.
Deflation results from a combination of bad luck and poor economic management, including
the failure to coordinate monetary and fiscal policy. Sustained unwanted deflation is evidence of
policy failure. Both the knowledge and the tools exist to prevent unwanted deflation.
Willem H. Buiter
Chief Economist and Special Counselor to the President
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
One Exchange Square
London EC2A 2JN
UK
and NBER
willembuiter@whsmithnet.co.uk

Introduction
After an absence of almost half a century, the spectre of deflation is once again
haunting the corridors of central banks and finance ministries in the industrial world.
The great deflations of the 19th century and 1930’s made way for the post-World War
II era of persistent inflation - low to moderate in the advanced industrial countries,
moderate to high with occasional bursts of hyperinflation in developing countries,
transition countries and emerging markets. The recent renewed concern with
deflation is due in part to the historical association, at least during the interwar years,
of deflationary episodes with financial crises, recession, stagnation and even
depression. It is also prompted by the fear that in deflationary conditions, nominal
interest rates may come close to their lower bound of zero, at which point monetary
policy is thought to lose most if not all of its effectiveness.
I define deflation to be a sustained decline in the general price level of current
goods and services, that is, a persistently negative rate of inflation. In principle, the
price index is the ideal cost of living index. Real-world approximations include the
Consumer Price Index (CPI) in the US, the Retail Price Indexes (RPI, RPIX and
RPIY) in the UK and the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) in the EMU
area. For many practical and policy issues, the distinctions between these indices are
important. For the purpose of this paper, they are irrelevant.1
1 There is a widely held view that real-world price indices present us with systematically upward-
biased estimates of true inflation. This is important for issues ranging from cost-of-living indexation to
the choice of an appropriate inflation target by the monetary authority. For reasons of space I will not
consider these issues here. A Commission headed by Michael Boskin studied the CPI bias and
presented the results of its report on December 5, 1996. It concluded that that CPI inflation in the US
was likely to overestimate true inflation by about 1.0 percent to 2.0 percent per year. The sources of
this bias in CPI inflation identified by the Boskin Commission were: 1. Substitution bias (0.2 - 0.4
points per year); 2. Outlet bias (0.1 - 0.3 points); 3. Quality changes (0.2 - 0.6 points); 4. New products
(0.2 - 0.7 points); 5. Formula bias (0.3 - 0.4 points) (see Boskin et. al. [1996, 1997]). While not every
aspect of the methodology used by the Commission, or the magnitude of the bias it found, have been
universally accepted, there is widespread agreement that there was a significant upward bias. Changes
made since then by the Bureau of Labour Statistics have probably reduced the magnitude of the bias.
1

What is important is that deflation as used in this paper refers to a declining
general price level for current goods and services. It does not refer to asset price
deflation – a fall in the prices of existing stores of value, either real or financial. Asset
price movements are an important part of the transmission mechanism of monetary
and fiscal policy actions and other shocks. Asset price movements often complicate
the task of the monetary and fiscal authorities and prevent the simultaneous
achievement of price stability, full employment and balanced structure of production
and demand. Asset price deflation may at times precede, be associated with or even
cause downward movement in the general price level of goods and services. Asset
price deflation is, however, conceptually quite distinct from deflation in the sense
used in this paper.
The timing of the renewal of political concern with and scholarly interest in
deflation is not surprising. As shown in Figure 1, in Japan, the central bank discount
rate has been at 50bps or less since 1995, raising concern about the zero lower bound
on nominal interest rates, at least at the short end of the maturity spectrum. Japan is in
a protracted economic slump that started in 1992. Money wages have declined in four
of the past five years; the GDP deflator has declined in each of the past 5 years and
the CPI in four out of the past 5 years. Short nominal interest rates in Japan are near
zero.2
Figure 1 here
2
Percentage annual growth rates of nominal price and wage indices in Japan
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002*
Nominal -0.7 -1.2 0.5 -0.1 -1.2
Compensation**
GDP Deflator -0.1 -1.4 -2.1 -1.2 -1.0
CPI 0.7 -0.3 -0.7 -0.7 -1.1
Source: OECD [2002], Annex Table 12.
2