NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CONTINUING DANGERS OF DISINFORMATION
IN CORPORATE ACCOUNTING REPORTS
Edward J. Kane
Working Paper 9634
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9634
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2003
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2003 by Edward J. Kane. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given to the source.

Continuing Dangers of Disinformation in Corporate Accounting Reports
Edward J. Kane
NBER Working Paper No. 9634
April 2003
JEL No. G14, M4, K2
ABSTRACT
Insiders can artificially deflect the market prices of financial instruments from their full-information
or ‘inside value’ by issuing deceptive accounting reports. Incentive support for disinformational
activity comes through forms of compensation that allow corporate insiders to profit extravagantly
from temporary boosts in a firm’s accounting condition or performance. In principle, outside
auditing firms and other watchdog institutions help outside investors to identify and ignore
disinformation. In practice, accountants can and do earn substantial profits from credentialling
loophole-ridden measurement principles that conceal adverse developments from outside
stakeholders. Although the Sarbanes-Oxley Act now requires top corporate officials to affirm the
essential economic accuracy of any data their firms publish, officials of outside auditing firms are
not obliged to express reservations they may have about the fundamental accuracy of the reports
they audit. This asymmetry in obligations permits auditing firms to continue to be compensated for
knowingly and willfully certifying valuation and itemization rules that generate misleading reports
without fully exposing themselves to penalties their clients face for hiding adverse information. It
is ironic that what are called accounting ‘ethics’ fail to embrace the profession’s common-law duty
of assuring the economic meaningfulness of the statements that clients pay it to endorse.
Edward J. Kane
Department of Finance
Boston College
330A Fulton Hall
Chestnut Hill, MA 02167
and NBER
edward.kane@bc.edu

CONTINUING DANGERS OF DISINFORMATION IN CORPORATE
∗
ACCOUNTING REPORTS
Edward J. Kane
April 7, 2003
Children are repeatedly assured that honesty is the best policy. Reinforcing this
hopeful judgment, economists build models of market equilibrium in which honest firms
find ways to separate themselves from dishonest ones, helping customers and investors to
impose a “lemons discount” on the products and securities of opportunistic firms.
However, recurrent financial scandals and crises constitute strong evidence against the
applicability of the lemons model. Managers can and do increase their firm’s perceived
profitability by concealing unfavorable information, and watchdog information agents are
often fooled or persuaded to cooperate in the concealment.
An unremitting flood of accounting scams, Ponzi schemes, and corporate scandals
leads each new Congress to consider stronger controls on corporate wrongdoing.
Congress becomes involved because, when managers or watchdog information
professionals shirk their duties or act dishonestly, consequences accrue not only to
corporate stakeholders, but also to society at large.
This paper traces a major part of the problem to the flawed ethics of the
accounting profession. By designing and certifying reporting options that help troubled
firms and rogue managers to conceal adverse information from outside stakeholders, the
highly concentrated accounting industry manages to insulate from serious sanctions the
returns it can earn from cleverly abetting deceitful behavior.
∗
The author is Cleary Professor in Finance at Boston College. He is indebted to Richard C. Aspinwall, Bill
Bergman, Robert Eisenbeis, James Moser, and James Thomson for valuable comments on an earlier draft.
1

Our analysis stresses the weakness of social controls on interactions between the
governance systems that prevail within corporations and the ethical codes of accountants
and other external watchdog institutions. Although parties to acts of negligent
misrepresentation and fraud are subject to civil and criminal penalties, difficulties in
identifying, preventing, and punishing corrupt exchanges of value between managers and
accountants make it distressingly easy for these parties to conspire against trustful outside
stakeholders.
The more effectively the ethical norms, accounting standards, and corporate laws
of a given country control misrepresentation and questionable side payments, the more
reliable its financial information promises to be. Despite the passage of the Sarbanes-
Oxley Act of 2002, U.S. accounting rules remain riddled with safe-harbor loopholes.
These rules require auditors to confirm only that specified procedures are being followed
without having to express an opinion about the accuracy of the information being
transmitted. Standard-setting agents value safe-harbor loopholes as ways to limit
accountants’ professional obligations and their resulting exposure to civil and criminal
penalties. Corporate fraud, bribery, and illegal-gratuity statutes limit this exposure even
further by setting hard-to-prove standards for punishing deceitful reporting. Prosecutors
must establish a motivational link between the benefits managers and accountants may
exchange and the particular actions or decisions that generated them. Because clever
lawyers can always invent innocent rationalizations for accepting and delivering favors,
the burden of proof is inordinately heavy. To establish a corrupt motive requires either
that the accused stupidly fail to destroy highly incriminating records that investigators
2