NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
IDIOSYNCRATIC RISK AND THE
CREATIVE DESTRUCTION IN JAPAN
Yasushi Hamao
Jianping Mei
Yexiao Xu
Working Paper 9642
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9642
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2003
We would like to thank Stephen Brown, Jennifer Carpenter, Kalok Chan, Lewis Chan, Gregory Chow, John
Griffin, John Heaton, Jean Helwege, David Hirshleifer, Burton Hollifield, Douglas Joines, Andrew Karolyi,
Donna Keyser, Burton Malkiel, René Stulz, Jessica Wachter, Karen Wruck, Jeff Wurgler, and participants
at NBER Japan Project Meeting, 13th Annual Conference in Financial Economics and Accounting at
University of Maryland, and seminars at City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology, New York University, Ohio State University, University of Southern California for helpful
discussions and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Yasushi Hamao, Jianping Mei, and Yexiao Xu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including
©notice, is given to the source.

Idiosyncratic Risk and the Creative Destruction in Japan
Yasushi Hamao, Jianping Mei, and Yexiao Xu
NBER Working Paper No. 9642
April 2003
JEL No.G2
ABSTRACT
The dramatic rise and fall of the Japanese equity market provides a unique opportunity to examine
market-and firm-specific risks over different market conditions. The price behavior of Japanese
equities in the 1990s is found to resemble that of U.S. equities during the Great Depression. Both
show increasing market volatility and a prolonged large co-movement in equity prices. What is
unique about the Japanese case is the surprising fall in firm-level volatility and turnover in Japanese
stocks after its market crash in 1990. This large decrease in firm-level volatility may have impeded
Japan's capital formation process as it has become more difficult over the past decade for both
investors and managers to separate high quality from low quality firms. Using data on firm
performance fundamentals and corporate bankruptcies, we show that the fall in firm-level volatility
and turnover in Japanese stocks could be attributed to the sharp increase in earnings homogeneity
among Japanese firms and the lack of corporate restructuring.
Yasushi Hamao Jianping Mei Yexiao Xu
Marshall School of Business Stern School of Business School of Management
University of Southern California New York University University of Texas at Dallas
hamao@usc.edu jmei@stern.nyu.edu yexiaoxu@utdallas.edu

It was the best of times, it was the worst of times, it was the age of
wisdom, it was the age of foolishness, it was the spring of hope, it was
the winter of despair, we had everything before us, we had nothing
before us, we were all going direct to Heaven, we were all going direct
the other way. –Charles Dickens, “A Tale of Two Cities”
The chronic stagnation of the Japanese economy is a big puzzle. Once a shining
light for both developing and industrialized nations, it has now become a basket case for
bubble economies. Twelve years after its stock market bubble burst, a once mighty
country is still operating far below its potential productive capacity. While numerous
arguments have been advanced to explain the recent plight of the Japanese economy,
most have focused on lack of consumer demand, collapsing asset values, and non-
performing loans.1 This paper offers a unique perspective by studying the role of
Japanese equity markets. A comparison of the Japanese case to the U.S. market during
the Great Depression reveals important similarities and differences that may contribute to
our understanding of the prolonged economic stagnation in Japan. Specifically, while
there are great similarities in the market volatility and correlation structure of equities, the
behavior of firm-specific volatility of Japanese equities exhibits important differences.
Campbell, Lettau, Malkiel, and Xu (2001) were the first to provide a
comprehensive study of idiosyncratic risk for U.S. stocks. During the period from 1962
to 1997, they discovered a noticeable increase in firm-level volatility relative to market
volatility. Moreover, they found that all volatility measures (market, industry, and firm)
move together counter-cyclically in the U.S. In other words, firm-level volatility tends to
increase during a recession. In contrast to the U.S. experience, this paper reports a sharp
1 See for example, Krugman (1999).
2

reduction in firm-level volatility immediately following the Japanese market crash, and
an increase in market-wide volatility.
In order to understand the abnormal behavior of idiosyncratic risk in Japan, we
examine the impact of firm performance fundamentals as well as bankruptcy on firm-
level volatility. We find that fundamental performances of firms are tied more closely
together during the post-crash period. We also discover a positive correlation between
changes in aggregate firm-level volatility and corporate bankruptcies. There is some
circumstantial evidence that increasing bankruptcies after 1997 have led to higher firm-
level volatility. In addition, we find idiosyncratic volatility for firms with business group
affiliations is less responsive to economic conditions than that of firms without such
affiliations. All these results suggest that the sharp fall in firm-level volatility could be
due to group protection.
This anomalous behavior of firm-level volatility may help us understand the poor
performance of the Japanese economy over the last decade. Disaggregated volatility
measures could impact aggregate output in several ways.
First, macroeconomic models of “cleansing recessions,” such as those described
by Caballero and Hammour (1994) and Eden and Jovanovic (1994), emphasize the
impact of firm-level volatility on resource allocation during recession. A recession may
increase the arrival rate of information about management quality and thus increase
resource reallocation from low quality to high quality firms. Such resource reallocation
is enhanced in the U.S. because firm-level volatility moves counter-cyclically. To the
extent that Japanese market downturns are accompanied by a reduction in firm-level
3