NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANK TIES AND BOND MARKET ACCESS: EVIDENCE ON
INVESTMENT-CASH FLOW SENSITIVITY IN JAPAN
Patrick M. McGuire
Working Paper 9644
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9644
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2003
I would like to thank Gary Saxonhouse, Matthew Shapiro, Susanto Basu, and I. Serdar Dinc, all from the
University of Michigan. In addition, I received many helpful comments from Anil Kashyap and the
participants in the NBER/CEPR/Tokyo University CIRJE/EIJS Japan Project Meeting in Tokyo, Japan (Sept
13-14, 2002). I would also like to thank Fumio Hayashi from Tokyo University, for help with data
preparation, and the Ministry of Economy, Trade, and Industry in Japan and the Economics Department of
Tokyo University for use of their raw data. Any errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Patrick M. McGuire All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given to the source.

Bank Ties and Bond Market Access: Evidence on Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivity in Japan
Patrick M. McGuire
NBER Working Paper No. 9644
April 2003
JEL No. G3
ABSTRACT
The banking literature has established that banks can alleviate information asymmetries between
lenders and borrowers, while the Q literature has used cash flow sensitivity analysis to test whether
financing constraints hinder investment. This paper investigates whether bank ties in Japan were
costly for mature and healthy firms in the 1980's and 1990's, and whether banks continued to
facilitate investment once non-bank financing options became available. Using the explicit bond
issuing criteria to solve the endogenous firm-sorting problem, I measure the investment-cash flow
sensitivity of Japanese firms, and find it lowest for those firms known to have faced bond market
constraints. I then find that the spread in sensitivity was much larger for main bank client firms, once
bond market access is controlled for. This result, coupled with results on the relative profitability
and bond activity of bank-affiliated firms, is consistent with banks capturing the net benefits of
relationship lending during the period of bond market deregulation.
Patrick M. McGuire
Bank for International Settlements
Centralbahnplatz 2 CH-4002
Basel, Switzerland
patrick.mcguire@bis.org

1 Introduction
The relationship banking literature postulates that close bank ties can mitigate the asym-
metric information and moral hazard problems that afflict public capital markets. Related
with this, the Q literature has interpreted excessive correlation between a firm’s investment
and its internal net worth as evidence of financing constraints.1 Combining these literatures,
Hoshi, Kashyap, and Scharfstein (1991) (hereafter HKS91) investigate the investment-cash
flow sensitivity of bank affiliated and independent firms in Japan, and provide evidence that
strong ties helped to alleviate liquidity constraints. Since the Japanese asset market collapse,
a body of work has emerged which focuses on the associated costs of “main banking”. This
paper builds on this literature by examining the investment-cash flow sensitivity of Japanese
manufacturing firms, and uses the explicit bond issuing criteria in a simple test of whether
firms enjoyed positive net benefits from close bank ties in the 1980’s and 1990’s.
While many have shown that banks can act as effective firm monitors, bank dependence
may be costly to firms if banks use their market power to extract rents (Sharpe (1990)
and Rajan (1992)). If close bank ties are costly for mature and healthy firms, should we
still expect banks to facilitate investment? Do banks retain their ability to lower cash flow
sensitivity when outside financing options are introduced? Can exogenous changes in the
financing environment be used to determine which party enjoys the benefits of relationship
banking? This paper addresses these questions, and highlights the importance of properly
addressing endogenous firm-sorting issues in empirical investment-Q work.
The empirical work on cash flow sensitivity has struggled with the problem of isolating
financially constrained firms.2 Ideally, exogenous criteria indicative of financing constraints
should be used to sort firms before comparing sensitivity across groups. Often, however,
empirical work is forced to rely on behavioral characteristics which can lead to endogenous
sample selection problems. Japan is a natural place to address this issue both because of its
historical reliance on large domestic banks in corporate financing (the “Main Bank” system),
and because of the government regulation of the capital markets for much of the post war
period.3 Throughout the 1980s, firms had to meet explicit criteria set by the government in
1Fazzari, Hubbard and Petersen (1988), Oliner and Rudebusch (1992), Chirinko (1993), and Kaplan and
Zingales (1997).
2See Hubbard (1998) for discussion.
3Reviewing the Japanese Main Bank system, Aoki (1994) noted, “In postwar Japan, the main bank
system has been the main pillar of corporate monitoring and governance, compensating for the lack of more
2

ordertoissuebondsinthedomesticmarket. Thesebondcriteriacanbeexploitedinempirical
work to isolate constrained firms, and serve as a partial solution to the endogeneity problem.
Using these criteria, I first show that sensitivity was lowest for those firms that were
restricted from the bond market during the 1980’s, a result very much at odds with the
standard prediction in the Q literature. That is, the investment of firms known to have
faced capital market restrictions was less sensitive to measures of internal net worth than
that of firms with a wider range of financing options. This result survives several robustness
tests, including controls for negative observations as outlined in Allayannis and Mozumdar
(2001), and may indicate that sensitivity analysis is not an appropriate technique for iden-
tifying financing constraints. However, restricted firms were, by definition, bank-dependent,
meaning the results presented here are consistent with both established theory with HKS91.
As effective firm monitors, banks may have facilitated the efficient use of capital, and
helped firms to achieve and maintain their first-best investment path. On the other hand,
high monitoring costs may have meant that firms paid a premium for bank financing. In
a more sinister scenario, banks may have enjoyed information monopolies, or market power
from the remaining capital controls, that allowed them to extract rents through higher
interest rates, compensating balance requirements, or pressure to over-borrow (Weinstein
and Yafeh (1998)). This is of particular concern because of the gradual nature of bond
market deregulation; banks may have been able to capitalize on their market power over
firms that did not meet the bond criteria. Thus, the results introduced above do not provide
clear evidence on whether bank ties were a net benefit to firms. Sensitivity may have been
lower for restricted firms because they enjoyed better access to funding (from close banks),
but possibly with high “indirect” costs. Alternatively, sensitivity may have been driven by
artificially high loan flows if firms were pressured to borrow.
Splitting the sample using both a standard proxy for main bank affiliation and the bond
criteria sheds light on this issue. As in Hoshi et al. (1990b), this section implicitly hypoth-
esizes that if firms enjoyed a positive net benefit from close bank ties, sensitivity should be
lower for bank-affiliated firms, regardless of bond market access. In addition, there should
be some ex post observable difference in performance between affiliated and independent
firms that reflects the benefits of bank ties. If the net benefit accrued to banks (because
of high monitoring costs or rent extraction) then bond-eligible, main bank client firms may
arm’s-length market-oriented means such as the takeover mechanism, and probably obviating a need for
them to develop.”
3