NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE ROLE OF INFORMATION
IN DRIVING FDI FLOWS:
HOST-COUNTRY TRANSPARENCY AND
SOURCE-COUNTRY SPECIALIZATION
Ashoka Mody
Assaf Razin
Efraim Sadka
Working Paper 9662
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9662
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2003
We wish to thank Benjamin Bental, Marc Bils, Richard Baldwin, Richard Cooper, Elhanan Helpman, Lance
Lochner, Prakash Loungani, and Dani Rodrik for useful comments and suggestions. Special thanks are due
to Ariel Burstein who provided us with an illuminating numerical example. Young Kim provided excellent
research assistance. Assaf Razin and Efraim Sadka also acknowledge the sponsorship of the European
Commission’s RTN project “The Analysis of International Capital Markets: Understanding Europe’s Role
in the Global Economy.” The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Ashoka Mody, Assaf Razin, and Efraim Sadka.. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including
©notice, is given to the source.

The Role of Information in Driving FDI Flows:
Host-Country Transparency and Source Country Specialization
Ashoka Mody, Assaf Razin, and Efraim Sadka
NBER Working Paper No. 9662
April 2003
JEL No. F2
ABSTRACT
We develop a simple information-based model of FDI flows. On the one hand, the abundance of
"intangible" capital in specialized industries in the source countries, which presumably generates
expertise in screening investment projects in the host countries, enhances FDI flows. On the other
hand, host-country corporate-transparency diminishes the value of this expertise, thereby reducing
the flow of FDI. Empirical evidence (from a sample of 12 source countries and 45 host countries
over the 1980s and 1990s) analyzed in a gravity-equation model, provides support to the theoretical
hypotheses.
The model also demonstrates that the gains for the host country from foreign direct investment [over
foreign portfolio investment (FPI)] are reflected in a more efficient size of the stock of domestic
capital and its allocation across firms. These gains are shown to depend crucially (and positively)
on the degree of competition among FDI investors.
Ashoka Mody Assaf Razin
International Monetary Fund Eitan Berglas School of Economics
amody@imf.org Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv 69978
ISRAEL
and NBER
razin@post.tau.ac.il
Efraim Sadka
Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv 69978
ISRAEL
sadk@post.tau.ac.il

- 2 -
The model also demonstrates that the gains for the host country from foreign direct
investment [over foreign portfolio investment (FPI)] are reflected in a more efficient size of
the stock of domestic capital and its allocation across firms. These gains are shown to depend
crucially (and positively) on the degree of competition among FDI investors.
I. INTRODUCTION
Foreign direct investment (FDI) has been growing faster than world GDP, and is becoming a
major component of foreign investment.2 We usually observe both one-way flows of FDI,
from developed to developing economies, and two-way flows among developed economies.
The purpose of this paper is to explore some unique features of foreign direct investment
(FDI) associated with host-country transparency and source-country specialization, that make
this form of foreign investment stand out among the various forms of capital flows, such as
foreign portfolio investment (FPI).
From empirical data (a sample of 12 source countries and 45 host countries over the 1980s
and the 1990s) we identify two main categories of variables that help explain FDI inflows.
First, we uncover a positive correlation between industry specialization in the source
countries and FDI flows into the host countries. Second, we find that countries with higher
quality of corporate transparencies, and stronger credit-market institutions, attract less FDI
inflows.
2 See the Australian Productivity Commission (2002) for a recent case study.

- 3 -
We incorporate these new theoretical considerations in a gravity model of capital flows. Such
models have proved useful in explaining bilateral trade flows and, more recently, cross-
border equity flows (Portes and Rey, 2000 and Portes, Rey and Oh, 2001). There have been
some initial explorations of the determinants of FDI in gravity models (Wei, 2000), but the
focus has not been on the role of corporate-governance information, as we do here.
We first develop a simple information-based model, consistent with the empirical findings
concerning specialization and transparency. We interpret the industry specialization in the
source country as providing a comparative advantage to the potential foreign direct investors,
in eliciting good investment opportunities in the host country, relative to domestic investors
and foreign portfolio investors in the host country. The advantage stems, for instance, from
the ability of FDI investors to apply better industry-specific micro-management standards (an
“intangible capital”). This element is captured in our model by assuming a lower cost for
foreign direct investors of cream-skimming high-productivity firms than their domestic
counterparts. The advantage of FDI investors in their cream-skimming skills is less
pronounced when corporate transparency and capital market institutions are of high quality;
in which case FDI inflows are less abundant.3
Our model also suggests that the gains from FDI to the host country are reflected in a more
efficient size of the stock of domestic capital and its allocation across firms. Domestic firms
that are controlled by FDI investors are typically the “cream" (high-productivity firms). The
3 See also Razin and Sadka (2003).