NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO ALL NETWORKS FACILITATE
INTERNATIONAL COMMERCE?
US LAW FIRMS AND THE INTERNATIONAL
MARKET FOR CORPORATE CONTROL
Simon J. Evenett
Working Paper 9663
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9663
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2003
I thank participants at the NBER-CEPR-TCER-RIETI conference for their comments and suggestions and
am especially grateful to Kyoji Fukao, Jim Harrigan, Takeo Hoshi, Stephen Redding, John Ries, and David
Weinstein. Jim Rauch also provided neat comments on a previous version of this paper. My understanding
of the determinants and regulation of cross-border mergers and acquisitions has been immeasurably improved
by discussions with senior American antitrust practitioners and current and former officials, in particular Bill
Kolasky, Bill Kovacic, Jim Rill, Doug Rosenthal, Charles Stark, and Randy Tritell. All remaining errors
should of course be attributed to me. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Simon J. Evenett. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given to the source.

Do all networks facilitate international commerce? US law firms and
the international market for corporate control
Simon J. Evenett
NBER Working Paper No. 9663
April 2003
JEL No. F2, L4
ABSTRACT
This paper estimates the effects of several American law firms’ international networks of offices on
the total value of overseas mergers and acquisitions (M&A) by US corporations. Nowadays many
nations can review proposed mergers and US law firms help clients overcome such regulatory
hurdles, effectively greasing the market for corporate control. However, they can also oppose
transactions that are inimical to their clients’ interests. I present evidence that suggests that Baker
& McKenzie—the US law firm with the most overseas offices—has facilitated such transactions,
whereas the combined effect of the next five largest American law firms has tended to reduce such
M&A.
Simon J. Evenett
World Trade Institute
University of Bern and CEPR
Hallerstrasse 6
Bern
Switzerland
simon.evenett@worldtradeinstitute.ch

1. Introduction
In recent years there has been considerable interest in the means by which
groups of market participants interact so as to facilitate various forms of
international commerce. Particular emphasis has been given in this research
program to mechanisms to locate potential buyers and sellers and to overcome
contract enforcement problems (Rauch, 2002; and Rauch and Casella,
forthcoming). Given the considerable growth in international trade flows since
1985, especially in the pan-Pacific region where Chinese business groups
operate extensively, it is perhaps not surprising that research into such
mechanisms has gathered pace (see, for example, Rauch and Trindade, 2002.)
The late 1990s witnessed a surge in one form of international commerce that has
received considerably less attention from international economists: a global wave
of mergers and acquisitions (M&A).2 What is more, since the 1980s—that is, well
before the latest M&A wave—leading law firms have been expanding their
presence outside their home jurisdictions, creating networks of legal
professionals to advise corporations as they take advantage of the opportunities
afforded by the current era of international market integration. This paper
explores whether there is a connection between these two phenomena; that is,
whether the formation of such global law firms has helped contribute to overseas
US M&A activity during 1999, one of the boom years in the latest wave of cross-
border M&A.
The causal links between the presence of global legal networks and transactions
in the international market for corporate assets are potentially different from
those traditionally emphasized in studies of international trade flows; the latter
stressing the roles of search costs, asymmetries of information, and contract
enforcement costs. A feature of transactions in the market for corporate control is
2 See, however, Evenett (2003) for a detailed overview of the composition and scale of this
international wave of M&A; and an econometric analysis of the impact of such transactions on the
banking spreads in selected OECD nations.
2

that purchases and sales of firms often involve review by and approval by
national competition or antitrust authorities. These review processes not only
erect a potential barrier to M&A transactions but they also create demand for the
very services of intermediaries—such as law firms and economic
consultancies—whose actions may influence the outcome of these official
investigations.
In a multi-country world a merger of two firms may require the approval of many
national authorities. For example, the merger between Price Waterhouse and
Coopers and Lybrand, announced on September 17, 1997, required approval in
the United States, by the European Commission, in Canada, Australia, New
Zealand, and Switzerland—to name some, and by no means all, of the
jurisdictions involved (Kolasky, 2000). Law firms with a global imprint can and do
help clients to obtain clearances from national antitrust authorities for mergers
and takeovers with international ramifications. Familiarity with both the clients
needs and with numerous national merger review procedures are the means by
which global law firms can add grease to the international market for corporate
assets.
Another feature of merger review procedures is that some jurisdictions appear to
give rival firms greater opportunities to present evidence against a proposed
merger than others. It is often claimed that the European Commission’s merger
review procedure gives opponents to a proposed merger a greater role than in
comparable U.S. proceedings (Boeder, 2000; Venit and Kolasky, 2000); a point
that was made with particular force by some in the aftermath of the European
Commission’s decisions on the proposed Boeing-McDonnell Douglas and
General Electric-Honeywell mergers. To the extent that this is true, global law
firms can throw sand into the wheels of this form of international commerce by
presenting evidence against proposed transactions that are inimical to their
3