NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO DEMOGRAPHIC CHANGES AFFECT RISK PREMIUMS?
EVIDENCE FROM INTERNATIONAL DATA
Andrew Ang
Angela Maddaloni
Working Paper 9677
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9677
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2003
We are grateful to John Donaldson and Paolo Siconolfi for helpful discussions and suggestions. We thank
Geert Bekaert, Philip Davis, John Fell, Hans-Joachim Klöckers, Cam Harvey, Jim Poterba, Abigail Tay, and
seminar participants at Columbia University for helpful comments. We thank Francesca Di Iorio for providing
most of the population data and Alan Taylor for the macroeconomic data. We are grateful to an anonymous
referee for providing very helpful comments. This paper represents the authors’ personal opinions and does
not necessarily reflect the views of the European Central Bank. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Andrew Ang and Angela Maddaloni. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given
to the source.

Do Demographic Changes Affect Risk Premiums? Evidence from International Data
Andrew Ang and Angela Maddaloni
NBER Working Paper No. 9677
May 2003
JEL No. G12, G15, J10, P46
ABSTRACT
We examine the link between equity risk premiums and demographic changes using a very long
sample over the twentieth century for the US, Japan, UK, Germany and France, and a shorter sample
covering the last third of the twentieth century for fifteen countries. We find that demographic
variables significantly predict excess returns internationally. However, the demographic
predictability found in the US by past studies for the average age of the population does not extend
to other countries. Pooling international data, we find that, on average, faster growth in the fraction
of retired persons significantly decreases risk premiums. This demographic predictability of risk
premiums is strongest in countries with well-developed social security systems and lesser-developed
financial markets.
Andrew Ang Angela Maddaloni
Columbia Business School European Central Bank
805 Uris Hall Kaiserstrasse 29, D-60311
3022 Broadway Frankfurt am Main
New York, NY 10027 Germany
and NBER angela.maddaloni@ecb.int
aa610@columbia.edu

1 Introduction
During the 1990’s, the baby boom generation (those born roughly in the two decades fol-
lowingWorldWarII)entereditspeaksavingsyears. Individualsagedbetween40and60years
old are the prime savers of the economy in the US and this age class is projected to rise until
roughly2010andthendecline. Severaltheoreticalmodelshavearguedthatthebabyboomgen-
eration was a contributing factor to the high stock returns and the large increase in stock prices
observed from 1990 to 1999.1 Some, such as Abel (2001b), argue that as the baby boomers
retire, asset prices are likely to fall. Thus, understanding the effect the baby boomer cohort
has on current and future asset returns is important for economic policy, social planning and
social welfare issues. In this paper, we investigate the link between equity risk premiums and
demographicchangesinseveralcountries. Wecontributetothedebateonexpectedreturnsand
demographyinanumberofways.
First, we construct long data samples covering most of the twentieth century for the largest
fivedevelopedcountries(France,Germany,Japan,UKandUS).IntheUS,therehasbeenonly
onebabyboomshockinthepast40years,buttherehavebeendemographicchangesthroughout
the whole twentieth century. Linking the increase in asset prices in the US with only the high
returnsinthe1990’smaycorrespondtoonlyone,non-representative,observation. Focusingon
thisoneobservationopensupthepossibilityofdataminingregardinginferenceofdemographic
predictability of expected returns. Moreover, since demography is a slowly evolving variable,
testingforlow-frequencychangesinexpectedreturnsshouldbedonewithlongtime-series.
We use three explanatory variables to summarize dynamic demographic composition: the
average age of the population above 20 years old, the fraction of adults over age 65, and the
proportionofthepopulationintheworkingages20-64. Whilelevelsofthesevariablesarequite
highlycorrelatedacrosscountries,changesinthesedemographicmeasuresandaveragereturns
across the G5 countries are lowly correlated, so observing population changes and expected
returnsinthesemarketsgivesextrainformationwhicheffectivelyincreasesoursamplesize.
Second,weconstructafairlylargecross-sectionalsampleof15countries,coveringmostof
the developed markets, similar to Erb, Harvey and Viskanta (1997). This data covers the last
third of the twentieth century. While this second data set is much shorter, it provides a large
sampleofcross-sectionalvariationindemographicexperienceandexpectedreturns.
1Mankiw and Weil (1989) make a similar argument trying to explain the rise of real estate prices in the late
1970’sandearly1980’s.
1

Third, we use an econometric framework which adjusts for overlapping observations and
heteroskedasticity by using Hodrick (1992) standard errors. These standard errors have good
small sample properties and account for the moving average structure induced by using over-
lapping observations when looking at long-horizon returns (see Hodrick 1992; and Ang and
Bekaert 2001). Using standard OLS, Newey-West (1987) or Hansen-Hodrick (1980) standard
errors to judge predictability, especially over long horizons, may cause severe size biases. In
particular, improper inference leads to over-rejection of the null hypothesis of constant ex-
pectedreturns. Ifcorrectinferenceismadeusingappropriatestandarderrors,thereisnoreason
to restrict the data to be non-overlapping. Thus, our analysis uses all the available data, for
most efficient estimation and most powerful tests. In contrast, Poterba (2001) uses 5-year non-
overlapping returns. We test predictability of the risk premium over horizons of 1 year, 2 years
and5years.
Finally, we pool the cross-sectional information of both our long time-series over the G5
countriesandourlargersampleof15countriestojointlyestimatethepredictabilitycoefficients.
In this procedure, we specify each country to have its own (constant) expected return as the
null hypothesis. We use the cross-sectional data to estimate the demographic predictability
coefficientsoverseveral horizons, and conduct statistical inference with heteroskedastic-robust
standarderrors. Indeed,poolingthecross-sectionaldatasignificantlyincreasesstatisticalpower.
We find that demographic changes do indeed predict risk premiums internationally. How-
ever, the particular relationship between changes in average age and risk premiums in the US,
which Bakshi and Chen (1994) and others find, is unique to the US and is not replicated in
other countries. While changes in the average age of the population have no forecasting power
in international data, the change in the proportion of retired adults is a significant predictor of
excess returns. However, unlike the US experience, increases in the retired proportion of the
population,asafractionofthetotaladultpopulation, decreaseexcessreturns.
This result is somewhat surprising since retired people must finance their consumption en-
tirely from financial wealth. Equities have larger aggregate risk, so the extant class of standard
overlappinggenerations(OLG)models(forexample,seeConstantinides,DonaldsonandMehra
2002), predict that retirees should diversify their holdings and hold largely risk-free assets. In
OLG models, when larger proportions of agents retire, they dis-save, and sell their assets not
bequeathed to the next generation to fund their consumption. If these agents affect asset prices
bysellingtheirassets,assetpriceswouldbepusheddownandexpectedreturnswouldincrease.
2