NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RISK AVERSION, LIABILITY RULES, AND SAFETY
Joshua Graff Zivin
Richard Just
David Zilberman
Working Paper 9678
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9678
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2003
We would like to thank Sherry Glied and Art Small for numerous helpful discussions. The opinions expressed
in this paper are those of the authors alone. Joshua Graff Zivin is Assistant Professor, Department of Health
Policy and Management, Mailman School of Public Health, and International Center for Health Outcomes
and Innovation Research, Columbia University and NBER. Richard Just is Distinguished University
Professor, Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics, University of Maryland. David Zilberman
is Professor, Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics, University of California, Berkeley. Please
address all correspondence to: Joshua Graff Zivin, Joseph L. Mailman School of Public Health Columbia
University, Department of Health Policy and Management, 600 West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2003 by Joshua Graff Zivin, Richard Just, and David Zilberman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including
©notice, is given to the source.

Risk Aversion, Liability Rules, and Safety
Joshua Graff Zivin, Richard Just, and David Zilberman
NBER Working Paper No. 9678
May 2003
JEL No. D8, K0, Q2
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates the performance of liability rules in two-party stochastic externality
problems where negotiations are feasible and side payments are based on the realized level of
externalities. Results show that an increase in polluter liability does not necessarily increase safety
or efficiency in cases where the polluter is risk neutral. Complete polluter liability is found to yield
Pareto optimality. When either party is risk averse, an increase in polluter liability may sometimes
reduce safety and efficiency. If the polluter is risk neutral and the victim is risk averse, Pareto
optimality is only achieved by assigning full liability on the polluter, i.e. giving the victim complete
property rights to a clean environment. If the polluter is risk averse and the victim is risk neutral,
no level of polluter liability is optimal. In this case, optimality can only be achieved through a
contract on abatement activities, such that the risk-averse polluter receives a guaranteed payment
regardless of the stochastic outcome.
Richard Just
Joshua Graff Zivin
Department of Health Policy and Management Department of Agricultural
Columbia University and Resource Economics
600 West 168th St. #608 University of Maryland
New York, NY 10032 College Park, MD 20742
and NBER rjust@umd.edu
jz126@columbia.edu
David Zilberman
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics
207 Giannini Hall # 3310
Berkeley CA 94720-3310
zilber@are.berkeley.edu

Risk Aversion, Liability Rules, and Safety
I. Introduction
It is generally agreed that, when externalities exist, the competitive price mechanism does not
yield a Pareto-optimal resource allocation. The Pigouvian tax has been the traditionally prescribed
remedy to external pollution problems (see Baumol and Oates; and Mishan). In a seminal paper,
however, Ronald Coase described an alternative means to control externalities --one especially
relevant for cases where the number of decision makers involved is small. Coase claimed that a
competitive system with well-defined property right assignments, perfect information, and zero
transaction costs would attain Pareto optimality through a process of voluntary bargaining and side
payments. In his words: “It is necessary to know whether the damaging business is liable for
damage caused since without the establishment of this initial delimitation of rights there can be no
market transaction to transfer and recombine them. But the ultimate result (which maximizes the
value of production) is independent of the legal position if the pricing system is assumed to work
without cost” (see Coase [1960, p. 8]).
Coase's work has spawned a wide body of literature in both the economics of law and the
environment (e.g. Farrell; DeSerpa; Medema). With rare exception, these literatures have
examined externalities in a deterministic setting. In a practical sense, however, pollution problems
are often stochastic with externalities depending on random forces such as human error, weather, or
other natural phenomena. Indeed, many of the cases described in the seminal externality literature
were stochastic in nature. For example, the foundry-laundry case discussed by Pigou described a
situation where pollution occurs only when the wind is blowing in a certain direction. Similarly,
Stigler described a case where contamination of a stream kills fish depending on flow rates
3

affecting dissolution and dispersion. Moreover, some of the most spectacular environmental
disasters – the nuclear meltdown at Chernobyl and the plant explosion at Bhopal – have been the
result of random events, not consistent and predictable ones.
This stochasticity is important for two reasons. First, when pollution is stochastic, the victim
cannot necessarily infer polluter action, thus inhibiting their ability to contract on pollution
abatement or prevention activities. The departure from the assumption of determinism makes
information asymmetries between polluter and victim more likely. In this case, victims may be
limited to contracts on realized damages or be forced to engage in expensive monitoring that may
allow them to contract on the polluter activities that contribute to victim damages. Second,
stochastic pollution problems mean at least one agent involved in the Coasean bargain will have a
stochastic income stream, suggesting an important role for risk preferences. Given wide variations
in the wealth and size of agents that generate and suffer from pollution, agents are likely to differ in
their ability and willingness to shoulder risk. These heterogeneous risk preferences will, of course,
manifest themselves in equilibrium contracts.
This latter issue of risk preferences has received some attention in the economics literature.
Greenwood and Ingene constructed a model where both parties have full information and therefore
are able to employ nonstochastic side-payment schemes, which depend on variables that affect the
distribution of pollution (in their case, these variables are the output levels of both parties). They
demonstrate that the Coase result – the invariance of pollution levels to the assignment of property
rights – holds if both parties are risk neutral, but does not under risk aversion. Graff Zivin and
Small expand upon this single-case result by deriving a contract curve that describes all possible
equilibria as function of the initial allocation of property rights, agents relative bargaining power,
and risk preferences. They demonstrate that the Coase theorem obtains only if both agents have the
4