NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF
THE GENERAL STRUCTURE OF THE LAW
Steven Shavell
Working Paper 9699
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9699
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2003
Research support from the John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and Business is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Steven Shavell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given to the source.

Economic Analysis of the General Structure of the Law
Steven Shavell
NBER Working Paper No. 9699
May 2003
JEL No. D00, D8, K00, H00
ABSTRACT
This paper contains a chapter on the general structure of the law from a forthcoming book,
Foundations of Economic Analysis of Law (Harvard University Press, 2003). In this chapter, I
consider basic features of the legal system, including whether the law directly constrains behavior
or channels it by the threat of sanctions, and whether the law is brought into play by private legal
action or involves public enforcement. I investigate the conditions under which one or another
structure of law will be socially desirable, and I then discuss tort, contract, criminal law, and several
other areas of law in the light of the analysis of the optimal structure of the law.
Steven Shavell
Harvard Law School
1575 Massachusetts Avenue
Hauser Hall 508
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
shavell@law.harvard.edu

Table of Contents
Economic Analysis of the General Structure of the Law
(part of Foundations of Economic Analysis of Law)
Chapter 25. The General Structure of Legal Intervention and Its Optimality
1. Fundamental Dimensions of Legal Intervention
2. Optimal Structure of Legal Intervention
3. Optimal Structure of Legal Intervention Illustrated
4. Remarks: Incompleteness of Analysis

Summary Table of Contents
Economic Analysis of the General Structure of the Law
(part of Foundations of Economic Analysis of Law)
Chapter 1. Introduction
Part One. Property Law
Chapter 2. Definition, Justification, and Emergence of Property Rights
Chapter 3. Division of Property Rights
Chapter 4. Acquisition and Transfer of Property
Chapter 5. Conflict and Cooperation in the Use of Property: The Problem of Externalities
Chapter 6. Public Property
Chapter 7. Property Rights in Information
Part Two. Accident Law
Chapter 8. Liability and Deterrence: Basic Theory
Chapter 9. Liability and Deterrence: Firms
Chapter 10. Extensions of the Analysis of Deterrence
Chapter 11. Liability, Risk-bearing, and Insurance
Chapter 12. Liability and Administrative Costs
Part Three. Contract Law
Chapter 13. Overview of Contracts
Chapter 14. Contract Formation
Chapter 15. Production Contracts
Chapter 16. Other Types of Contract
Part Four. Litigation and the Legal Process
Chapter 17. Basic Theory of Litigation
Chapter 18. Extensions of the Basic Theory
Chapter 19. General Topics on the Legal Process
Part Five. Public Law Enforcement and Criminal Law
Chapter 20. Deterrence with Monetary Sanctions
Chapter 21. Deterrence with Nonmonetary Sanctions
Chapter 22. Extensions of the Theory of Deterrence
Chapter 23. Incapacitation, Rehabilitation, and Retribution
Chapter 24. Criminal Law
Part Six. General Structure of the Law
Chapter 25. The General Structure of Legal Intervention and Its Optimality
Part Seven. Welfare Economics, Morality, and the Law
Chapter 26. Welfare Economics and Morality
Chapter 27. Implications for the Analysis of Law
Chapter 28. Income Distributional Equity and the Law
Chapter 29. Concluding Observations about the Economic Analysis of Law