NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF
PUBLIC LAW ENFORCEMENT
AND CRIMINAL LAW
Steven Shavell
Working Paper 9698
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9698
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2003
Research support from the John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and Business is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Steven Shavell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given to the source.

Economic Analysis of Public Law Enforcement and Criminal Law
Steven Shavell
NBER Working Paper No. 9698
May 2003
JEL No. D00, D8, K00, K14, K32, K42, L5, H00
ABSTRACT
This paper contains the chapters on public enforcement of law and on criminal law from a
general, forthcoming book, Foundations of Economic Analysis of Law (Harvard University Press,
2003). By public law enforcement is meant the use of public law enforcement agents -- such as
police, tax inspectors, regulatory personnel -- to enforce legal rules. A number of important
dimensions of public law enforcement may be distinguished. One is the choice of the basic rule of
liability: whether liability is strict or fault-based, and whether liability is imposed only if harm is
done or may be imposed on the basis of acts alone (independently of the occurrence of harm). A
second dimension of enforcement is the type of sanction, whether monetary or nonmonetary,
notably, imprisonment. A third aspect of enforcement is the magnitude of sanctions. And a fourth
dimension of enforcement is the degree of enforcement effort, which determines the probability of
imposition of sanctions.
These dimensions of enforcement are discussed in the chapters that follow. In chapter 20,
the basic theory of public enforcement employing monetary sanctions is discussed; in chapter 21,
the basic theory of enforcement using nonmonetary sanctions is examined; and in chapter 22,
extensions to the basic theory are considered.
Then, in chapter 23, functions of sanctions apart from deterrence, namely, incapacitation,
rehabilitation, and retribution, are discussed. Finally, in chapter 24, the subject of criminal law
is addressed against the background of the theory of public enforcement of law.
Steven Shavell
Harvard Law School
1575 Massachusetts Avenue
Hauser Hall 508
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
shavell@law.harvard.edu

Table of Comments
Economic Analysis of Public Law Enforcement and Criminal Law
Chapter 20. Deterrence with Monetary Sanctions
1. Certain Enforcement: Basic Theory of Liability
2. Law Enforcement with a Probability: The Optimal Probability and Magnitude of
Sanctions
3. Synopsis
Chapter 21. Deterrence with Nonmonetary Sanctions
1. Certain Enforcement with Nonmonetary Sanctions: Basic Theory of Liability
2. The Optimal Probability and Magnitude of Nonmonetary Sanctions
3. When Nonmonetary Sanctions Are Optimal to Employ
4. Joint Use of Nonmonetary and Monetary Sanctions
5. Different Types of Nonmonetary Sanctions
Chapter 22. Extensions of the Theory of Deterrence
1. Individual Deterrence
2. Marginal Deterrence
3. Costs of Imposing Monetary Sanctions
4. Self-Reporting of Violations
5. General Enforcement
6. Insurance against Sanctions
7. Sanctions for Repeat Offenders
Chapter 23. Incapacitation, Rehabilitation, and Retribution
1. Incapacitation
2. Rehabilitation
3. Retribution
Chapter 24. Criminal Law
1. Description of the Criminal Law
2. Explanation for Criminal Law
3. Optimal Use of Imprisonment Reviewed
4. Principles of Criminal Law

Summary Table of Contents of
Foundations of Economic Analysis of Law
(forthcoming 2003, Harvard University Press)
Chapter 1. Introduction
Part One. Property Law
Chapter 2. Definition, Justification, and Emergence of Property Rights
Chapter 3. Division of Property Rights
Chapter 4. Acquisition and Transfer of Property
Chapter 5. Conflict and Cooperation in the Use of Property: The Problem of Externalities
Chapter 6. Public Property
Chapter 7. Property Rights in Information
Part Two. Accident Law
Chapter 8. Liability and Deterrence: Basic Theory
Chapter 9. Liability and Deterrence: Firms
Chapter 10. Extensions of the Analysis of Deterrence
Chapter 11. Liability, Risk-bearing, and Insurance
Chapter 12. Liability and Administrative Costs
Part Three. Contract Law
Chapter 13. Overview of Contracts
Chapter 14. Contract Formation
Chapter 15. Production Contracts
Chapter 16. Other Types of Contract
Part Four. Litigation and the Legal Process
Chapter 17. Basic Theory of Litigation
Chapter 18. Extensions of the Basic Theory
Chapter 19. General Topics on the Legal Process
Part Five. Public Law Enforcement and Criminal Law
Chapter 20. Deterrence with Monetary Sanctions
Chapter 21. Deterrence with Nonmonetary Sanctions
Chapter 22. Extensions of the Theory of Deterrence
Chapter 23. Incapacitation, Rehabilitation, and Retribution
Chapter 24. Criminal Law
Part Six. General Structure of the Law
Chapter 25. The General Structure of Legal Intervention and Its Optimality
Part Seven. Welfare Economics, Morality, and the Law
Chapter 26. Welfare Economics and Morality
Chapter 27. Implications for the Analysis of Law
Chapter 28. Income Distributional Equity and the Law
Chapter 29. Concluding Observations about the Economic Analysis of Law