NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANK INTEGRATION AND
STATE BUSINESS CYCLES
Donald P. Morgan
Bertrand Rime
Philip E. Strahan
Working Paper 9704
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9704
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2003
The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the position of the Swiss National
Bank, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, or the Federal Reserve System. We thank Jean Tirole for his
comments and Paul Edelstein and Shana Wang for their research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Philip E. Strahan, Donald P. Morgan, and Bertrand Rime. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit
including ©notice, is given to the source.

Bank Integration and State Business Cycles
Donald P. Morgan, Bertrand Rime, and Philip E. Strahan
NBER Working Paper No. 9704
May 2003
JEL No. G2
ABSTRACT
We investigate how the better integration of U.S. banks across states has affected economic
volatility within states. In theory, the link between bank integration and volatility is ambiguous;
integration tends to dampen the impact of bank capital shocks on state activity, but it amplifies the
impact of firm collateral shocks. Empirically, the net effect has been stabilizing as year-to-year
fluctuations in employment growth within states fall as that state's banks become better integrated
(via holding companies) with banks in other states. The magnitudes are large, and the effects are
most pronounced in states with relatively undiversified economies. Consistent with our model, we
find the link between economic growth and bank capital within a state weakens with integration,
whereas the link between growth and housing prices (a possible proxy for firm capital) tends to
increase.
Donald Morgan Bertrand Rime
Research Department Swiss National Bank
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Börsenstr. 15, Postfach
33 Liberty Street 8022 Zürich
New York, NY 10045 rime@snb.ch
don.morgan@ny.frb.org
Philip Strahan
Carroll School of Management
Boston College
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
philip.strahan@bc.edu

2
I. Introduction
The United States once had essentially 50 little banking systems, one per state.
States themselves limited geographic expansion with laws blocking entry by banks
headquartered in other states. Once states began opening their borders to out-of-state
banks in the late 1970s, our many systems began rapidly converging toward a more
national banking system dominated by very large holding companies operating banks in
many states (Map). U.S. banks are not just getting bigger as they consolidate; they are
also getting wider. This other dimension of bank consolidation—geographic
integration—has been largely neglected by researchers, hence our paper.
Under the segregated regime, the fate of a state and its banks were closely tied; as
went the states, so went the banks. Farm price deflation in the early 1980s bankrupted
many farmers and many farm banks. Falling oil prices in the mid-80s wiped out a lot of
Texans and a lot Texas banks. While the price drops probably precipitated these crises,
our maintained premise is that the associated loss of collateral by firms and the loss of
capital at banks prolonged and deepened crises, and that integration--allowing banks to
enter and exit states--should alter the feedback between real and financial shocks.
As a starting point for thinking about those effects, we work through an extended
version of the banking model in Holmstrom and Tirole (HT,1997). Bankers in that model
both prevent moral hazard—by monitoring firms—and they commit moral hazard—by
neglecting to monitor. Because of these hazards or frictions, equilibrium investment in
an economy depends on the level of firm collateral and bank capital; these seemingly
backward-looking variables give firms and bankers a stake in future investment
outcomes, and that keeps them honest. Negative shocks to either firm collateral or bank
2

3
capital cause investment to contract. We add a second (physical) state to the HT model,
then investigate how interstate banking alters the impact of these shocks. Both are still
contractionary, but the magnitudes change: bank capital shocks in state A have a smaller
impact with interstate banking, but the impact of collateral shocks gets bigger. The
derivatives are complicated functions of the frictions in the model, but the logic is
straightforward: a holding company that operating in two states can import capital to state
A if lending opportunities there are still good, but a collateral shock in state A will lead
the holding company to export capital and lending away from that state. In essence,
interstate banking immunizes states against bank capital shocks, but exposes them to
collateral shocks.
Rather than trying to identify these effects separately (the econometric equivalent
of laser surgery), we first investigate whether the net impact of integration has made state
economies more or less stable.1 Table 1 suggests the answer. As states’ banking systems
integrated, the state-specific variation in employment, variation that can be not be
attributed either to aggregate business cycles or to differences in average growth across
states, fell. Volatility in each state declines by more than one-half, from 2.4% in the late
1970s to 1.1% in the middle 1990s.2 Personal income growth displayed a similar trend;
we include these figures in Panel B to show that there was no trend decline toward lower
1
Banks and firms share risk to some extent, so they end up inheriting each other’s problems. The precise
division of those risks (and the bad outcome) would depend in a complicate way on ex ante contracts and
ex post bargaining power. Nor do we consider the welfare benefits of integration, but presumably welfare
rises as volatility falls.
2
These figures are the root mean squared error from a regression of state employment growth on a time
effect (to remove aggregate cycles) and a state effect (to remove state differences in mean growth). See
Table 1 for details.
3