NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THY NEIGHBOR’S PORTFOLIO:
WORD-OF-MOUTH EFFECTS IN THE
HOLDINGS AND TRADES OF MONEY MANAGERS
Harrison Hong
Jeffrey D. Kubik
Jeremy C. Stein
Working Paper 9711
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9711
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2003
Thanks to the National Science Foundation for research support, and to Rebecca Brunson and Ravi Pillai for
research assistance. We are also grateful for comments and suggestions from Julian Abdey, Malcolm Baker,
Gene D’Avolio, Chip Fortson, Rafael LaPorta, Karl Lins, Andrei Shleifer, and Jeff Wurgler, as well as from
seminar participants at Harvard Business School, Boston College, the University of Texas, NYU, Columbia,
Northwestern, Maryland, USC, Penn State and Syracuse.The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Harrison Hong, Jeffrey D. Kubik, and Jeremy C. Stein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including
© notice, is given to the source.

Thy Neighbor’s Portfolio: Word-of-Mouth Effects in the
Holdings and Trades of Money Managers
Harrison Hong, Jeffrey D. Kubik, and Jeremy C. Stein
NBER Working Paper No. 9711
May 2003
JEL No. D83, G11, G20
ABSTRACT
A mutual-fund manager is more likely to hold (or buy, or sell) a particular stock in any quarter if
other managers in the same city are holding (or buying, or selling) that same stock. This pattern
shows up even when controlling for the distance between the fund manager and the stock in
question, so it is distinct from a local-preference effect. It is also robust to a variety of controls for
investment styles. These results can be interpreted in terms of an epidemic model in which investors
spread information about stocks to one another by word of mouth.
Jeffrey D. Kubik
Harrison Hong
Professor of Economics Center for Policy Research
Department of Economics 426 Eggers Hall
Princeton, NJ 08540-5296 Syracuse University
hhong@princeton.edu Syracuse, NY 13244-1020
jdkubik@maxwell.syr.edu
Jeremy C. Stein
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer, Room 209
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jeremy_stein@harvard.edu

I. Introduction
In this paper, we explore the hypothesis that investors spread information and ideas about
stocks to one another directly, through word-of-mouth communication. This hypothesis comes
up frequently in informal accounts of the behavior of the stock market.1 For example, in his
bestseller Irrational Exuberance, Shiller (2000) devotes an entire chapter to the subject of “Herd
Behavior and Epidemics”, and writes:
“A fundamental observation about human society is that people who communicate
regularly with one another think similarly. There is at any place and in any time a Zeitgeist, a
spirit of the times….Word-of-mouth transmission of ideas appears to be an important contributor
to day-to-day or hour-to-hour stock market fluctuations…” (pp. 148, 155)
However, in spite of its familiarity, this hypothesis about word-of-mouth information
transmission has received little direct support in stock-market data.2 One noteworthy exception is
Shiller and Pound’s (1989) survey of 131 individual investors. When asked about what had
drawn their attention to the stock they had most recently purchased, many of these investors
named a personal contact, such as a friend or relative. Although this evidence is certainly
suggestive, it seems fair to say that the empirical case for the importance of word-of-mouth
communication in the stock market has not yet been fully developed.3
In an effort to bring large-sample evidence to bear on the question, we study the holdings
and trades of mutual-fund managers. Our empirical strategy is a simple one, premised on the
1 See, e.g., Ellison and Fudenberg (1995) for a formal model of word-of-mouth learning.
2 However, recent work has done much to advance the more general proposition that local peer-group effects can
have important consequences for a number of other economic outcomes, including educational attainment and
participation in crime. See, e.g., Case and Katz (1991), Glaeser, Sacerdote and Scheinkman (1996), and Bertrand,
Luttmer and Mullainathan (2000); Glaeser and Scheinkman (2002) provide a survey with more references.
Relatedly, Dumais, Ellison and Glaeser (2002) and Rosenthal and Strange (2001) provide evidence that geographic
proximity facilitates intellectual spillovers across a variety of industries.
3 There are a few papers that look at word-of-mouth effects in other financial-market settings. Kelly and Grada
(2000) find striking evidence that, during banking panics, bad news about banks spreads via word of mouth in
neighborhoods. See also Duflo and Saez (2002) and Madrian and Shea (2000), who demonstrate that individuals’
choices of retirement plans are influenced by the decisions of their co-workers.
1

assumption that fund managers who work in the same city are more likely to come into direct
contact with one another—e.g., at local investor conferences and other similar events—and
hence to exchange ideas by word-of-mouth. Consider for example a fund manager working for
the Fidelity fund family, which is located in Boston, and her decision of whether or not to buy
shares of Intel in a given quarter. Our basic prediction is that this decision will be more heavily
influenced by the decisions of fund managers working for the Putnam family, which is also
located in Boston, than by the decisions of fund managers located in other cities.
This prediction is strongly confirmed in the data. The effects show up when we look at
either the level of a fund manager’s shareholdings in any given quarter, or the changes in her
shareholdings from one quarter to the next—i.e., her trades. In terms of magnitudes, we find
that, controlling for the holdings of the rest of the mutual-fund universe, a given fund manager’s
holdings of a particular stock (as a fraction of her total portfolio) increase by roughly 0.20
percent when other managers from different fund families in the same city increase their
holdings of the same stock by one percent. So if managers at Putnam and other Boston-based
fund families increase their average weighting on Intel from 1.0 percent of their portfolios to 2.0
percent, while other managers across the country keep their weightings fixed, we would expect
the typical Fidelity manager to increase her weighting from 1.0 percent to about 1.20 percent.
Our tests control in a variety of ways for the distance between the fund manager and the
company in question, so these results are distinct from the local-preference effect that Coval and
Moskowitz (1999, 2001) have identified among mutual-fund managers. In other words, we are
not just picking up the common factor that all Boston-based managers like to invest in Boston-
area companies. We also control for investment styles, as well as for industries. This means that
2