NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PRODUCT DIFFERENTIATION, SEARCH COSTS,
AND COMPETITION
IN THE MUTUAL FUND INDUSTRY:
A CASE STUDY OF S&P 500 INDEX FUNDS
Ali Hortaçsu
Chad Syverson
Working Paper 9728
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9728
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2003
Zvi Eckstein and Alan Sorenson provided thoughtful suggestions regarding earlier drafts. We have also
benefited from discussions with Judy Chevalier, Lars Hansen, Tom Hubbard, Boyan Jovanovic, Bob Lucas,
Derek Neal, Ariel Pakes, Jonathan Reuter, and seminar participants at the University of Chicago, the Society
for Economic Dynamics annual meeting, INSEAD, NYU, the Economic Research Center, the NBER IO
meetings, Harvard/MIT, and the Chicago GSB. Arie Toporovsky, Chris Xu, and Yoo-Na Youm provided
research assistance. We are grateful for the financial support of the John M. Olin Foundation. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2003 by Ali Hortaçsu and Chad Syverson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is given
to the source.

Product Differentiation, Search Costs, and Competition in the Mutual Fun Industry:
A Case Study of S&P 500 Index Funds
Ali Hortaçsu and Chad Syverson
NBER Working Paper No. 9728
May 2003
JEL No. L0, L1, G0, G1, G14, G20
ABSTRACT
Two salient features of the competitive structure of the U.S. mutual fund industry are the large
number of funds and the sizeable dispersion in the fees funds charge investors, even within narrow
asset classes. Portfolio financial performance differences alone do not seem able to fully explain
these features. We investigate whether non-portfolio fund differentiation and information/search
frictions also play a role in creating these observed industry characteristics. We focus on their impact
in a case study of the retail S&P 500 index funds sector. We find that fund proliferation and price
dispersion also exist in this sector, despite the funds’’ financial homogeneity. Furthermore, there was
a marked shift in sector assets to more expensive (often newly entered) funds throughout our sample
period. Our analysis indicates that these observations are consistent with the presence of both non-
portfolio differentiation and information/search frictions. Structural estimation of a novel search-
over-differentiated-products model reveals that reasonable magnitudes of investor search costs can
explain the considerable price dispersion in the sector, and consumers seem to value funds’’
observable attributes – such as fund age and the number of other funds in the same fund family– in
largely plausible ways. The results also suggest that the substantial increase in mutual fund market
participation observed during our sample, and the corresponding purchase decisions of novice
investors, drove the shift in assets toward more expensive funds. We also find evidence consistent
with the presence of switching costs, as distinct from search costs. Using structural estimates of
demand parameters and search costs, we investigate the possibility that there are too many sector
funds from a social welfare standpoint. The results of this exercise indicate that restricting entry
would yield nontrivial gains from reduced search costs and productivity gains from scale economies,
but these may be counterbalanced by losses from increased market power and reduced product
variety.
Chad Syverson
Ali Hortaçsu
Department of Economics Department of Economics
University of Chicago University of C hicago
1126 E. 59th Street 1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637 Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER and NBER
hortacsu@uchicago.edu syverson@uchicago.edu

I. Introduction
An investor seeking to hold assets in a mutual fund is a consumer with many choices: in
2001, there were 8307 U.S. mutual funds in operation. If one counts different share classes for a
common portfolio as separate options available to an investor, the implied total number of funds
to choose from exceeds 13,000. Note in comparison that there were a total of 7600 companies
listed that year on the NYSE, AMEX, and Nasdaq combined. A mutual fund investor’s choice
set has also been growing robustly over time: while there were 834 mutual funds in operation in
1980, this nearly quadrupled to 3100 by 1990, and almost tripled again by 2001.1
An additional, less documented feature of the mutual fund marketplace is the enormous
dispersion in the fees investors pay to hold assets in funds, a dispersion that persists despite the
competition among large number of industry firms. These fee differences are not simply a result
of variation across fund sectors; price dispersion within (even narrowly defined) sectors is large.
Table 1 summarizes this within-sector dispersion. The table shows fund fee dispersion
moments—the coefficient of variation, the interquartile price ratio, and the ratio of the 90th to the
10th percentile price—for each of 22 fund objective sectors in 2000.2
As is evident in the table, the 75th-percentile-price fund in a sector-year cell typically has
investor costs about twice those of the 25th percentile fund. The 90th-10th percentile price ratios
indicate between three- and seven-fold fee differences within sector-years. The extrema of the
distribution (not shown) can exhibit vast dispersion; the minimum-price aggressive growth fund,
for example, imposed annualized fees of only 14 basis points (i.e., 0.14% of the value of an
investor’s assets in the fund), whereas the highest-price fund charged a whopping 1670 basis
points. While some of these sectors are fairly broad and may include funds with very different
portfolios, dispersion remains even within what are plausibly quite specialized sectors. The
table’s second panel shows the same dispersion measures for four randomly selected specialized
1 The expansion of the choice set has accompanied a steady increase in the fraction of the population taking
advantage of the mutual fund option. Only 6% of households held mutual funds in 1980. By 2001, fully 52% of
U.S. households held assets in mutual funds.
2 Throughout the paper, we refer to funds’ annualized fees as “prices” to reflect the fact that from the investor’s
perspective, these fees are the cost of buying the right to hold assets in a fund. The fund data used to calculate these
figures is from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP). Roughly 95 percent of the funds in the CRSP
database are matched to one of these sectors, which are categorized according to the Investment Company Data, Inc.
(now Standard and Poor’s Micropal) system. Fund prices are annualized investor costs, calculated according to the
literature standard of annual fees (both management fees and 12b-1 fees if applicable) plus one-seventh of any loads.
While this is a simplification of what are in some cases rather complicated nonlinear pricing schedules, we feel it is
a reasonable approximation. We have checked the robustness of our primary empirical results to other price
definitions. The paper’s data appendix discusses the data in greater detail.
1

sectors (these are based on Strategic Insight’s classification system, which is considerably finer
than the above taxonomy). There is a modest drop in price dispersion compared to the broader
sectors, but considerable differences still remain.3
Of course, fund portfolios can vary considerably even within narrow asset classes. Fund
price dispersion might then reflect within-sector differences in demand or cost structures across
portfolios. On the demand side, certain portfolios will outperform their sector cohorts; higher
prices may just reflect investors’ willingness to pay for better performance. As for costs, fund
managers choose different securities with which to comprise their portfolio, and some of these
securities may be more expensive to analyze or trade than others. Fund prices may reflect this
fact.4 Portfolio differentiation, too, may explain in part the other salient fact discussed above: the
large number of industry funds. Investors may differ in their ideal portfolios and their current
asset compositions. Perhaps thousands of funds (and the several hundred new funds each year)
are necessary to meet the demand for the many risk-return profiles sought by investors.5
However, a look at the retail (i.e., non-institutional) S&P 500 index fund sector strongly
suggests that the composition and financial performance of funds’ portfolios are not the only
factors explaining fund proliferation and fee dispersion. All funds in this $164 billion (in 2000)
3
The competitive effect of entry appears to be weak throughout the industry. Entry coincides with increases in both
average fees and fee dispersion. We regress sectoral price (fee) dispersion moments for 1993-2001 on the logged
number of sector funds, allowing for sector-specific intercepts and trends. The results, available from the authors,
show that average fees in the sector actually increase significantly as the number of sector funds rises. The asset-
weighted mean also increases (albeit insignificantly). Several fee dispersion moments (standard deviation,
coefficient of variation, interquartile range, and the 90th-10th and 95th-5th percentile fee ranges) are positively
correlated with increases in the number of sector funds as well.
4
To check whether price dispersion plausibly reflects performance differences across funds, we regress gross
annual returns, the within-year average gross monthly return, and the within-year standard deviation of monthly
returns on fund prices. The sample consists of all mutual funds in the CRSP database between 1993 and 2001 with
return data available—roughly 83,300 fund-year observations. The specifications include interacted Strategic
Insight objective category (of which there are 193) and year effects, so estimated coefficients reflect the correlation
between returns and prices within sector-year cells. The price coefficients in both gross return regressions are
actually negative (though statistically insignificant); more expensive funds have lower-than-average returns. (A
regression of net annual returns on price yields a significantly negative coefficient; one would expect zero in a
perfectly competitive market where price differences are exactly compensated by gross returns.) Furthermore, the
correlation between fund prices and return variance is positive and significant—also the opposite sign one would
expect if performance and price were closely linked. A more careful investigation would obtain measures of
expected returns and use longer performance histories to measure within-fund return variation; however, given the
magnitude of the observed price dispersion, these results suggest that the price-performance link is not an
overwhelming determinant of the patterns observed in the data. The findings are also in line with Carhart (1997),
where the impact of expenses on performance was negative and at least one-for-one. Detailed results are available
from the authors upon request.
5 See Mamaysky and Spiegel (2001) for an argument along these lines.
2