NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION AND
SHORT-TERMIST BEHAVIOR
IN SPECULATIVE MARKETS
Patrick Bolton
José Scheinkman
Wei Xiong
Working Paper 9722
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9722
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2003
We would like to thank Lucian Bebchuk, Alan Blinder, Gary Gorton, Harrison Hong, Rafael LaPorta, David
Scharfstein, Jeremy Stein, Ivo Welch and seminar participants at Baruch, Harvard, HEC, INSEAD, Paris-
Dauphine, Princeton, and the Five Star Conference at NYU for discussions and comments. This paper was
written while Scheinkman was the Blaise Pascal Research Professor at Universite Paris Dauphine. He is
grateful for financial support provided by the National Science Foundation grant 0001647. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2003 by Patrick Bolton, José Scheinkman, and Wei Xiong. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Executive Compensation and Short-termist Behavior in Speculative Markets
Patrick Bolton, José Scheinkman and Wei Xiong
NBER Working Paper No. 9722
May 2003, Revised November 2005
JEL No. G3
ABSTRACT
We present a multiperiod agency model of stock based executive compensation in a speculative
stock market, where investors are overconfident and stock prices may deviate from underlying
fundamentals and include a speculative option component. This component arises from the option
to sell the stock in the future to potentially overoptimistic investors. We show that optimal
compensation contracts may emphasize short-term stock performance, at the expense of long run
fundamental value, as an incentive to induce managers to pursue actions which increase the
speculative component in the stock price. Our model provides a different perspective for the recent
corporate crisis than the increasingly popular `rent extraction view' of executive compensation.
Patrick Bolton José Scheinkman Wei Xiong
Bendheim Center for Finance Princeton University Princeton University
26 Prospect Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08540-5296
and NBER
pbolton@princeton.edu

1 Introduction
Following the collapse of the recent technology bubble on NASDAQ and other exchanges nu-
merous stories have appeared in the …nancial press pointing out how executives and directors
of many companies managed to enrich themselves by selling their shares shortly before their
company’s stock price crumpled.1 These striking reports have raised concerns about executive
compensation and cast doubt on their intended incentive e¢ ciency.
The classical view of executive compensation as formulated by Mirrlees (1975), Holmstrom
(1979) and more recently Holmstrom and Tirole (1993) among others rests on two fundamental
hypotheses. First that CEO incentive schemes e¢ ciently trade o¤ risk-sharing and incentive
considerations, and second that stock-prices are unbiased estimators of …rm fundamentals, on
which CEO pay could be based to reward managerial e¤ort. While the recent corporate crisis
has led many commentators to entirely reject this classical view, our paper takes a di¤erent
perspective. We examine the implications for optimal incentive contracting of relaxing the
second hypothesis about stock markets and are thus able to reconcile the incentive perspective
of executive compensation with the recent events.
Speci…cally, in this paper we depart from Holmstrom and Tirole (1993) by introducing
a source for di¤erence of opinions among investors which, in turn, assures that stock prices
re‡ect not only the fundamental value of the …rm but also a short-term speculative component.
In addition, we postulate that risk-averse managers can take speci…c actions that boost the
speculative component in stock prices, albeit at the expense of long run fundamental value.
We solve this modi…ed principal-agent problem and show that optimal compensation contracts
will overemphasize short-term stock performance to induce managers to take actions that may
increase the speculative component in stock prices. We also consider the role of controlling
shareholders that have a longer-term outlook and argue that although they do not bene…t
directly from stock sales at the in‡ated short run prices, they may still encourage some short-
termist strategies to reduce their cost of capital.
There is growing evidence that stock prices can deviate from fundamental values for pro-
1The Financial Times has conducted a survey of the 25 largest …nancially distressed …rms since January
2001andfoundthat,althoughhundredsofbillionsofinvestorwealthtogetherwith100,000jobsdisappeared,
top executives and directors in these …rms walked away with a total of $3.3 billion by selling their stock
holdings early (see Financial Times, July 31, 2002).
1

longed periods of time.2 While many economists believe in the long run e¢ ciency of stock
markets they also recognize that US stock markets have displayed an important speculative
component during the period between 1998 to 2000.3 In addition, several recent studies have
shown that it is di¢ cult to reconcile the stock price levels and volatility of many internet and
high-tech …rms during this period with standard discounted cash-‡ow valuations.4 In some
highly publicized cases the market value of a parent company was even less than the value of its
holdings in an “internet”subsidiary. The trading volume for these stocks was also much higher
than that for more traditional companies, a likely indicator of di¤erences of opinion among
investors regarding the fundamental values of these stocks.5
Thegeneralideawebuildoninthispaper,thatstockpricesmaybehigherthanfundamental
value when there are di¤erences of opinion and short-sales constraints, actually has a long
ancestry in Economics and Finance. It has been traced back to early writings by Keynes (1936)
andlaterresurfacedinthearticlesbyMiller(1977),HarrisonandKreps(1978)andmorerecently
Morris (1996), Chen, Hong and Stein (2002), and Scheinkman and Xiong (2003).
Several questions arise concerning the use of stocks in CEO compensation contracts when
stockpricesmaynotalwaysre‡ectthefundamentalvalueofthe…rm. Forexample, whatkindof
incentive would stock compensation provide to …rm managers in such an environment? Would
investorsbewillingtousestocksforcompensatingmanagersiftheyknewthatstockpricescould
deviate substantially from fundamental value? More generally, what is “shareholder value”in
such a speculative market? Our goal in this paper is to set up a tractable theoretical model to
address these questions and to provide an analysis of optimal CEO compensation in speculative
markets.
We consider an optimal contracting problem in a two-period principal-agent model similar
to Holmstrom and Tirole (1993). We let a risk-averse CEO choose some costly hidden actions,
which a¤ect both the long-run fundamental value of the …rm (in period 2) and its short-run
stockvaluation(inperiod1). Forriskdiversi…cationreasons,whenthestockpriceisanunbiased
estimate of the fundamental value of the …rm, the optimal (linear) CEO compensation scheme
2See Shleifer (2000) and Shiller (2000) for supporting arguments and Fama (1998) for a contrarian view.
3e.g. Malkiel (2003)
4See Lamont and Thaler (2003), Ofek and Richardson (2003), and Cochrane (2002).
5An extreme example is the trading volume in Palm stock, which turned over once every day according
to Lamont and Thaler (2003, Table 8).
2