NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PRODIGALS AND PROJECTORS:
AN ECONOMIC HISTORY OF USURY LAWS
IN THE UNITED STATES FROM
COLONIAL TIMES TO 1900
Hugh Rockoff
Working Paper 9742
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9742
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2003
Paper Prepared for the Conference “Factor Endowments, Labor and Economic Growth in the Americas” in honor
of Stanley Engerman, Rochester June 8, 2001. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Hugh Rockoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is given to the source.

Prodigals and Projectors: An Economic History of
Usury Laws in the United States from Colonial Times to 1900
Hugh Rockoff
NBER Working Paper No. 9742
May 2003
JEL No. N2
ABSTRACT
During the Colonial era usury laws in the United States were strict both in terms of the maximum rate
that could be charged and the penalties that would be imposed. In Massachusetts in eighteenth century,
for example, the maximum rate was 6 percent, and both principal and interest were forfeited if usury
could be proved against the lender. The laws were eased during the early national period, and in many
states they were repealed, although the United States never completely abandoned its system of usury
laws. By 1870, when a limited reaction set in, the liberalization had reached the point where the great
bulk of commercial transactions must have been largely unaffected by the usury laws, at least in non-
crisis years. Two factors seem to have been paramount in producing the liberalization: changes in ideas
about the effectiveness of government regulation in general and about the effectiveness of usury laws
in particular, and competition among the states for capital. This history suggests that the usury laws,
when tightly drawn, may have had a larger impact than economic historians have generally recognized.
Hugh Rockoff
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
rockoff@econ.rutgers.edu

1. Why Should Economic Historians Study Usury Laws?1
With a few notable exceptions, such as Friedman (1963) and Glaeser and
Scheinkman (1998), usury laws have been ignored by historians and economists writing
about the financial history of the United States. Many of the classic financial histories of the
United States do not even mention them. Yet there are a number of good reasons for
studying usury laws. For one thing usury laws are, arguably, the most ubiquitous forms of
economic regulation. They are mentioned in the Bible and the Koran. There were usury laws
in ancient Rome, although not in classical Athens (Finley 1953). And, the medieval
canonists developed a detailed theory of usury. Usury laws have not been confined to
countries influenced by European cultural traditions. In India, during the Buddhist period, it
was recommended that interest be limited to 15 percent per year on secured loans and to 60
percent per year on unsecured loans. Seth (1955, 6). In traditional China the maximum rate
was 3 percent per month, and the penalty for charging more was 40 to 100 blows with the
light cane. (Alabaster 1899, 550-51). Usury laws, moreover, have been the subject of classic
works of literature, such as “The Merchant of Venice.” The usury laws in England were
repealed in 1854 (although legislation protecting borrowers was reinstated at the turn of the
century), but in the United States they were continued in many states down to the present
day.
Usury laws, unlike most other forms of economic regulation, are relatively easy to
quantify. During the period of concern here they usually took the form of a maximum rate, a
round number: 0, 6, 10, etc. The penalties for evading the usury laws, moreover, although
often neglected in discussions of the law, were also easily quantified. The penalty was
typically forfeiture of interest and principal, forfeiture of interest alone, or something
1

similar. By taking a standard loan contract we can reduce these disparate penalties to a
common denominator. To be sure, usury laws sometimes included provisions that are not
easily quantified. The maximum legal rate, for example, might differ among lenders or by
type of loan, and criminal penalties might be imposed. But for the most part, the usury laws
can be quantified, allowing us to draw a long-run picture of the history of usury laws, and to
make generalizations about the determinants of the history of usury laws that may carryover
to less easily quantified forms of regulation.
The level of the rate of usury, moreover, may give us some insight into the common
rate of interest for times and places when market quotations are scarce. Indeed, in some
cases the rate of usury may be a more accurate reflection of the common rate, than the
quotations normally relied upon, which are often the rates on government bonds, or other
atypical instruments. The usefulness of the rate of usury as a proxy for the common rate of
interest would depend on how usury rates were determined in relation to the bulk of credit
transactions. So an understanding of the political economy of maximum rates can contribute
to their usefulness as a record of rates.
The main reason economic historians neglect usury laws is the conviction that they
are easily evaded and therefore have no effect. Suppose a borrower and lender want to
contract a loan at 30 percent interest when the legal maximum is 10 percent. What is to stop
the borrower from signing a bond that says that 10 percent is to be paid on $100 (a legal
contract), while in fact receiving only $85 in cash, or perhaps paying a “fee” of $15 for the
services of arranging the loan?2 The answer is nothing. The suggestion then, is that the legal
maximum has no effect.
2