NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FIRMS, CONTRACTS, AND TRADE STRUCTURE
Pol Antràs
Working Paper 9740
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9740
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2003
I am grateful to Daron Acemoglu, Marios Angeletos, Gene Grossman, and Jaume Ventura for invaluable
guidance, and to Manuel Amador, Lucia Breierova, Francesco Caselli, Fritz Foley, Gino Gancia, Andrew
Hertzberg, Elhanan Helpman, Bengt Holmström, Ben Jones, Oscar Landerretche, Alexis León, Gerard Padró,
Thomas Philippon, Diego Puga, Jeremy Stein, Joachim Voth, two anonymous referees, and the editor (Ed
Glaeser) for very helpful comments. I have also benefited from suggestions by seminar participants at
Berkeley, Chicago GSB, Columbia, Harvard, MIT, NBER, Northwestern, NYU, Princeton, San Diego,
Stanford, and Yale. Financial support from the Bank of Spain is gratefully acknowledged. All remaining
errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Pol Antràs. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is given to the source.

Firms, Contracts, and Trade Structure
Pol Antràs
NBER Working Paper No. 9740
May 2003
JEL No. D23, F12, F14, F21, F23, L22, L33
ABSTRACT
Roughly one-third of world trade is intrafirm trade. This paper starts by unveiling two systematic
patterns in the volume of intrafirm trade. In a panel of industries, the share of intrafirm imports in
total U.S. imports is significantly higher, the higher the capital intensity of the exporting industry.
In a cross-section of countries, the share of intrafirm imports in total U.S. imports is significantly
higher, the higher the capital-labor ratio of the exporting country. I then show that these patterns can
be rationalized in a theoretical framework that combines a Grossman-Hart-Moore view of the firm
with a Helpman-Krugman view of international trade. In particular, I develop an incomplete-
contracting, property-rights model of the boundaries of the firm, which I then incorporate into a
standard trade model with imperfect competition and product differentiation. The model pins down
the boundaries of multinational firms as well as the international location of production, and it is
shown to predict the patterns of intrafirm trade identified above. Econometric evidence reveals that
the model is consistent with other qualitative and quantitative features of the data.
Pol Antràs
MIT, Department of Economics
Room E52-262A
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
and NBER
pol@mit.edu

1 Introduction
Roughly one-third of world trade is intrafirm trade. In 1994, 42.7 percent of the total
volume of U.S. imports of goods took place within the boundaries of multinational
firms, with the share being 36.3 percent for U.S. exports of goods (Zeile, 1997). In
spite of the clear significance of these international flows of goods between affiliated
units of multinational firms, the available empirical studies on intrafirmtrade provide
little guidance to international trade theorists. In this paper I unveil some novel
patterns exhibited by the volume of U.S. intrafirm imports and I argue that these
patterns can be rationalized combining a Grossman-Hart-Moore view of the firm,
together with a Helpman-Krugman view of international trade.
In a hypothetical world in which firm boundaries had no bearing on the pattern of
internationaltrade,onewouldexpectonlyrandomdifferencesbetweenthebehaviorof
the volume of intrafirm trade and that of the total volume of trade. In particular, the
share of intrafirm trade in total trade would not be expected to correlate significantly
with any of the classical determinants of international trade.
Figure 1 provides a first illustration of how different the real world is from this
hypothetical world. In a panel consisting of 23 manufacturing industries and four
years of data (1987, 1989, 1992, and 1994), the share of intrafirm imports in total
U.S. imports is significantly higher, the higher the capital intensity in production
of the exporting industry. Figure 1 indicates that firms in the U.S. tend to import
capital-intensive goods, such as chemical products, within the boundaries of their
firms, while they tend to import labor-intensive goods, such as textile products, from
unaffiliated parties.1
Figure 2 unveils a second strong pattern in the share of intrafirm imports. In
a cross-section of 28 countries, the share of intrafirm imports in total U.S. imports
is significantly higher, the higher the capital-labor ratio of the exporting country.
U.S. imports fromcapital-abundantcountries, suchas Switzerland, tendtotakeplace
1ThepatterninFigure1isconsistentwithGereffi’s(1999)distinctionbetween‘producer-driven’
and ‘buyer-driven’ international economic networks. The first, he writes, is “characteristic of capi-
tal- and technology-intensive industries [...] in which large, usually transnational, manufacturers
play the central roles in coordinating production networks” (p. 41). Conversely, ‘buyer-driven’
networks are common in “labor-intensive, consumer goods industries” and are characterized by
“highly competitive, locally owned, and globally dispersed production systems” (pp. 42-43). The
emphasis is my own.
1

Figure 1: Share of Intrafirm U.S. Imports and Relative Factor Intensities
Notes:TheY-axiscorrespondstothelogarithmoftheshareofintrafirmimportsintotalU.S.importsfor23manufacturing
industriesand4years:1987,1989,1992,1994.TheX-axismeasuresthelogofthatindustry’sratioofcapitalstocktototal
employmentinthecorrespondingyear,usingU.S.data.SeeTableA.1.forindustrycodesandAppendixA.4.fordatasources.
)M/fiM(fogol
0
dru
dru dru
dru ocohch
ru r
e
u b
le
b
e
c
le
oam a u u d d
cce loe lem
ele
cle
v
v
e
v e
h
ec h c voh l e emh coocmh c
c
h
h
e
e
che
che
-1.5 pri pri in tr s a p o t l p e r i a n a o l l a s e pp l llaafm f o mi o n e et e se l r ffr a m l mu im be a e r i i m u n ai u m b s d a a imaud t a f r o fao f o o o f o o s s o t s t c o o t l o e sto oc p h p a a p p p p a b a p e p v bbebevevv
pri
lum
-3
lumlumpri
tex
tex oommaa
oma y=-6.79+1.15x
lum oma
R2=0.50
tex
-4.5
tex
3 4 5 6
logof(Capital/Employment)
Figure 2: Share of Intrafirm U.S. Imports and Relative Factor Endowments
Notes:TheY-axiscorrespondstothelogarithmoftheshareofintrafirmimportsintotalU.S.importsfor28exporting
countriesin1992.TheX-axismeasuresthelogoftheexportingcountry’sphysicalcapitalstockdividedbyitstotalnumberof
workers.SeeTableA.2.forcountrycodesandAppendixA.4.fordetailsondatasources.
)M/fiM(fogol
0
CHE
SIRGLP
MEX NCDALN
PA B N R M A YS GBR BEL DEU
FRA
-2 HKG ISR
EJSPPN SWEAUS
PHL ITA
COL OANARG
-4
IDN CHL VEN
y=-14.11+1.14x
(2.55) (0.29)
-6
R2=0.46
EGY
7.5 9 10.5 12
logofCapital-LaborRatio
2