NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MARKET REACTIONS TO TANGIBLE
AND INTANGIBLE INFORMATION
Kent Daniel
Sheridan Titman
Working Paper 9743
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9743
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2003
We thank Nick Barberis, George Buckley, Mike Cooper, Gene Fama, Josef Lakonishook, Mitchell Petersen,
Canice Prendergast, Andrei Shleifer, Walter Torous, Linda Vincent, Tuomo Vuolteenaho and seminar participants
at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, MIT, Notre Dame, Stanford, the University of Arizona, UBC, UC
Berkeley, the University of Chicago and the NBER Behavioral Finance Meetings, the LSE Conference on Market
Rationality, the 2001 EFMA meetings, and the Burridge Investment Conference at the University of Colorado
for helpful discussions, comments and suggestions. We especially thank Kenneth French for assistance with data,
and for comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Kent Daniel and Sheridan Titman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is given to
the source.

Market Reactions to Tangible and Intangible Information
Kent Daniel and Sheridan Titman
NBER Working Paper No. 9743
May 2003
JEL No. G1
ABSTRACT
We decompose stock returns into components attributable to tangible and intangible information. A
firm's tangible return is the component of its return attributable to fundamental accounting-performance
information, and its intangible return is the component which is orthogonal to this information. Our
evidence indicates that intangible information reliably predicts future stock returns. However, in contrast
to previous research, we find that tangible returns have no forecasting power. The premia associated
with intangible information pose challenges for both traditional asset pricing models and models based
on psychological factors.
Kent Daniel
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
kentd@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Sheridan Titman
McCombs School of Business
University of Texas
Austin, Texas 78712
and NBER
titman@mail.texas.edu

I. Introduction
During the past decade, financial economists have puzzled over two related observations.
Thefirstisthatoverlonghorizons,futurestockreturnsarenegativelyrelatedtopaststock
returns. The second is that stock returns are positively related to price-scaled variables,
such as the book-to-market ratio.1
DeBondt and Thaler (1985, 1987) were the first to document the long-horizon return
reversal evidence. They argue that the evidence supports psychological theories that sug-
gest that individuals tend to overreact to information. By looking at specific accounting
based information, Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1994, LSV) provide further support
for this hypothesis. Specifically, they find that future returns are negatively related to
past sales growth, suggesting that investors overreact to the information embedded in
sales growth rates.
As Fama and French (1993, 1995) stress, since changes in fundamental performance
are likely to be associated with changes in risk, this evidence is also potentially consistent
with a risk-based explanation. They argue that high book-to-market and low past return
firms are distressed and hence riskier, and the higher average returns earned by these
firms are compensation for this risk. Fama and French (1996) provide evidence that the
long-horizon return reversal effect is subsumed by the stronger book-to-market effect. In
addition, they argue that both return premia result from covariation with a priced-risk
factor, a proxy for which is the return of their HML portfolio, a zero investment portfolio
that consists of long positions in high book-to-market stocks and short positions in low
book-to-market stocks.2
While these behavioral and risk-based explanations are very different, both are based
on the idea that high future stock returns are related to poor past fundamental per-
formance. In one case, investors overreact to fundamentals, and in the other, risk is
negatively related to past fundamental performance (or distress). In this paper we show
that neither of these interpretations is quite right. Specifically, we show that future re-
turns are unrelated to past fundamental performance, where fundamental performance is
measured using standard accounting growth measures of firm performance.
To understand this finding, note that while there is a negative correlation between the
book-to-marketratioandpastaccountinggrowthmeasures(i.e. highBMfirmsareindeed
1We review this literature in Section II.
2However, Daniel and Titman (1997) point out that the Fama and French empirical results are also
consistent with mispricing-based models.
1

generally distressed, as Fama and French (1995) and LSV document), not all high book-
to-market firms are distressed. For example, a firm can become a high book-to-market
firm as a result of either high earnings growth (which pushes up book), or a relatively
low past return (which pushes down the market price). Thus, it is conceivable that the
book-to-market effect could be generated by underreaction rather than overreaction to
the information in past earnings.3 For example, much of the accounting information
(e.g., earnings or book value growth) of the Internet firms in the late 1990s was consis-
tent with financial distress. However, since other information about their future growth
opportunities were viewed very favorably, they had extremely low book-to-market ratios.
To the extent that the subsequent low returns of Internet stocks can be characterized as
resulting from previous overreaction, the culprit is overreaction to this other information,
which we will call intangible information, and not to the tangible accounting information
that has been discussed in the above-cited literature.4
To explore these issues in more detail, we provide a breakdown of the information
that moves stock prices into two components: tangible and intangible information.5 The
Oxford English Dictionary defines a tangible property or form as “That can be laid hold
of or grasped by the mind, or dealt with as a fact.” and intangible “... That cannot be
grasped mentally.” Consistent with this, we define tangible information as performance
information like sales, earnings and cash flow growth, which can be extracted from the
firms’ accounting statements. We define intangible information as the other determinants
of a stock’s past return. Correspondingly, we define tangible returns as the component
of returns that can be linked directly to these accounting growth numbers. Intangible
returns, in contrast, presumably reflect changes in expectations about future cash flows
or discount rates.
Figure 1 illustrates our calculation of tangible and intangible returns.6 Each year,
we perform a cross-sectional regression of firms’ past 5-year log-returns on a variety of
fundamental growth measures (unanticipated book-value, earnings, cash-flow, and sales
ˆ
growth, or all of these). For a given firm at a given point in time, we calculate log(P ) –
t
its expected log price at time t conditional on log(P t−5 ) and on its unanticipated funda-
3There is however, some evidence consistent with underreaction to fundamentals at shorter horizons,
for example post-earnings announcement drift (see, for example Rendleman, Jones, and Latane (1982)
and Bernard and Thomas (1989).
4What we are calling tangible and intangible information should not be confused with what accoun-
tants call tangible and intangible assets, which refer to assets that cannot be objectively valued.
5In Appendix B, we provide a simple model that further motivates our decomposition.
6Theassumptionhereisthatthelog-pricepersharechangeisequaltothelogreturn. Inourempirical
tests, we will do these calculations on a adjusted per-share basis, as described in Section A.
2