NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
JAMES TOBIN: AN APPRECIATION OF HIS
CONTRIBUTION TO ECONOMICS
Willem H. Buiter
Working Paper 9753
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9753
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2003
The views and opinions expressed are those of the author. They do not represent the views and opinions of
the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development. Bill Brainard, Mike Wickens, Jan Magnus Casey
B. Mulligan, Herschel Grossman, Robert Shiller and Mike Artis made valuable comments on earlier drafts.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2003 by Willem H. Buiter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is given to the source.

James Tobin: An Appreciation of his Contribution to Economics
Willem H. Buiter
NBER Working Paper No. 9753
June 2003
JEL No. B31, B41, C25, E21, E31, E32, E41, E44, E52, E62, E63, F32, F33, F41, G11, G20, I30
ABSTRACT
Jim Tobin, who died on March 11, 2002 at the age of 84, was one of giants of economics of the
second half of the twentieth century and the greatest macroeconomist of his generation. Tobin's
influence on macroeconomic theory is so pervasive - so much part of our professional 'acquis' - that
many younger economists often are not even aware that it is his ideas they are elaborating, testing,
criticising, refuting or re-inventing. In this Appreciation, I consider Tobin's scholarly contributions,
made over a period of more than 50 years.
Tobin received the 1981 Nobel Memorial Prize "for his analysis of financial markets and their
relations to expenditure decisions, employment, production and prices". I consider his contributions
to mean-variance portfolio demand and asset pricing theory, especially the Portfolio Separation
Theorem; pitfalls in financial model building; portfolio balance and flow of funds models and the
'credit channel'; the life-cycle model and social security; econometric methodology, including the
Tobit estimator and his pioneering work using both time series and cross-sectional data to estimate
food demand functions; economic growth; Tobin's q; the 'Tobin Tax'; the monetary and fiscal policy
effectiveness debate, first with Milton Friedman and then with the New Classical Macroeconomics
and Real Business Cycle schools; and Tobin's approach to methodological questions including
microfoundations and aggregation.
Willem H. Buiter
Office of the Chief Economist
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
One Exchange Square
London, EC2A 2EH
United Kingdom
and NBER
buiterw@ebrd.com

Jim Tobin, who died on March 11, 2002 at the age of 84, was one of giants of
economics of the second half of the twentieth century and the greatest
macroeconomist of his generation.1 Tobin’s influence on macroeconomic theory is so
pervasive - so much part of our professional ‘acquis’, that many younger economists
often are not even aware that it is his ideas they are elaborating, testing, criticising,
refuting or re-inventing.
Together with Markowitz, Tobin developed the mean-variance approach to
portfolio choice under uncertainty. This became the demand-side - the interesting half
- of the Capital Asset Pricing Model. Tobin was the father of empirical portfolio
balance and flow-of-funds models. Together with William Brainard, he added greatly
to our understanding of the transmission mechanism of monetary policy by giving us
‘Tobin’s q’. His work during the 1960s on explicitly including financial
intermediaries in the monetary transmission mechanism contains fully worked-out
models of what became known in the 1980s as the ‘bank lending’ or ‘credit channel’
of monetary policy. He made early and important contributions to the neoclassical
theory of growth with outside money. He was a leading contributor to the theory and
empirics of the life-cycle model of consumption, including the role of liquidity
constraints. He pioneered the application of what is now referred to as the ‘Yaari-
Blanchard’ version of the life-cycle overlapping generations model to the study of
important monetary and fiscal policy issues using realistic numerically calibrated
versions of that model. He made a seminal contribution to econometric methodology
with the ‘Tobit’ estimator for a class of limited dependent variable models. In a
decades-long debate with Milton Friedman, Tobin convinced most of the profession
1 A somewhat unusual indicator of his achievement as a scholar is the fact that his name is associated
both with a theory of the determinants of corporate investment, Tobin’s q, and with a proposal for a tax
on foreign exchange transactions, the Tobin tax, neither of which can, in my view, be counted among
his three or four most important contributions to economic science.
1

that the demand for money has an economically and statistically significant interest
rate-responsiveness; that a constant growth rate for some monetary aggregate is
unlikely to contribute to economic stability and that both monetary and fiscal
feedback rules can, in principle, help stabilise the real economy. While he did not
succeed in providing a fully ‘Lucas-critique-proof’ theory of a long-run non-vertical
Phillips curve, he was a major contributor to the currently prevailing practical wisdom
among central bankers and monetary economists, that monetary non-neutralities are
persistent enough, predictable enough and stable enough to make (rules-bound)
monetary stabilisation policy both feasible and desirable.
In this article, I will not attempt to convey a complete picture of this multi-
faceted, remarkable man, or even of the full range of the professional attributes I
knew first hand - his qualities as a scholar, teacher, mentor, co-author, colleague,
advisor of Presidents and other policy makers, passionate policy advocate, critic and
friend.2 For half a century, Tobin was Yale monetary and macroeconomics – some
would say, Yale economics. His influence on his students, colleagues and co-authors
was deep and pervasive. Tobin starts his Professional Autobiography with the
sentence “Rare is the child, I suspect, who wants to grow up to be an economist, or a
professor ” (Tobin [1986b, p. 113]). Perhaps; but more rare even is the young student
of economics taking his first tentative steps as a professional economist who, on
becoming acquainted with Tobin, in person or through his writings, did not feel better
about his choice of profession.
With one exception, the scope of what follows is restricted to Tobin’s
published scholarly contributions. The exception is an attempt to combine Tobin’s
2 Tobin wrote more than 500 papers, and it is impossible to provide a comprehensive overview in a
single review article. Grossman [1975] is an interesting review of the first of Tobin’s Essays in
Economics (Tobin [1971]). Both Grossman [1982] and Lucas [1981b] contain critical reviews of
Tobin [1980].
2