NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ONE COST OF THE CHILEAN CAPITAL CONTROLS:
INCREASED FINANCIAL CONSTRAINTS
FOR SMALLER TRADE FIRMS
Kristin J. Forbes
Working Paper 9777
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9777
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2003
Thanks to Jose de Gregorio, Francisco Gallego, Simon Johnson, and Jorge Roldos for extremely helpful
comments and discussions. Thanks to seminar participants at Berkeley, Dartmouth, Harvard, Michigan, the
Minneapolis Fed, MIT, Stanford and the World Bank for useful suggestions. Further thanks to Ken Rogoff,
Carmen Reinhart and Ashoka Mody for providing generous support and encouragement at the initial stages
of this project. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Kristin J. Forbes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is given to the source.

One Cost of the Chilean Capital Controls:
Increased Financial Constraints for Smaller Traded Firms
Kristin J. Forbes
NBER Working Paper No. 9777
June 2003
JEL No. F3, F21, G1, G32, O16, O54
ABSTRACT
There is growing support for taxes on short-term capital inflows in emerging markets, such as
the encaje adopted by Chile from 1991-98. Previous empirical assessments of the encaje
conclude that it may have generated some small economic benefits, such as shifting the
composition of capital inflows to a longer maturity, but no significant economic costs. Managers
of small and medium-sized companies in Chile, however, claim that the encaje made it
substantially more difficult to obtain financing for productive investment. This paper assesses
whether the Chilean capital controls increased financial constraints for different-sized, publicly-
traded firms. It uses two different testing methodologies: a Tobin's q and Euler-equation
framework. Results indicate that during the encaje, smaller traded firms in Chile experienced
significant financial constraints and these constraints decreased as firm size increased. Both
before and after the encaje, however, no group of traded firms experienced significant financial
constraints, and there is no relationship between firm size and financial constraints. Although
Chilean-style capital controls may also yield benefits, this cost of the encaje could be particularly
important in emerging markets where smaller firms can be valuable sources of job creation and
economic growth.
Kristin J. Forbes
MIT
Sloan School
Room E52-455
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
kjforbes@mit.edu

I. Introduction
In the early and mid-1990's, most international economists and Washington-based policymakers
supported rapid capital account liberalization for emerging markets. Many countries followed this
advice. The initial results were generally positive – increased capital inflows, investment booms,
and impressive growth performance. In the last decade, however, several countries with recently
liberalized capital accounts experienced severe financial crises, such as Mexico, Thailand, Korea,
Russia, and Argentina. These experiences, especially when combined with the recent backlash
against globalization, have caused many people to question the benefits of unrestricted capital
flows.1 Could controls on capital flows have prevented these crises, or at least reduced their
virulence? This question recently gained prominent attention when the U.S. government insisted
that free-trade agreements with Singapore and Chile include strict restrictions on their ability to
use capital controls in the future.
Although there continues to be widespread disagreement on the desirability and
feasibility of certain types of capital controls, such as a Tobin-style tax on currency transactions
or limits on capital outflows during crises, there is increasing and fairly widespread support for
market-based taxes on short-term capital inflows. For example, The Economist concluded a recent
survey on global finance with the statement: “…some kinds of restriction on inflows (not
outflows) of capital will make sense for many developing countries.”2 The most well known
example of a market-based tax on capital inflows is the encaje adopted by Chile from 1991-98.
Even the IMF, formerly the bastion of capital market liberalization, has cautiously begun to
support these sorts of controls. For example, Stanley Fischer, former First Deputy Managing
Director of the IMF writes: “The IMF has cautiously supported the use of market-based capital
inflow controls, Chilean style.”3 Eduardo Aninat, a Deputy Managing Director of the IMF,
recently stated: “…in some circumstances, these controls on capital inflows can play a role in
reducing vulnerability created by short-term flows….The investment restrictions appear to have
served Chile well…”4 IMF officials have even suggested that other emerging markets, such as
Russia, could benefit from adopting similar capital controls in certain circumstances.5
1 For an excellent study on the effects of financial globalizations, see Prasad et al. (2003).
2 The Economist, “A Cruel Sea of Capital: A Survey of Global Finance.” 05/03/98, pg 24.
3 Fischer (2002).
4 Wall Street Journal, “Some Warm to Use of Capital Controls,” by Pamela Druckerman. 10/24/02.
5 For example, in an interview for the March 17, 2003 IMF Survey, John Odling-Smee, Director of the
IMF’s European II Department, stated that in some circumstances for Russia “..we would support some
kind of market-friendly capital controls, such as the Chilean-type controls, to try to discourage speculative
inflows.”
1

A series of empirical studies have supported this sea-change in attitudes by providing
fairly positive or neutral assessments of the Chilean capital controls.6 Although there is some
variation in the results, most studies conclude that the capital controls shifted the composition of
capital inflows to a longer maturity and provided a small increase in monetary policy flexibility,
but had minimal effect on other variables (such as the total volume of capital inflows or exchange
rate). These studies suggest that the only costs of the controls were relatively minor, such as any
deadweight loss from the government establishing and monitoring the system, or from firms
attempting to evade the controls. In other words, the general interpretation of this body of
empirical work is that the Chilean capital controls generated some small economic benefits, but
no significant economic costs.
Managers of small and medium-sized companies in Chile, however, have a different
interpretation. They claim that the capital controls made it substantially more difficult to obtain
external financing. One study reports that between 1996 and 1997 (during the encaje) investment
costs for smaller firms exceeded 20 percent per year, while larger firms could access international
markets at a cost of only 7-8 percent.7 It is not surprising, however, that smaller firms in Chile
faced a higher cost of external capital than larger firms. A large body of theoretical literature
explains why asymmetric information problems, which tend to be greater in smaller and younger
firms, will raise the cost of external capital relative to that for internal capital. Moreover, a large
body of empirical literature documents that firms’ investment decisions tend to be affected by
their internal sources of funds in a range of countries, especially for smaller firms.8
There are a number of reasons, however, why the Chilean capital controls may have
increased any financial constraints for smaller firms. First, many Chilean firms responded to the
controls by adopting alternate forms of financing that were not subject to the tax (such as issuing
ADRs or obtaining direct credit from foreign suppliers). These alternative sources of financing
were not only more costly than those used before the encaje, but often unavailable to smaller
firms with less established reputations. Second, and closely related, there were a number of
loopholes to the capital controls, but finding and developing the mechanisms to utilize these
loopholes required an up-front fixed cost. For larger firms, this fixed cost could be spread across a
greater volume of financing, thereby increasing the return to finding the loopholes. As a result,
larger firms were more likely than smaller firms to search for, find, and utilize these exceptions to
the encaje, and therefore obtain a relatively lower cost of capital.
6 These studies are discussed in more detail in Section II.
7 Costs are for dollar borrowing. Cited in Edwards (1999).
8 These studies are discussed in more detail in Section III.
2