NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TRANSPARENCY, RISK MANAGEMENT
AND INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL FRAGILITY
Mario Draghi
Frnacesco Giavazzi
Robert C. Merton
Working Paper 9806
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9806
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2003
An earlier version was presented under the same title as the Geneva Report at the Fourth Geneva Conference
on the World Economy: Financial Markets: Shock Absorbers or Shock Creators?, International Center for
Monetary and Banking Studies, Geneva, Switzerland, May 10, 2002. Aid from the Centre for Economic
Policy Research and the Swiss National Science Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. We thank Alberto
Giovannini, Charles Goodhart, Michael Mussa and Elu von Thadden for their comments on an earlier draft,
and Agostino Consolo for helpful assistance. Francesco Giavazzi thanks the Houblon-Norman Fund at the
Bank of England for its hospitality while part of this work was conducted. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Mario Draghi, Francesco Giavazzi, and Robert C. Merton. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit
including © notice, is given to the source.

Transparency, Risk Management and International Financial Fragility
Mario Draghi, Francesco Giavazzi, and Robert C. Merton
NBER Working Paper No. 9806
June 2003
JEL No. F3, G1, G2
ABSTRACT
Discussions of financial risk often fail to distinguish between risks that are consciously borne and
those that are not. To understand the breeding conditions for financial crises the prime focus of
concern should not be simply on large risk-taking per se, but on the unintended, or unanticipated
accumulation of large risks by individuals, institutions or governments, often through the lack of
knowledge or understanding of the risks by stakeholders and overseers of those entities. This paper
analyses specific situations in which significant unanticipated and unintended financial risks are
accumulated. It focuses, in particular, on the implicit guarantees that governments extend to banks
and other financial institutions, which may result in the accumulation, often unconscious from the
viewpoint of the government, of unanticipated risks in the balance sheet of the public sector. The
paper also discusses how risk exposures can be measured, hedged and transferred through the use
of derivatives, swap contracts, and other contractual agreements with specific reference to emerging
markets.
Mario Draghi Francesco Giavazzi Robert C. Merton
Vice Chairman Professor of Economics John and Natty McArthur
Goldman Sachs International Bocconi University University Professor
132 Fleet Street 20136, Milano Harvard Business School
London EC4 Italy Boston, MA 02163
mario.draghi@cs.com francesco.giavazzi@uni-bocconi.it and NBER

1. Risk and transparency
Well-functioning financial markets carry out many tasks: the transfer of value over time
(borrowing-lending), across borders and industries, the facilitation of payments, the
fragmentation of large-size investment projects. An important latent function of financial
markets is to provide timely information: on the expectations of economic agents and on the
value of the economy’s assets.
But perhaps the foremost function financial markets perform is the transfer or allocation
of risk among different actors: young people, for instance, tend to be better equipped in taking
on risk than old people. Given a total amount of risk in the economy, financial markets and
financial institutions contribute to its distribution among different actors in a way that better
fits individual preferences or conditions.
Financial markets, however, are often “incomplete”, in the sense that they provide only
limited possibilities to shift risk across individuals. The role of swaps and other privately
negotiated derivative instruments is to complete financial markets, thus increasing the ability
of individuals, financial institutions, corporations and governments to manage risk.
1.1 Risk and derivatives
Consider, for example, an emerging market economy. The domestic financial market will
typically allow very limited diversification of risks. In such a situation, diversification through
international capital mobility is the obvious alternative. However, the transfer across borders of
the ownership of real and financial assets is a rather inflexible way to achieve diversification,
in the sense that it is costly to reverse. Often it also runs against political constraints.
Over-the-Counter (OTC) derivative contracts provide an appealing alternative. Equity
swaps, for instance, allow a country to diversify risk without shifting the ownership of assets.
For example, a government could impose tight capital controls, limit foreign ownership of
1

domestic firms and still diversify the country’s exposure to domestic risk through equity swap
contracts with foreigners that do not require the transfer of ownership of the underlying asset.
The general point is that risk diversification through derivative instruments is more
flexible than diversification through the transfer of assets. Interest rate swaps, for instance, one
of the most common of these instruments, allow banks to service both their borrowers, who
want fixed-interest rate, long-dated loans and their depositor lenders, who do not wish to be
exposed to interest rate risk, without the bank taking interest rate exposure itself. Credit-
default swaps allow a bank to swap credit risk vis-à-vis one borrower for credit risk vis-à-vis a
different set of borrowers: the risk-return performance of the bank may thus be improved
without negatively affecting its relationship with customers—as might happen if the bank were
to sell the loans. We discuss these instruments further in Section 6 of this paper.
A volatile economic environment increases the incentive to use derivatives to achieve a
better allocation of risk in the economy. During the first half of 2002, as uncertainty in the
world economy was increasing, the size of the OTC derivatives market (foreign exchange,
interest rate, equity-linked and commodity contracts), increased by 15 percent, reaching
$127,564 billion. Outstanding credit derivatives, a type of instruments, which did not exist up
to the mid-nineties, increased 35 percent, reaching $1,600 billion. 1
As derivatives markets expand, however, so do the concerns regarding the possibility that
the use of these instruments might increase the vulnerability of the financial system, rather than
contribute to a better allocation of risks. These concerns were well summarized in a recent IMF
paper: “OTC derivative contracts bind institutions together in an opaque network of credit
exposure, the size and characteristics of which can change rapidly and, moreover, are arguably
not fully understood with a high degree of accuracy even by market participants themselves.
Risk assessments and management of exposures are seriously complicated by a lack of solid
information and risk analyses about the riskiness of both their own positions and those of their
1 Data from the B.I.S. and the International Swaps and Derivatives Association.
2