NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE MIRAGE OF EXCHANGE RATE
REGIMES FOR EMERGING MARKET COUNTRIES
Guillermo A. Calvo
Frederic S. Mishkin
Working Paper 9808
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9808
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2003
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2003 by Guillermo A. Calvo and Frederic S. Mishkin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Mirage of Exchange Rate Regimes for Emerging Market Countries
Guillermo A. Calvo and Frederic S. Mishkin
NBER Working Paper No. 9808
June 2003
JEL No. F3, F4, E5
ABSTRACT
This paper argues that much of the debate on choosing an exchange rate regime misses the boat. It
begins by discussing the standard theory of choice between exchange rate regimes, and then explores
the weaknesses in this theory, especially when it is applied to emerging market economies. It then
discusses a range of institutional traits that might predispose a country to favor either fixed or
floating rates, and then turns to the converse question of whether the choice of exchange rate regime
may favor the development of certain desirable institutional traits. The conclusion from the analysis
is that the choice of exchange rate regime is likely to be of second order importance to the
development of good fiscal, financial, and monetary institutions in producing macroeconomic
success in emerging market countries. This suggests that less attention should be focused on the
general question whether a floating or a fixed exchange rate is preferable, and more on these deeper
institutional arrangements. A focus on institutional reforms rather than on the exchange rate regime
may encourage emerging market countries to be healthier and less prone to the crises that we have
seen in recent years.
Guillermo A. Calvo
Chief Economist
Inter-American Development Bank
1300 New York Avenue NW
Washington, D.C., 20577
and NBER
gcalvo@iadb.org
Frederic S. Mishkin
Graduate School of Business
Uris Hall 619
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
fsm3@columbia.edu

In recent years, a number of emerging market countries have experienced devastating
financial crises and macroeconomic turbulence, including Argentina (2001-2002), Turkey (2000-
2001), Ecuador (1999), Russia (1998), east Asia (1997), Mexico (1994-95), and even Chile (1982).
In the ensuing post-mortems, an active debate has followed over how the choice of exchange rate
regime might have contributed to macroeconomic instability – and conversely, how a shift in
exchange rate regime might contribute to improved macroeconomic performance. Should an
emerging market economy prefer a floating exchange rate, a fixed exchange rate, or some blend
of the two like an exchange rate that was usually fixed but might sometimes shift?
Many countries used to choose an intermediate path: that is, an exchange rate that was
often stabilized by the central bank, but might sometimes shift, often known as a “soft peg.”
However, in the aftermath of the macroeconomic crisis across east Asia in 1997-98, a view emerged
that this exchange rate regime was in part responsible for the depth of the macroecononomic
crisis. The governments of Thailand, Malaysia, South Korea, and other nations in that region had
kept exchange rates fixed. There was no explicit institutional guarantee that the exchange rate
would remain fixed, but the rates had been stable for long enough that local financial institutions
borrowed in dollars abroad and then loaned freely in U.S. dollars to domestic borrowers. But
when a surge of foreign investment stopped, the existing exchange rate became unsustainable.
For example, when the Thai baht collapsed against the U.S. dollar, Thai borrowers were
completely unable to repay their dollar-denominated loans – and in turn Thai financial
institutions were nearly all insolvent. This meltdown of the financial sector led to an enormous
economic contraction.
2

Thus, one often-told lesson of the east Asian experience is that nations must make a
bipolar choice: either choose a framework for credibly guaranteeing a fixed exchange rate,
known as a “hard peg,” or else accept a freely floating exchange rate.1 Yet neither of these
extreme exchange rate regimes has an unblemished record.
There are two basic ways a government can offer a credible guarantee of a fixed exchange
rate: a currency board and full dollarization. In a currency board the note-issuing authority, whether
the central bank or the government, fixes a conversion rate for this currency vis-à-vis a foreign
currency (say U.S. dollars) and provides full convertibility because it stands ready to exchange
domestically issued notes for the foreign currency on demand and has enough international reserves
to do so. Full dollarization involves eliminating the domestic currency altogether and replacing it
with a foreign currency like the U.S. dollar, which is why it is referred to as dollarization, although it
could instead involve the use of another currency like the euro. This commitment is even stronger
than a currency board because it makes it much more difficult -- though not impossible -- for the
government to regain control of monetary policy and/or set a new parity for the (nonexistent)
domestic currency.
Argentina, for example, chose the currency board approach for ensuring a fixed exchange
rate. Indeed, Argentina even recognized that full backing of the monetary base may not be
enough, because that would leave the banking system without a lender of last resort or a situation
where the government might need additional credit, so the Argentines also paid for contingent
credit lines. From a legal perspective, the central bank of Argentina was highly independent. But in
1 For a discussion of the why soft pegs have fallen out of favor and the rise of the bipolar view, see
Obstfeld and Rogoff (1995), Eichengreen and Masson (1998), and Fischer (2001) in this journal.
3