NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANKRUPTCY POLICY REFORM AND TOTAL
FACTOR PRODUCTIVITY DYNAMICS IN KOREA:
EVIDENCE FROM MACRO DATA
Youngjae Lim
Chin Hee Hahn
Working Paper 9810
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9810
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2003
This paper was prepared for the volume on Productivity that is being edited by Takatoshi Ito and Andrew Rose
for the NBER and will be published by the University of Chicago Press.The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Youngjae Lim and Chin Hee Hahn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is given
to the source.

Bankruptcy Policy Reform and Total Factor Productivity Dynamics in Korea:
Evidence from Micro Data
Youngjae Lim and Chin Hee Hahn
NBER Working Paper No. 9810
June 2003
JEL No. K0, L1, N8, O0, O4
ABSTRACT
Using the firm level panel data, obtained from the period between during , this study shows that the
failing firms, accepted in the court-administered rehabilitation procedures after the post-crisis
bankruptcy reform in Korea, had experienced less persistent problems in the pre-bankruptcy Total-
Factor-Productivity (TFP) performances than those before the reform. The most crucial element of
the post-crisis reform in the post-crisis court-administered bankruptcy system is the implementation
of an economic efficiency criterion, whereas the pre-reform system benefited failing firms deemed
as having high social value and prospects for rehabilitation. The new system removes the
possibilities for interested parties to oppose the exit of the firms without economic values. Then,
to get an idea of how the bankruptcy policy reform would affect the performance of aggregate TFP,
we assess the role of the creative destruction process of entry and exit in total factor productivity
growth utilizing plant level panel data in the Korean manufacturing sector during the 1990-98
period. For this purpose, we document the plant entry and exit rates, examine the dynamic
relationship between plant turnovers and plant productivity, and quantify the contribution from
entry and exit to productivity growth. We conclude that, for sustained total factor productivity
growth, it is important to establish policy or institutional environment where efficient businesses
succeed and inefficient businesses fail.
Youngjae Lim
Korea Development Institute
P.O. Box 113, Cheongnyang
Seoul 130-012, KOREA
yjlim@kdi.re.kr
Chin Hee Hahn
Korea Development Institute
P.O. Box 113, Cheongnyang
Seoul 130-012, KOREA
chhahn@kdi.re.kr

I. Introduction
During the onset of the Korean financial crisis in 1997, an inefficient corporate
bankruptcy system had a detrimental affect on Korea’s economy. Prior to the crisis, in 1996
and the first three-quarters of 1997, a number of large firms facing bankruptcy actively
sought shelter under the court-administered rehabilitation procedures. However, the
inadequacies of the bankruptcy system failed to maintain discipline in targeting appropriate
firms to undergo the rehabilitation procedure among the increasingly large number of
financially distressed firms. Meanwhile, before the outbreak of the economic crisis, the
uncertainty and delay encountered in dealing with failing firms clearly added to the distortion
of the resource allocation process in Korea’s economy.
In other words, the exit barriers for large firms seemed to have deteriorated the
efficiency of resource allocation before the onset of the crisis. Prior to the crisis, Korea’s
corporate bankruptcy system had a tendency to work as a de facto exit barrier. For example,
before the reform, producers with persistently declining productivity were more likely to be
accepted in some rehabilitation procedure if they were deemed as having “high social value”
such as a large output or employment share in the economy.
Hence, the natural course of action for post-crisis Korea was to undertake a
2

sweeping reform of its corporate bankruptcy system. As the case with other structural reforms
in the corporate sector, reforming Korea’s bankruptcy policy was pushed forward based on
the belief that new reforms were essential in preventing recurrent economic crises from
plaguing the economy. Yet, the past experiences of crisis-hit countries suggest that there is a
strong possibility that incomplete or weak reforms will often lead to recurrent economic
crises. Despite the suggestion, to the best of our knowledge, there are few empirical studies to
examine how bankruptcy reforms in the post-crisis Korea affect the efficiency of resource re-
allocation and, ultimately, the total factor productivity (TFP) growth in Korea’s economy.1
Against this backdrop, our study aims to address the issue of evaluating the effects
of bankruptcy policy reform by analyzing micro data on the firm or plant level. First, by
employing the firm-level panel data, the study will examine how the post-crisis reforms in the
bankruptcy policy affect the productivity dynamics of failing firms. In the analysis, we will
focus on bankruptcy procedures administered by the courts. For example, failing firms faced
with bankruptcy that are unsuccessful in securing an out-of-court settlement after exhausting
1 There are some recent studies that begin by examining the determinants of the divergent growth path of crisis-
hit countries and (simply) suggest that such policies as bankruptcy policy reform, are possibly the candidates.
However, they do not analyze the effect of bankruptcy policy reform on the resource re-allocation process of the
economy based on the details of institutions at the micro level. For instance, Hayashi and Prescott (2000) show
the 1990's of the Japanese economy is the failure to improve productivity not the failure to accumulate inputs.
Based on this finding and other evidence, they further suggest that the industrial policy of protecting failing or
declining industries or firms by the Japanese government is the main culprit behind the "lost decade".
Meanwhile, in a comparative study of Chile and Mexico, Bergoeing, Kehoe, Kehoe, and Soto (2001) show that
the decade-long divergent growth paths of the two countries since the financial crisis in the early 1980's are
predominantly driven by the differences in total factor productivity growth rates. They suggest that policies such
as the bankruptcy policy reform, are candidates for explaining the different paths of the two countries.
3