NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION AS AN AGENCY PROBLEM
Lucian Arye Bebchuk
Jesse M. Fried
Working Paper 9813
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9813
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2003
We are grateful to Bradford Delong, Andrei Shleifer, Timothy Taylor, and Michael Waldman for many
valuable suggestions. For financial support, we would like to thank the John M. Olin Center for Law,
Economics, and Business (Bebchuk) and the Boalt Hall Fund and U.C. Berkeley Committee on Research
(Fried). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research
©2003 by Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Jesse M. Fried. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is
given to the source.

Executive Compensation as an Agency Problem
Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Jesse M. Fried
NBER Working Paper No. 9813
July 2003
JEL No. D23, G32, G34, G38, J33, J44, K22, M14
ABSTRACT
This paper provides an overview of the main theoretical elements and empirical
underpinnings of a “managerial power” approach to executive compensation. Under this approach,
the design of executive compensation is viewed not only as an instrument for addressing the agency
problem between managers and shareholders but also as part of the agency problem itself. Boards
of publicly traded companies with dispersed ownership, we argue, cannot be expected to bargain at
arm’s length with managers. As a result, managers wield substantial influence over their own pay
arrangements, and they have an interest in reducing the saliency of the amount of their pay and the
extent to which that pay is de-coupled from managers’ performance. We show that the managerial
power approach can explain many features of the executive compensation landscape, including ones
that many researchers have long viewed as puzzling. Among other things, we discuss option plan
design, stealth compensation, executive loans, payments to departing executives, retirement benefits,
the use of compensation consultants, and the observed relationship between CEO power and pay.
We also explain how managerial influence might lead to substantially inefficient arrangements that
produce weak or even perverse incentives.
Lucian Arye Bebchuk Jesse M. Fried
John M. Olin Center Boalt Hall School of Law
for Law, Economics, and Business University of California at Berkeley
Harvard Law School Berkeley, CA 94720
1557 Massachusetts Avenue friedj@law.berkeley.edu
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
bebchuk@law.harvard.edu

Executive compensation has long attracted a great deal of attention from
financial economists. Indeed, the increase in academic papers on the subject of
CEO compensation during the 1990’s seems to have outpaced even the
remarkable increase in CEO pay itself during this period (Murphy (1999)). Much
research has focused on how executive compensation schemes can help alleviate
the agency problem in publicly traded companies. To adequately understand the
landscape of executive compensation, however, it is necessary to recognize that
the design of compensation schemes is also partly a product of this same agency
problem.
I. ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES TO EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
Our focus in this paper is on publicly traded companies without a
controlling shareholder. When ownership and management are separated in this
way, managers might have substantial power. This recognition goes back, of
course, to Berle and Means (1933) who observed that “[D]irectors, while in office,
have almost complete discretion in management” (p. 139). Since Jensen and
Meckling (1976), the problem of managerial power and discretion has been
analyzed in modern finance as an “agency problem.”
Managers may use their discretion to benefit their private interests in a
variety of ways (Shleifer and Vishny (1997)). For example, managers may engage
in empire building (Jensen, (1974), Williamson (1964)). They may, as Jensen
(1986) suggests, fail to distribute excess cash when the firm does not have
profitable investment opportunities. Managers also may entrench themselves in
their positions, making it difficult to oust them when they perform poorly
(Shleifer and Vishny (1989)). Any discussion of executive compensation must
proceed against the background of the fundamental agency problem afflicting
management decision-making. There are two different views, however, on how
the agency problem and executive compensation might be linked.
Among financial economists, the dominant approach to the study of
executive compensation views these pay arrangements as a (partial) remedy to the
agency problem. Under this approach, which we label “the optimal contracting
approach,” boards are assumed to design compensation schemes to provide
managers with efficient incentives to maximize shareholder value. Financial
economists have done substantial work within this optimal contracting model in
an effort to understand executive compensation practices. Recent surveys of this
work include Murphy (1999) and Core, Guay, and Larcker (2001). To researchers
working within the optimal contracting model, the main flaw with existing
practices seems to be that, due to political limitations on how generously
1

executives can be treated, compensation schemes are not sufficiently high-
powered (Jensen and Murphy (1990)).
Another approach to studying executive compensation focuses on a
different link between the agency problem and executive compensation. Under
this approach, which we label the “managerial power approach,” executive
compensation is viewed not only as a potential instrument for addressing agency
problems – but also as part of the agency problem itself. As a number of
researchers have recognized, some features of pay arrangements seem to reflect
managerial rent seeking rather than the provision of efficient incentives (e.g.,
Blanchard, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, (1994), Yermack (1997), and Bertrand
and Mullainathan (2001)). We seek to develop a full account of how managerial
influence shapes the executive compensation landscape in a forthcoming book
(Bebchuk and Fried (2004)) that builds substantially on a long article written
jointly with David Walker (Bebchuk, Fried, and Walker (2002)).
Drawing on this work, we argue below that managerial power and rent
extraction are likely to have an important influence on the design of
compensation arrangements. Indeed, the managerial power approach can shed
light on many significant features of the executive compensation landscape that
have long been seen as puzzling by researchers working within the optimal
contracting model. We also explain that managerial influence on pay might
impose substantial costs on shareholders – beyond the amount of excess pay
executives receive – by diluting and distorting managers’ incentives and thereby
hurting corporate performance.
Although the managerial power approach is conceptually quite different
from the optimal contracting approach, the former is not proposed as a complete
replacement for the latter. Compensation arrangements might be shaped both by
market forces, which push toward value-maximizing arrangements, and by
managerial influence, which pushes toward departures from optimal
arrangements in directions favorable to managers. The managerial power
approach simply claims that these departures from value-maximizing
arrangements are substantial and that compensation practices thus cannot be
adequately explained by optimal contracting alone.
II. THE LIMITATIONS OF OPTIMAL CONTRACTING
The optimal contracting view recognizes that managers suffer from an
agency problem and do not automatically seek to maximize shareholder value.
Thus, providing managers with adequate incentives is important. Under the
optimal contracting view, the board, working in shareholders’ interest, attempts
2