NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MONETARY POLICY IN ECONOMIES WITH LITTLE OR NO MONEY
Bennett T. McCallum
Working Paper 9838
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9838
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2003
This paper was prepared for presentation at the December 16-17, 2002, meeting of the Hong Kong Economic
Association. I am indebted to Marvin Goodfriend, Lok Sang Ho, Allan Meltzer, and Edward Nelson for helpful
comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research
©2003 by Bennett T. McCallum. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is given to the source.

Monetary Policy in Economies with Little or No Money
Bennett T. McCallum
NBER Working Paper No. 9838
July 2003
JEL No. E3, E4, E5
ABSTRACT
The paper's arguments include: (1) Medium-of-exchange money will not disappear in the foreseeable
future, although the quantity of base money may continue to decline. (2) In economies with very little
money (e.g., no currency but bank settlement balances at the central bank), monetary policy will be
conducted much as at present by activist adjustment of overnight interest rates. Operating procedures
will be different, however, with payment of interest on reserves likely to become the norm. (3) In
economies without any money there can be no monetary policy. The relevant notion of a general price
level concerns some index of prices in terms of a medium of account. The liabilities of some official
entity might serve as the medium of account, but there could be viable rivals if policy is poor. (4) A
broad commodity-bundle monetary standard could be viable, even with a redemption medium, and there
is scope for quantitative analysis of the properties of such a system. (5) The number of distinct national
currencies may decline sharply, with the emergence of a small number of currency areas and floating
exchange rates across these areas.
Bennett T. McCallum
Graduate School of Industrial Administration
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
bmccallum@cmu.edu

1. Introduction
This paper attempts to address issues relating to the topic of the conference session
entitled “Money and Monetary Policy in the 21st Century.” In that futuristic regard,
probably the most prominent concern is that the continuing rapid development of information
technology (IT) could lead to the disappearance of money as more IT-intensive methods for
conducting transactions come to predominate. Closely related is the suggestion that central
banks could lose the ability to influence aggregate demand and, therefore, inflation and
cyclical macro-economic conditions. These topics lead on into other related concerns
involving the unit-of-account role of money and exchange rate arrangements. Of particular
interest are various proposals for an automatic, non-discretionary, commodity-bundle
monetary standard. In what follows I will take up these issues and offer some analysis and
opinions of my own.
2. Preliminaries
Before turning to the paper’s main discussion, it will be useful to review some
definitional matters and also two theoretical points. Terminologically, an economy’s money
is, by traditional usage, its tangible medium of exchange—i.e., an item that is generally
acceptable in payment for any commodity.1 Again by tradition, claims to some primary
medium of exchange (MOE) are considered part of the money stock if they are convertible
on demand. A monetary system of exchange is, accordingly, one in which the vast majority
of transactions involve money on one side. A barter system of exchange, by contrast, is one
in which commodities are directly exchanged without any intermediate conversion into
money. Finally, an accounting system of exchange is one in which there is no money but
exchanges are conducted by means of signals to an accounting network, with debits and
1

credits to the wealth accounts of buyers and sellers being effected with each exchange. In the
present paper, as in McCallum (1985), I will classify the latter type of system as non-
monetary. In effect, an accounting system of exchange is a highly efficient form of barter.
Many writings emphasize that money typically serves in a second role, besides that as
the MOE, as a “unit of account.” Syntactically this usage is illogical, as noted by Wicksell
(1935, p. 7) and Niehans (1978, p. 118), since money is a tangible object, not an intangible
unit of measurement. What makes more sense is to distinguish the medium of account
(MOA)—a particular commodity or commodity bundle—from the unit of account, which is
some specified quantity of the MOA. Then the MOA is a good (or specified bundle of
goods) some quantity of which serves as the basis for quoting prices in the economy under
consideration. Thus, for example, from 1901-1932 the U.S. economy’s MOA was gold
whereas its unit of account (UOA) was a dollar, defined as 0.04838 ounces of gold. Since
1971, by contrast, the MOA for the United States has been Federal Reserve Notes (and
claims to them), with one dollar serving as the UOA.
There is, as mentioned by Wicksell (1935) and Niehans (1978), and emphasized by
McCallum (1985), no logical necessity for an economy’s MOE to also be its MOA. But the
computational benefits of having a MOA, which are sizeable, are incomplete unless the
MOA is also the MOE. Accordingly, the MOE in a monetary economy will in most cases
also be used as the MOA. In the absence of severe inflation or some other inducement to do
otherwise, that is, sellers will quote prices in terms of the MOE. In other words, the MOE
and MOA tend to coincide.
The first theoretical point to be mentioned is that private optimality considerations
imply that if two assets are held in positive quantities and have equivalent risk
1 See, for example, Wicksell (1935) and Niehans (1978).
2