NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FINANCIAL INNOVATION, MARKET PARTICIPATION
AND ASSET PRICES
Laurent Calvet
Martín Gonzalez-Eiras
Paolo Sodini
Working Paper 9840
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9840
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2003
Earlier versions of this paper appear in the Ph.D. dissertations of M. Gonzalez-Eiras and P. Sodini. We
received helpful comments from D. Acemoglu, F. Alvarez, S. Basak, O. Blanchard, R. Caballero, J.
Campbell, J. Detemple, P. Diamond, A. Fisher, R. Giammarino, G. Mankiw, E. Maskin, M. Pagano, T.
Persson, S. Ross, R. Uppal, D. Vayanos, T. Vuolteenaho, J. Wang, and seminar participants at Boston
University, CEU, ESSEC, Gerzensee, Harvard, INSEAD, the London School of Economics, MIT, NYU,
Salerno, San Andrés, the Stockholm School of Economics, UBC, the University of Amsterdam, the
University of Cyprus, UTDT, the University of Trieste, the Rolf Mantel Memorial Conference, the 2000
LACEA Meeting, the 2001 European Summer Meeting of the Econometric Society and the 2002 NBER
Meeting on Economic Fluctuations and Growth. The paper also benefited from excellent research assistance
by Charles P. Cohen. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research
©2003 by Laurent Calvet, Martín Gonzalez-Eiras, and Paolo Sodini. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit
including © notice, is given to the source.

Financial Innovation, Market Participation and Asset Prices
Laurent Calvet, Martín Gonzalez-Eiras, and Paolo Sodini
NBER Working Paper No. 9840
July 2003
JEL No. D52, E44, G12
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates the pricing effects of financial innovation in an economy with endogenous
participation and heterogeneous income risks. The introduction of non-redundant assets
endogenously modifies the participation set, reduces the covariance between dividends and
participants' consumption and thus leads to lower risk premia. In multisector economies, financial
innovation spreads across markets through the diversified portfolio of new entrants, and has rich
effects on the cross-section of expected returns. The price changes can also lead some investors to
leave the markets and give rise to non-degenerate forms of participation turnover. The model is
consistent with several features of financial markets over the past few decades: substantial
innovation; higher participation; significant turnover in investor composition; improved risk
management practices; a slight increase in interest rates; and a reduction in risk premia.
Laurent Calvet Martín Gonzalez-Eiras
Department of Economics Departamento de Economía
Harvard University Universidad de San Andrés
Littauer Center Vito Dumas 284 (1644)- Victoria
Cambridge, MA 02138 Buenos Aires, Argentina
and NBER mge@udesa.edu.ar
lcalvet@aya.yale.edu
Paolo Sodoni
Department of Finance
Stockholm School of Economics
Sveavägen 65
Box 6501
SE-113 83 Stockholm
Sweden
paolo.sodini@hhs.se

1. Introduction
The introduction of a vast array of non-redundant securities has transformed fi-
nancial markets over the past few decades. Derivative contracts now allow firms
to routinely manage their exposure to commodity and financial prices.1 New in-
surance and financial products provide additional diversification opportunities to
individual investors. Initial public offerings have enabled entrepreneurs to diver-
sify some of their wealth away from the companies in which they had managerial
interests.2 Financial theory suggests that these innovations might have profound
implications for portfolio choice, asset pricing and the cross-sectional allocation
of risk.3 For instance, new instruments allow agents to reduce their exposure to
idiosyncratic or background shocks, which increases the demand for stocks and
leads to a lower market premium (e.g. Kihlstrom, Romer and Williams, 1981;
Nachman, 1982; Campbell and Viceira, 2002).
Thispapershowsthatnewmechanismsarisewhenparticipationisendogenized
in an economy with heterogeneous income risks.4 The introduction of new securi-
ties changes the participation set, decreases the covariance between dividends and
participants’ consumption, and thus amplifies the reduction in the market pre-
mium. In multifactor economies, financial innovation also spreads across markets
throughthediversifiedportfoliochoicesofnewentrantsandhasricheffectsonthe
cross-section of expected returns. The price changes can also lead some investors
to leave financial markets. Innovation then induces the simultaneous entry and
exit of investors, giving rise to non-degenerate forms of participation turnover.5
Our approach builds on the existence of fixed costs to participate in financial
markets. Corporatehedgingrequirestheemploymentofexpertsabletoeffectively
reduce the firm’s risk exposure using existing financial assets. Investors have to
sustain learning efforts and expenses related to the opening and maintenance of
accounts with an exchange or a brokerage firm. Statutory and government reg-
1See for instance Ross (1976).
2Shiller (2003) provides a recent review of these developments.
3Theoretical investigations of financial innovation include Allen and Gale (1994a, b), Calvet
(2001), Cass and Citanna (1998), Detemple and Selden (1991), Duffie and Jackson (1989),
Grossman (1989), Huang and Wang (1997), and Stein (1987). See Duffie and Rahi (1995) for a
review.
4Whilethediscussionfocusesontheeffectofanincreaseinspanning,thepaperalsoanalyzes
the consequences of a reduction in transactions costs.
5Hurst, Luoh and Stafford (1998) and Vissing-Jørgensen (2002) report substantial rates of
entry and exit in US stockownership.
1

ulations often create costly barriers to the participation of institutional investors
in some markets.
We introduce a two-period economy with incomplete markets and endogenous
participation. Agents can borrow or lend freely, but have to pay a fixed entry
cost to invest in risky assets. They receive heterogeneous random incomes deter-
mined by a finite number of macroeconomic risk factors. Security prices and the
participation structure are jointly determined in equilibrium. The model is com-
putationally tractable and leads to a closed-form system of equilibrium equations
in the CARA-normal case. As mentioned earlier, three new mechanisms arise in
this economy.
First, the introduction of non-redundant instruments encourages more in-
vestorstoparticipateinfinancialmarketsforhedginganddiversificationpurposes.
Under plausible conditions on the cross-sectional distribution of risk, the new en-
trants reduce the covariance between stock returns and the mean consumption of
participants, leading to a lower market premium. The model thus illustrates the
connection between the cross-sectional distribution of risk and the price impact
of new assets. It is also consistent with features that have characterized finan-
cial markets in the past few decades: substantial financial innovation, a sharp
increase in investor participation, improvements in risk-management practices, a
slight increase of real interest rates, and a reduction in the risk premium.6
Second, participation plays an important role in spreading the effects of in-
novation across markets. When a common factor becomes tradable, some agents
decide to pay the entry fee and trade the new contract in order to manage their
risk exposure. The new participants achieve optimal diversification by trading
other assets, which modifies the risk premia even in sectors uncorrelated to the
new contract. Furthermore, the entrants tend to have a stronger impact on the
average exposure to the factor than on other sectors of the economy. As a result,
price changes are more pronounced for assets correlated with the new contract.
Financial innovation thus differentially affects distinct sectors of the economy and
has a rich impact on the cross-section of expected returns.
Third, the price changes induced by financial innovation can give rise to non-
degenerate forms of participation turnover. For instance, the introduction of a
new asset leads some agents to enter financial markets to manage their income
6The decrease in the risk premium is reported in Blanchard (1993), Campbell and Shiller
(2003),Cochrane(1997)andFamaandFrench(2002). Similarly,BarroandSala-i-Martin(1990)
andHonohan(2000)documentaslightincreaseinrealinterestratesoverthepastthreedecades.
2