NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
STOCK PRICES AND IPO WAVES
Luboš Pástor
Pietro Veronesi
Working Paper 9858
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9858
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2003
The authors thank John Campbell, John Cochrane, Gene Fama, Tano Santos, Per Strömberg, Luigi Zingales,
and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, INSEAD, and London Business School for
helpful comments. Huafeng Chen, Karl Diether, Lukasz Pomorski, and Anand Surelia provided expert
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research
©2003 by Luboš Pástor and Pietro Veronesi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is given
to the source.

Stock Prices and IPO Waves
Luboš Pástor and Pietro Veronesi
NBER Working Paper No. 9858
July 2003
JEL No. G12
ABSTRACT
We develop a model of stock valuation and optimal IPO timing when investment
opportunities are time-varying. IPO waves in our model are caused by declines in expected returns,
increases in expected profitability, or increases in prior uncertainty about average profitability. The
model predicts that IPO waves are preceded by high market returns, followed by low market returns,
and accompanied by high stock prices. These as well as other predictions are supported empirically.
Stock prices at the peak of the recent "bubble", which was associated with an IPO wave, are
consistent with plausible parameter values in our rational valuation model.
Luboš Pástor Pietro Veronesi
Graduate School of Business Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street 1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637 Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER and NBER
lubos.pastor@gsb.uchicago.edu pietro.veronesi@gsb.uchicago.edu

1. Introduction
The number of initial public o®erings (IPOs) changes dramatically over time, as shown in
Figure 1. For example, 845 ¯rms went public in 1996, but there were only 83 IPOs in 2001
and 87 IPOs in 2002. What are the underlying causes of the wild swings in IPO volume?
How is IPO volume related to market prices? Were the stock prices in March 2000 too high?
These are the questions this paper aims to answer, theoretically as well as empirically.
We argue that IPO volume varies due to time variation in investment opportunities.
We develop a model of stock valuation in which investment opportunities vary in three
dimensions: expected market returns, expected aggregate pro¯tability, and prior uncertainty
about the post-IPO average pro¯tability in excess of market pro¯tability. We then set up a
simple model of optimal IPO timing, and show that IPO volume responds to time variation
in all three dimensions of investment opportunities. IPO volume has important implications
for stock prices { for the valuations of IPOs and of the market as a whole.
We consider an economy with a special class of agents, \inventors", who are uniquely
equipped to invent new ideas that can lead to abnormal pro¯ts. New ideas are discovered
at a constant frequency. Inventors patent each idea upon discovery and start a private ¯rm
that owns the patent. Inventors lack the capital necessary to begin production, so they must
turn to capital markets. The decision faced by inventors is when to take their ¯rms public
and begin irreversible production to maximize the value of their patents. When investment
opportunities are constant, it is optimal to go public as soon as the patent is secured. When
investment opportunities vary over time, however, inventors may ¯nd it optimal to postpone
their IPO in anticipation of more favorable economic conditions in the future.
We solve for the optimal time to go public, and show that new ¯rms are attracted to
capital markets especially when the cost of capital is low, when expected future cash °ows
are high, and when the uncertainty surrounding those °ows is high. As a result, clusters
of IPOs, or \IPO waves", occur after expected returns decline, after expected pro¯tability
increases, or after uncertainty about average pro¯tability increases. IPOs cluster because
when investment opportunities improve, many inventors exercise their options to take their
¯rms public at about the same time. The resulting IPO waves typically last several months,
as all private ¯rms rarely go public at exactly the same time because they di®er in the time
to expiration on their patents as well as in their ¯rm-speci¯c pro¯tability. To demonstrate
the various properties of IPO waves implied by our model, we calibrate the model to the
data and simulate it over long periods of time.
1

Our model is rich in empirical predictions. IPO waves caused by a decline in expected
market return should be preceded by high market returns (because prices rise while expected
returnfalls)andfollowedbylow marketreturns(becauseexpectedreturnhasdeclined). IPO
waves caused by an increase in expected pro¯tability should also be preceded by high market
returns(becausepricesriseascash°owexpectationsgoup)andfollowedbyhighpro¯tability
(because expected pro¯tability has risen). Finally, IPO waves caused by an increase in prior
uncertainty about average pro¯tability should be preceded by increased disparity between
newly listed ¯rms and seasoned ¯rms in terms of their valuations and return volatilities
(because prior uncertainty a®ects the valuations and volatilities of new ¯rms only).
Wetestthemodel'simplicationsusingdatabetween1960and2002, and¯ndconsiderable
corroborating evidence. We ¯nd support for all three channels (discount rate, cash °ow, and
uncertainty) through which IPO waves are created in our model. IPO volume is positively
related to recent market returns, consistent with a decline in expected returns as well as with
an increase in expected pro¯ts before IPO waves. The discount rate channel is supported by
two additional ¯ndings: IPO volume is negatively related to future market returns as well
as to recent changes in market return volatility, which is itself positively related to expected
market return in our model. The cash °ow channel is also supported by two additional
facts: IPO volume is positively related to changes in aggregate pro¯tability as well as to
revisions in analysts' forecasts of long-term earnings growth. Finally, IPO volume is also
positively related to recent changes in the excess volatility and valuation of newly listed
¯rms, consistent with an increase in prior uncertainty about average pro¯tability.
In addition to optimal IPO timing, we also analyze stock prices, using a closed-form so-
lution for a ¯rm's ratio of market equity to book equity (M/B). We show that IPO waves in
our model tend to be preceded by high valuations for the market as a whole. The reason is
that IPO timing is endogenous { ¯rms are induced to go public by improvements in invest-
ment opportunities (e.g. declines in expected returns or increases in expected pro¯tability),
and these improvements also have the e®ect of lifting the valuations of all ¯rms. The fact
that IPO waves follow high market valuations has been documented e.g. by Lerner (1994),
Loughran, Ritter, and Rydqvist (1994), Pagano, Panetta, and Zingales (1998), Baker and
Wurgler (2000), and Lowry (2003).1 Most of these papers provide behavioral explanations,
but we show that this phenomenon is also consistent with a rational model.
1Schultz (2003) argues that equity issuers appear to time the market ex post but not ex ante, because
market peaks are known only ex post. His crucial assumption is that ¯rms issue equity at higher prices.
(Note that issuance at higher prices arises endogenously in our model.) According to Schultz, IPO volume
is correlated with future returns ex post, but not ex ante. In contrast, in our model ¯rms go public after
declines in expected returns, so that high IPO volume predicts low market returns also ex ante.
2