NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHO BENEFITS FROM LABOR MARKET REGULATIONS?:
CHILE 1960-1998
Claudio E. Montenegro
Carmen Pagés
Working Paper 9850
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9850
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2003
Forthcoming in Law and Employment: Lessons from Latin America and the Caribbean, edited by Heckman
and Pagés. We thank the University of Chile for giving us permission to use their data. The views expressed
in this paper are those of the authors and do not represent the opinions of the World Bank, the IADB or their
boards of directors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research
©2003 by Claudio E. Montenegro and Carmen Pagés. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is
given to the source.

Who Benefits from Labor Market Regulations?: Chile 1960-1998
Claudio E. Montenegro and Carmen Pagés
NBER Working Paper No. 9850
July 2003
JEL No. E24, J23, J65
ABSTRACT
Economists have examined the impact of labor market regulations on the level of employment.
However, there are many reasons to suspect that the impact of regulations differs across types of
workers. In this paper we take advantage of the unusual large variance in labor policy in Chile to
exa mine how different labor market regulations affect the distribution of employment and the
employment rates across age, gender and skill levels. To this effect, we use a sample of repeated
cross-section household surveys spanning the period 1960-1998 and measures of the evolution of
job security provisions and minimum wages across time. Our results suggest large distribution
effects. We find that employment security provisions and minimum wages reduce the share of
youth and unskilled employment as well as their employment rates. We also find large effects on
the distribution of employment between women and men.
Claudio E. Montenegro Carmen Pagés
The World Bank Inter-American Development Bank

1. Introduction
The economic literature has devoted considerable attention to studying the impact of labor market
regulations on labor market outcomes. However, the issue of whether some sub-groups of workers bear
the brunt or enjoy the benefits of such regulations has been much less studied.2 One notable exception has
been the burgeoning literature studying the effect of statutory minimum wages on youth employment.
Although this subject remains controversial, many studies have found negative effects of minimum wages
on teenagers and young workers.3 Less attention has been paid to the issue of whether minimum wages
particularly affect women or men or unskilled versus skilled workers. Similarly, very little attention has
been paid to the effect that job security provisions may have on particular sub-groups of the labor force.
In this paper, we take advantage of the unusual variance in labor market policies in Chile to
examine how minimum wages and job security provisions affect different types of workers. To this effect,
we use a sample of repeated household surveys spanning the period 1960-1998 and several measures of
labor market regulations across time. We make use of cross-section and time-series methods to estimate
the effect that these policies have on the distribution of employment and on the particular sub-groups
employment rates. To assess whether our estimates are reflecting the effect of regulations instead of the
effect of some unobservable correlates, we also estimate the effect of labor policy on sectors not covered
by regulations. We find large and statistically significant effects on the covered sectors and no effects, or
effects going in the opposite direction, in the uncovered sectors.
Our results indicate that labor market regulations are far from neutral. We find that job security
provisions and minimum wages reduce the employment rates of the youth and the unskilled at the benefit
of older and skilled workers. We also find opposite effects of these policies on women’s and men’s
employment shares and rates. Job security provisions tend to benefit men at the expense of women, while
the reverse seems to be true for an increase in the minimum wage.
We then explore some explanations for these regularities and, while we cannot fully discriminate
among all of them, we are at least able to reject some hypotheses. There is little evidence that these
differential effects are driven by differences in labor supply elasticities or wage adjustments across sub-
groups. Instead, our findings suggest that labor market regulations produce unequal shifts in labor
demand across groups of workers.
2 One reference in this literature is the paper by Bertola, Blau and Kahn (2002) on the effect of unions’ involvement
in wage setting on the relative employment of youth, women and older individuals.
3 Among the most recent studies, Williams and Mills (2001), Partridge and Partridge (1998) and Bazen and Skourias
(1997) find a negative relation between minimum wages and youth employment, while Katz and Krueger (1992),
Card and Krueger (1994, 2000) and Card, Katz and Krueger (1993) find no evidence of such an effect.
1

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the arguments that predict non-
neutral effects of regulations. Section 3 describes the evolution of job security and minimum wage
regulations in Chile. Section 4 describes the data used in our empirical section. Section 5 describes the
methodology implemented to estimate the effects of regulations on the distribution of employment.
Section 6 describes our results for both the distribution of employment and the overall effect on
employment rates. Finally, Section 7 concludes.
2. Why Regulations May Affect Some Workers Differently
There are a number of reasons to suspect that labor market regulations alter the distribution of
employment across sub-groups. In the next two subsections we review the theoretical arguments that
predict differential effects of job security provisions and minimum wages across workers of different age,
skill level and gender.
2.1 Job Security
Job security provisions are introduced to discourage firms from adjusting their labor forces in the face of
adverse economic conditions. However, job security provisions also alter hiring decisions. In good times,
firms hire fewer workers because they take into account that these workers may have to be laid off in the
future, and that is costly. The overall impact of job security provisions on employment rates is
undetermined because it depends on whether the negative effect on layoffs is offset by the reduction in
hiring rates.4
Job security provisions will have differential effects across sub-groups of workers if changes in
legislation bring changes in hiring and layoff rates that have a larger impact on some sub-populations than
on others. Lazear (1990) conjectured that an increase in job security might act as a barrier preventing the
entry of young workers into the labor market. This is because job security reduces job creation, and entry
rates are especially high among youth. This argument, however, does not consider that the effect of lower
job creation rates can be offset by lower job destruction rates—which also tend to be large among youth.
Pagés and Montenegro (1999) suggest an argument whereby job security provisions may actually
increase young workers’ layoff rates. Their argument is related to the regularity that, across countries,
job security is positively related with a worker’s tenure. Mandatory severance payments that increase with
tenure change the cost of dismissing workers with short tenures relative to workers with more seniority at
the firm. In this context, it is expected that job security concentrates layoffs among youth because, other
things being equal, young workers tend to have lower average tenures than older workers. If severance
2