NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHY DIDN’T FRANCE FOLLOW THE
BRITISH STABILIZATION AFTER WORLD WAR ONE?
Michael D. Bordo
Pierre-Cyrille Hautcoeur
Working Paper 9860
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9860
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2003
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research
©2003 by Michael D. Bordo and Pierre-Cyrille Hautcoeur. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Why didn’t France follow the British Stabilization after World War One?
Michael D. Bordo and Pierre-Cyrille Hautcoeur
NBER Working Paper No. 9860
July 2003
JEL No. E63, M4
ABSTRACT
We show that the size of the public debt, the budget deficit and the monetary overhang made it
impossible for France to stabilize its price level and return to the pre-war parity immediately after
World War I, even on the anti-keynesian assumption that a stabilization would not have had any
negative effects on real income. The reason for the immediate postwar inflation then was not
mismanaged policy but a wise choice in the French context. Nevertheless, a stabilization at a
devalued franc which would have been substantially higher than the rate achieved by Poincaré in
1926 was historically possible in early 1924, and it would likely have benefited not only France but
the entire international monetary system.
Michael D. Bordo Pierre-Cyrille Hautcoeur
Department of Economics Professeur a l’Universite de Paris I
75 Hamilton Street Pantheon-Sorbonne
New Brunswick, NJ 08901 Chercheur associe au DELTA
and NBER Ecole normale superieure
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu 48 bd Jourdan 75014 Paris
pch@delta.ens.fr

Why didn't France follow the British Stabilization after World War One?a
Michael D. Bordo*
Pierre-Cyrille Hautcœur**
1. Introduction
The standard interpretation of the history of the inter-war period is that Great Britain, by going
back to gold at the original parity, made a big mistake because of the drastic and prolonged
reduction in output that resulted from the deflationary policy followed to achieve successful
resumption (Keynes 1925). This was aggravated by sterling overvaluation in succeeding years,
which put the U.K. at a competitive disadvantage and reinforced the deflation’s impact on output.
By contrast France is generally viewed as having followed a wiser strategy by not returning to the
pre-war parity, then by pursuing an inflationary strategy and allowing the franc to depreciate by
80% before returning to gold at a devalued parity de facto in 1926, thus avoiding the economic
cost of deflation.
The British followed the deflationary route because of the importance attached by the
government and the City of London to maintaining credibility in the bond markets. It was
generally believed that a restoration of the pre-war parity would allow the City of London to
regain its pre-war position as the center of international finance – in modern terms to follow the
gold standard contingent rule.
Recent interpretations of the macroeconomic history of Britain reinforce these arguments and
cast some doubt on the classic Keynesian story. They first demonstrate the importance of the
reputational argument, showing that a country following the gold standard rule gains by paying
durably lower interest rates (Bordo and Kydland 1995). They also discuss the reasons for high
unemployment: in contrast to those attributing it to deficient aggregate demand (e.g. Thomas,
a We thank Debajyoti Chakrabarty for helpful research assistance, participants at seminars at U. Carlos III, U. Paris XII,
U. Pompeu Fabra, U. de les Illes Balears, at the World Cliometric Society Meetings (Montreal, July 2000) and the
Economic History Association Annual Meetings (Philadelphia, September, 2001), Patrice Baubeau, Bertrand
Blancheton, Mark Carlson, Olivier Jeanne, Gianni Toniolo, Marc Trachtenberg, Eugene White and especially Pierre
Sicsic for useful comments on an earlier version of this paper.
* Rutgers U. and NBER.
** U. of Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne (Matisse) and DELTA (joint research unit CNRS-EHESS-ENS).
1

1981), they consider that it mostly reflected an increase in labor-market rigidities and high
unemployment benefits (Benjamin and Kochin 1979, 1982). Britain's balance of trade problems
are also attributed to rigidities in its specialization rather than to the overvaluation of the pound
(Maizels 1970 ; Broadberry and Ritschl 1995).
The new classical reinterpretation of the 1920’s has not been applied to French
macroeconomic history, even if there exist some good reasons to do so: that the French
government also believed in the importance of reputation to maintain its borrowing capacity in an
unstable world; and that France had also been an important international financial center before
1914 and wished to rebuild that position. So it is not surprising that after World War I many
argued that it should follow a policy similar to the British for similar reasons. The costs of the
inflationary process from 1914 to 1926 are also well known: a fragile financial system (Bouvier,
1984); leading to insufficiently capitalized firms; a decline in the international position of the
French financial market; undervaluation of the franc leading to inadequate specialization
subsequently revealed during the 1927-28 post-stabilization crisis (Marseille 1981).
The purpose of this paper is to open the debate by asking why France did not follow the
British example in an early deflationary policy and stabilization at the pre-war gold parity.
Specifically we ask the following questions: Was it possible for France to follow Britain in 1919?
What were the reasons or the constraints behind the choice made at the French Ministry of
Finance to resist the Banque de France and the public demand for a return to gold at the prewar
parity (with the revaluation and the deflation it implied) ? (Blancheton 2000). If the civil servants
in the rue de Rivoli, best symbolized by Pierre de Moüy, director of the Mouvement général des
fonds (the Treasury), wanted to stabilize the currency without destabilizing the economy, did they
succeed or was it possible to stabilize earlier at a lower cost?
In this paper we thus concentrate on the simple question, could France have followed a
British-style macroeconomic strategy beginning in 1919, the last point at which French prices
were within striking distance of restoring pre-war purchasing power parity with respect to the
pound ? What was the actual importance of the constraints (budget deficit, public debt, monetary
overhang, political instability) that the French government faced in order to implement that
strategy?
To answer this question, we simulate a simple model of the French economy in the 1920’s.
The model captures the effects of deflation and higher taxes on the supply side through the effects
via sticky wages on investment and real output. The counterfactual effects of a British-style
stabilization policy on fiscal balance is captured by assuming tax increases, conversion of the
2