NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHAT WORKS IN SECURITIES LAWS?
Rafael La Porta
Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes
Andrei Shleifer
Working Paper 9882
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9882
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2003
We are grateful to the Inter-American Development Bank, the Gildor Foundation, the BSI Gamma
Foundation, the NSF, the International Institute for Corporate Governance at Yale University, and the Doing
Business project of the World Bank for financial support, to Alfredo Larrea-Falcony and Qian Sun for
significant contributions to this work, to Constanza Blanco, John C. Coates IV, Luis Leyva Martinez, Carlos
Orta Tejeda, Tuffic Miguel Ortega, Jorge Gabriel Taboada Hoyos, Annette L. Nazareth, and Robert Strahota
for assistance in developing the questionnaire, to Douglas Baird, Frank Easterbrook, Richard Epstein, Edward
Glaeser, Lawrence Katz, Kevin Murphy, Eric Posner, and Richard Posner for helpful comments, and to
Jeffrey Friedman, Mario Gamboa-Cavazos, Anete Pajuste, and Vasudev Vadlamudi for excellent research
assistance. The data used in this paper can be downloaded from
http://post.economics.harvard.edu/faculty/shleifer/papers/securities_data.xls. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

What Works in Securities Laws?
Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 9882
July 2003
JEL No. G15, G18, G3, G22, P5
ABSTRACT
We examine the effect of securities laws on stock market development in 49 countries. We find
almost no evidence that public enforcement benefits stock markets, and strong evidence that laws
facilitating private enforcement through disclosure and liability rules benefit stock markets.
Rafael La Porta Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes
Harvard University Yale School of Management
M7 Littauer Center 135 Prospect Street
Cambridge, MA 02138 P.O. Box 208200
and NBER New Haven, CT 06520
rafael_laporta@harvard.edu and NBER
florencio.lopezdesilanes@yale.edu
Andrei Shleifer
Harvard University
M9 Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ashleifer@harvard.edu

I. Introduction.
In this paper, we examine securities laws of 49 countries, focusing specifically on how these
laws regulate the issuance of new equity to the public. Security issuance is subject to the well-
known “promoter’s problem” (Mahoney 1995) – the risk that corporate issuers sell bad securities
to the public – and as such is covered in all securities laws.1 We analyze the specific provisions in
securities laws governing initial public offerings in each country, examine the relationship between
these provisions and various measures of stock market development, and interpret these correlations
in light of the available theories of securities laws.
Our analysis draws on a theory of social control of business when both markets and
governments are subject to failure (Djankov et al. 2003). According to this theory, the efficiency
of alternative strategies of such control -- from private orderings, to private litigation over contracts
and torts, to still private litigation over public statutes, to government regulation, to state ownership
– is determined by the tradeoff between controlling market and government failure. More
interventionist strategies, such as regulation or state ownership, might limit market failure more
effectively, but are also more vulnerable to government failure. The optimal policy minimizes the
total social costs of market and government failure.
For securities markets, this approach can be distilled down to three broad hypotheses
concerning optimal public policy. Under the the null hypothesis, associated with Coase (1960) and
Stigler (1964), the optimal government policy is to do nothing. The securities law is irrelevant or
even damaging. Securities transactions take place between sophisticated issuers and investors.
1 Teoh et al. (1998) and Dechow et al. (1996) present evidence consistent with the view that US firms
manipulate accounting figures to raise capital on favorable terms. Leuz et al. (2002) show that earnings’ manipulation
is more extensive in countries with weak investor protection.
3

Issuers, auditors, and underwriters have reputational and legal reasons, grounded in contract and
tort law, to certify the quality of securities being offered to investors, so as to receive higher prices.
Investors have an interest to become informed, and to buy securities underwritten by reputable firms,
so as to avoid being cheated. These market and general legal mechanisms suffice for securities
markets to prosper. Securities law is either irrelevant (to the extent that it codifies existing market
arrangements or can be contracted around), or damaging, in so far as it raises contracting costs and
invites political interference in markets (Easterbrook and Fischel 1984, Macey 1994).
The other two hypotheses hold that “law matters.” Reputations, contract, and tort law are
insufficient to keep promoters from cheating investors because the payoff from cheating is too high
and because private litigation is too expensive and unpredictable to serve as a deterrent. To reduce
the enforcement costs and opportunistic behavior, the government can introduce a securities law
specifying the contracting framework.2 The two alternative hypotheses differ in how much
government intervention such a framework would optimally call for.
Under the first alternative, which we call the private enforcement hypothesis, the principal
benefit of the securities law is the direct reduction in the costs of private contracting. According
to this hypothesis, the law can standardize securities contracts (by, for example, mandating
disclosure in a prospectus) and clarify liability rules for inaccurate or incomplete disclosure to
investors. Without standardized contracts, litigation is governed by contract and tort law, with grave
uncertainty about outcomes because such matters as intent and negligence need to be sorted out in
court (Easterbrook and Fischel 1984). Securities law can structure contracting and litigation by
2See Landis (1938), Friend and Herman (1964), Coffee (1984 ,1989, 2002), Simon (1989), Mahoney (1995),
Fox (1999), Stulz (1999), Black (2001), Beny (2002), and Reese and Weisbach (2002). Barth et al. (2003) make an
empirical case for the benefits of government regulation of banking.
4