NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SIX CHALLENGES IN DESIGNING EQUITY-BASED PAY
Brian J. Hall
Working Paper 9887
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9887
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2003
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2003 by Brian J. Hall. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Six Challenges in Designing Equity-Based Pay
Brian J. Hall
NBER Working Paper No. 9887
July 2003
JEL No. J0, J3, L0, L2
ABSTRACT
During the past two decades, there has been a dramatic increase in equity-based pay for executives.
This paper analyzes why the primary goal of the equity-pay explosion--creating long-run ownership
incentives for top executives--has often been difficult to achieve in practice. More generally, I
describe six challenges in the design of equity-based pay plans and discuss potential solutions. The
six challenges involve:
1. mismatched time horizons;
2. gaming;
3. the value-cost "wedge";
4. the leverage-fragility tradeoff;
5. aligning risk-taking incentives; and
6. avoiding excessive compensation.
The paper also discussed the merits of stock versus options and concludes that restricted stock is
often a superior form of compensation.
Brian J. Hall
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 185
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
bhall@hbs.edu

SIX CHALLENGES IN DESIGNING EQUITY-BASED PAY
by Brian J. Hall, Harvard Business School*
There has been a dramatic change in both the level and composition of executive pay in
the U.S. during the last two decades. Executive compensation has increased sharply, driven
almost entirely by an explosion in stock option grants. What’s more, the trend toward equity-
based pay appears to be spreading to the rest of the developed world.
But what has equity-based pay really accomplished, and what can we expect in the
future? Let’s start with what can go right. Besides attracting and retaining a high-quality
management team, well-designed stock and stock option packages can increase corporate
productivity and value by better aligning top managers’ interests with those of the shareholders.
And despite all of the recent controversy, research shows that the increased use of stock options
has greatly strengthened the link between executive pay and corporate performance during the
last decade or two. In their much-cited 1990 study of U.S. companies in the 1970s and early
1980s, Michael Jensen and Kevin Murphy reported that for every $1,000 change in a company’s
market value in a given year, the average CEO’s total compensation for that year changed by only
about three dollars. In a study almost a decade later, Jeff Liebman and I found that by the end of
the 1990s, the pay-to-performance link for U.S. CEOs had jumped almost tenfold since 1980—
due almost entirely to the proliferation of stock options during the 1990s.1
Yet this change in no way suggests that the stock option revolution has been all to the
good. Indeed, the current method of rewarding executives has significant flaws, as demonstrated
by recent events when top executives of many companies cashed out significant portions of their
options during the end of the bull market of the 1990s, a period when stock prices proved
unsustainably high. And whether achieved by accident or design, the resulting transfer of wealth
to selling managers from existing (and particularly buying) shareholders generated considerable
skepticism about corporate governance in general and executive compensation in particular. At
* This article was prepared with the assistance of Research Associate Aaron M. G. Zimmerman.
It draws heavily on material in Incentive Strategy II: Executive Compensation and Ownership
Structure (HBS No. 902-134).
1 See Michael C. Jensen and Kevin J. Murphy, “Performance Pay and Top Management Incentives,”
Journal of Political Economy, April 1990, pp. 225-265; Brian J. Hall and Jeffrey B. Liebman, “Are CEOs
Really Paid Like Bureaucrats?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1998, pp. 653-691; and Brian J.
Hall, “What You Need to Know About Stock Options,” Harvard Business Review, March-April 2000, pp.
121-129.

SIX CHALLENGES IN DESIGNING EQUITY-BASED PAY
the same time, companies whose stock prices have plummeted are now struggling with the dual
problem of retaining employees with deeply underwater options and placating shareholders
strongly opposed to repricing those options.
What has also become clear is that designing an effective equity-based compensation
plan—one that motivates long-term value-maximizing behavior—is not a simple task. There are
difficulties associated with time horizons, opportunistic selling, the gaming of accounting
numbers and stock prices, risk-taking, fairness, and what I will call option “fragility.” Moreover,
as this article will make clear, most stock options are worth considerably less to the executives
they are meant to motivate than to the shareholders of the companies that grant them. This
“wedge” in value represents a significant cost to the firm’s shareholders—one that could tilt the
balance toward the use of restricted stock or cash-based compensation instead. Until recently,
corporate decisions to grant options rather than restricted stock have clearly been influenced by a
quirk of accounting—the fact that companies need not expense option grants on their income
statements, whereas the cost of restricted stock, indexed options, and virtually all other executive
compensation must flow through the P&L. But a growing sensitivity to the drawbacks of options
(which will only be reinforced if the accounting treatment is changed) is likely to cause many
companies to consider restricted stock and cash-based compensation as more cost-effective
alternatives to options.
In this article, I discuss the major challenges in designing equity-based play plans that
effectively link executive compensation to long-run shareholder value. Besides encouraging
executives to balance long-term performance goals against the pressures to meet near-term
earnings targets, corporate pay plans must also perform another difficult balancing act—
maintaining a strong pay-for-performance link (including reduced rewards when stock prices fall)
while at the same time retaining capable executives. There are dramatic differences in equity-
based pay plans, and the way companies set up these plans can have powerful effects on both
incentives and retention. But incentives can be a double-edged sword and must be carefully
managed to prevent the loss of shareholder confidence and value.
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION: RECENT HISTORY AND TRENDS
As late as 1984, fewer than half of the CEOs of publicly traded U.S. companies were
granted any stock or stock options in a given year. With hindsight, it now seems clear that the
resulting misalignment of incentives between managers and owners was a major contributor to
the wave of U.S. corporate restructurings in the 1980s. Private equity firms like Kohlberg Kravis
2