NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FEES AND SURCHARGING IN
AUTOMATIC TELLER MACHINE NETWORKS:
NON-BANK ATM PROVIDERS VERSUS LARGE BANKS
Elizabeth W. Croft
Barbara J. Spencer
Working Paper 9883
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9883
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2003
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2003 by Elizabeth W. Croft and Barbara J. Spencer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Fees and Surcharging in automatic teller machine networks:
Non-bank ATM providers versus large banks
Elizabeth W. Croft and Barbara J. Spencer
NBER Working Paper No. 9883
July 2003
JEL No. L1, G2
ABSTRACT
This paper develops a spacial model of ATM networks to explore the implications for banks and
non-banks of interchange fees, foreign fees and surcharges applied to transactions by customers at
other than an own-bank ATM. Surcharging raises the price (foreign fee plus surcharge) paid by
customers above the joint profit-maximizing level achieved by setting the interchange fee at
marginal cost and not surcharging. Similar size banks would agree not to surcharge, but such an
agreement is typically not possible between a bank and a non-bank. A high cost of teller transactions
modifies the tendency towards high ATM fees.
Elizabeth W. Croft Barbara J. Spencer
Business Program Sauder School of Business
University of Northern BC. University of British Columbia
3333 University Way, Prince George 2053 Main Mall, Vancouver
B.C. V2N 4Z9, Canada B.C. V6T1Z2, Canada
crofte@unbc.ca and NBER
barbara.spencer@sauder.ubc.ca

Fees and surcharging in automatic teller machine networks:
Non-bank ATM providers versus large banks
1. Introduction
The wide-spread introduction of surcharges on ATM (Automatic Teller Machine)
transactions in North America has become a high profile issue, creating concern among consumer
advocates and public policy makers about disclosure and fairness in ATM fees. Surcharges
proliferated after April 1996 when, in response to pressure from State governments and the courts,
both of the U.S. national ATM networks, Cirrus and Plus, lifted the prohibition they had maintained
on surcharging up to that point.1 At the same time the networks agreed to allow the entry of non-
banks. Non-banks provide only ATM services, whereas banks typically both own ATMs and issue
cards so that customers can access ATMs. As we will show, network membership by non-banks has
significant implications in raising the fees that customers have to pay for ATM transactions.
ATM networks were initially developed as a means by which banks could save costs by
shifting customers from costly “teller” transactions using personnel at a branch to the use of
machines. In the early 1980s in North America, these initially proprietary systems evolved into
shared networks, which enhanced consumer convenience in accessing their account, without having
to go to their branch. A main fee set by the (shared) network is an “interchange fee” that banks must
pay to other member firms for each transaction made by one of their customers at another member’s
1Surcharging was first allowed in1989 by Pulse Electronic Funds Transfer Association as a result of a
binding arbitration ruling. Plus and Cirrus subsequently faced the threat of a legal challenge to their
surcharging ban by ATM owners on anti-trust grounds. The networks were also under pressure from new
laws and regulations in 15 states that permitted surcharging. See Ruud and Webre (1998).

2
ATM.2 In order to recover at least part of the cost, banks typically charge their own customers a
“foreign fee” for these transactions. In addition to the foreign fee, customers making ATM
transactions at other than their own bank may pay a “surcharge” directly to the owner of the ATM.
This fee structure has the interesting and unusual feature that all three fees apply to the same
transaction. Even apart from effects on consumer welfare, this raises the question as to the differing
incentives of network members that drive these three fees.
This paper considers the profit implications of all three fees (interchange fees, foreign fees
and surcharges) in the context of a spatial model of ATM networks in which consumers move
around the “city” as represented by a circular network of ATMs. Consumers face a tradeoff between
the inconvenience of travelling to the closest ATM of their own bank and the total price, the sum of
the foreign fee and surcharge, that they must pay for a transaction at other ATMs. Consumers may
also choose to travel to the branch of their bank so as to use a teller. Banks charge an up-front fee
for a banking package that allows customers to make transactions at an own-bank ATM or an in-
branch teller at no additional cost.3 A feature of the analysis is our consideration of the effects of the
higher marginal cost of teller transactions.4
Firms providing ATM services differ based on their number of customers with banking
relationships. At the extremes, the network members could be two banks with equal numbers of
customers or a large bank with all the customers together with a non-bank ATM provider. The paper
2According to McAndrews (1998), the interchange fee ranges from $0.30 to $0.60 per transaction in the
U.S.. We abstract from other fees, such as a “switch fee”, ranging from $0.02 to $0.15, which is paid by
network members to cover the cost of routing transactions through the network.
3Hannan (2001) states that 72.3% of U.S. banks surveyed in 1999 charged foreign fees for withdrawals at
a non-own ATM, while only 6.4% charged their own customers fees for withdrawals from own ATMs. An
exception is the 1995, $3 charge set by First Chicago for some teller transactions (see Duclaux, 1995).
4Transaction costs vary between $0.15 to $0.50 for an ATM and $1 to $2 for a teller (Fasig, 2001).