NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
REGULATIONS, MARKET STRUCTURE, INSTITUTIONS,
AND THE COST OF FINANCIAL INTERMEDIATION
Asli Demirgüç-Kunt
Luc Laeven
Ross Levine
Working Paper 9890
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9890
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2003
We thank Allan Berger, John Boyd, Gianni De Nicolo, Carola Schenone, Phil Strahan, Andrew Winton, seminar
participants at the University of Minnesota, the World Bank, and the Cleveland Federal Reserve Bank, and an
anonymous referee for very helpful discussions and comments. This paper’s findings, interpretations, and
conclusions are entirely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the World Bank, its
Executive Directors, or the countries they represent. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, Luc Laeven, and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Regulations, Market Structure, Institutions, and the Cost of Financial Intermediation
Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, Luc Laeven, and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 9890
July 2003
JEL No. G21, G28, O16
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the impact of bank regulations, market structure, and national institutions on
bank net interest margins and overhead costs using data on over 1,400 banks across 72 countries
while controlling for bank-specific characteristics. The data indicate that tighter regulations on bank
entry and bank activities boost the cost of financial intermediation. Inflation also exerts a robust,
positive impact on bank margins and overhead costs. While concentration is positively associated
with net interest margins, this relationship breaks down when controlling for regulatory impediments
to competition and inflation. Furthermore, bank regulations become insignificant when controlling
for national indicators of economic freedom or property rights protection, while these institutional
indicators robustly explain cross-bank net interest margins and overhead expenditures. Thus, bank
regulations cannot be viewed in isolation; they reflect broad, national approaches to private property
and competition.
Asli Demirgüç-Kunt Luc Laeven Ross Levine
World Bank World Bank Carlson School
Washington, DC 20433 Washington, DC 20433 of Management
ademirguckunt@worldbank.org llaeven@worldbank.org University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
rlevine@csom.umn.edu

1. Introduction
This paper assesses the impact of bank regulations, market structure, and national
institutions on the cost of intermediation as measured by bank net interest margins and bank
overhead expenditures. Banks mobilize and allocate society’s savings and the efficiency with
which they intermediate capital has substantive repercussions on economic performance
(Jayaratne and Strahan, 1996; Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic, 1998; Rajan and Zingales, 1998;
Wurgler, 2000; Beck, Levine, and Loayza, 2000; and Levine, Loayza, and Beck, 2000). Thus,
research on the determinants of the cost of intermediation will naturally enter the policy dialogue
(Group of Ten, 2001; Bank for International Settlements, 2001; and International Monetary
Fund, 2001).
Theory provides conflicting predictions about the relationships among regulations,
concentration, institutions, and bank efficiency. Many of these differences arise because of
differing beliefs about the causes of bank concentration. One common view holds that
regulatory impediments to competition and monopolistic power create an environment in which
a few powerful banks stymie competition with deleterious implications for efficiency. From this
perspective, high concentration is a useful signal of an uncompetitive and hence inefficient
market. Alternatively, the “efficient-structure” theory argues that more efficient banks have
lower costs and garner greater market share (Demsetz, 1973; Pelzman, 1977).1 From this
perspective, competitive environments may produce concentrated and efficient banking systems.
Finally, a growing literature holds that some countries have institutions that restrict competition
to protect a powerful elite (Engerman and Sokoloff, 1997; Acemoglu, et al., 2001; Haber et al.,
1 Scale economies may also drive banking to a monopolistic structure (Diamond, 1984; Boyd and Prescott, 1986).
1

2003).2 According to this “institutions” view, bank regulations and concentration reflect broader
institutional characteristics rather than representing independent determinants of bank efficiency.
To assess the impact of bank regulations, the usefulness of concentration as a signal, and to
understand the role of national institutions in shaping regulations and market structure, one needs
to examine individual banks operating in distinct regulatory and institutional environments.
This is the first study to examine the influence of bank regulations, concentration, and
institutional development on bank margins and overhead expenditures across a broad cross
section of countries while controlling for bank specific factors and cross-country differences in
macroeconomic and financial sector conditions. We use bank-level data across 72 countries and
over 1,400 banks. This sample includes great diversity in terms of the cost of financial
intermediation, other bank characteristics, bank regulations, macroeconomic and financial
conditions, and national institutions. New data on bank regulations allow us to contribute to the
public policy debate and help distinguish among theoretical models by studying the regulatory,
market structure, and institutional determinants of the cost of intermediation.
We examine two dependent variables to gauge the cost of financial intermediation: the
net interest margin and overhead expenditures. The net interest margin equals interest income
minus interest expense divided by interest-bearing assets. The net interest margin measures the
gap between what the bank pays savers and what the bank receives from borrowers. Thus, the
net interest margin focuses on the traditional borrowing and lending operations of the bank. The
overhead expenditure ratio is computed by dividing bank overhead costs by the total assets of the
bank. Cost inefficiencies and market power may be reflected in high overhead costs. Though
subject to measurement problems discussed below, the net interest margin and overhead
2 For an analysis of the politics fostering bank deregulation and policies, see Kroszner and Strahan (1999) and Rajan
and Zingales (2003).
2