NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DOES EXCHANGE RATE RISK MATTER FOR WELFARE?
Paul R. Bergin
Ivan Tchakarov
Working Paper 9900
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9900
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2003
We thank Paul Beaudry, Michael Devereux, Robert Kollmann, and Kenneth Rogoff for especially helpful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Paul R. Bergin and Ivan Tchakarov. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Does Exchange Rate Risk Matter for Welfare?
Paul R. Bergin and Ivan Tchakarov
NBER Working Paper No. 9900
August 2003, Revised March 2006
JEL No. F41
ABSTRACT
Volatility in exchange rates is a prominent feature of open economies, a fact which has
motivated elaborate attempts in many countries at exchange rate management. This paper analyzes
quantitatively the welfare effects of exchange rate risk in a general two-country environment. It finds
that the effects of uncertainty tend to be small for the types of simplified cases considered in past
literature. But it identifies other cases, not considered previously, in which these effects can be
significantly larger. These include habit persistence, where agents are more sensitive to risk, and
also incomplete asset market structures which allow for asymmetries between countries. The latter
case suggests that countries which are hosts to an international reserve currency, such as the U.S.
or members of the euro zone, may accrue significant benefits because of the enhanced ability to
hedge against exchange rate risk.
Paul R. Bergin Ivan Tchakarov
Department of Economics Department of Economics
University of California, Davis University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616 Davis, CA 95616
and NBER iptchakarov@ucdavis,edu
pbergin@ucdavis.edu

1 Introduction
Exchange rate variability is one of the most prominent features of open economy
macroeconomics, and a desire to moderate this variability has been a motivation behind the
managed exchange rate regimes of many countries as well as European monetary union. This
paper conducts a model-consistent evaluation of optimal monetary policy rules in the context
of a two-country general equilibrium model with sticky prices. It focuses on two questions.
Firstly, what degree of exchange rate variability or stabilization is optimal for certain classes
of economies? Secondly, for what types of economies does following an optimized
stabilization policy yield the most significant benefits in terms of household utility?
Several recent papers have employed analytically solvable models to characterize the
implications of alternative monetary policy rules and exchange rate arrangements in sticky
price open economies. Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2000) demonstrate that monetary policy
rules that stabilize the exchange rate do not necessarily increase household welfare or even
trade, depending on the nature of preferences, the monetary policy rules, and the shocks.
Devereux and Engel (2003) show that the degree to which optimal policy lets the exchange
rate fluctuate depends on the currency in which prices are sticky. Gali and Monacelli (2005)
study classes of policy rules in the form of inflation targeting and Taylor-type rules.1
This paper conducts a quantitative analysis of somewhat richer and more realistic
economic environments, as permitted by calibration and numerical solution. For example,
asset markets and preferences are not limited to cases that imply complete international risk
sharing, which would imply the current account is restricted to zero balance. As a result,
when the paper computes the effects of exchange rate variability, it takes into consideration
the potentially important effects that exchange rates have on a country’s current account.
This numerical analysis is made possible by the second-order solution method developed in
Kim et. al. (2004), which is also applied to an open economy setting in Kollmann (2002) and
(2004).2 The analysis here differs from Kollmann in that it studies alternative economic
environments, and pays special attention to the size of quantitative implications from policy
choices.
1
For a sample of other related work, see Benigno (2004), Benigno and Benigno (2003), Carre and Collard
(2003), Clarida, Gali and Gertler (2001), Corsetti and Pesenti (2001, 2004), Obstfeld and Rogoff (2002),
Sutherland (2005).
2
Related solution algorithms have been proposed in Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2004a), and Collard and
Juillard (2001).
1

The paper begins by studying a generalized version of the standard model from the
optimal policy literature, with calibrated parameters and augmented with incomplete asset
markets. Experiments support the findings from simpler analytical models, in that the
particular Taylor-type policy rule that is optimal prescribes aggressively stabilizing inflation.
The optimized rule does not directly respond to exchange rate fluctuations, and it is optimal
to let the exchange rate fluctuate in response to productivity shocks. However, the
experiment highlights that the benefits from following an optimized stabilization policy are
small in terms of representative household utility.
The paper goes on to study two new types of economic environments, where the
utility benefits might be expected to be larger. The first of these cases is where household
preferences exhibit habits. However, experiments indicate that the conclusions from the
benchmark economy are little altered. Optimized policy continues to focus on inflation
stabilization, and continues to allow substantial exchange rate variability. Further, while
households with habits are by definition much more sensitive to certain types of variability,
the utility gains from following an optimized stabilization policy increase only moderately.
The second alternative economic environment features one country unable to issue
debt denominated in its own currency. Termed “original sin” in recent literature, this asset
asymmetry makes it difficult for the country to respond to a stochastic environment through
precautionary saving, since net foreign assets expose the country all the more to the effects of
exchange rate variability. In this context the optimized cooperative policy rule puts
substantial weight on exchange rate stabilization and virtually eliminates exchange rate
fluctuations. The size of the utility gain for the sin country is about four times that for the
benchmark economy above.
The next section of the paper presents the benchmark two-country model, calibration,
and solution method. Section 3 presents results for the benchmark model and the two
extensions. Section 4 concludes and makes suggestions for future research.
2 The Model
Consider a model of two countries, denoted home and foreign. Agents consume two
final goods, where each country specializes in the production of one of these.
Monopolistically competitive firms produce intermediates using capital and labor, and set
prices sluggishly due to adjustment costs.
2