NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ON THE HIDDEN LINKS BETWEEN
FINANCIAL AND TRADE OPENING
Joshua Aizenman
Working Paper 9906
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9906
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2003
I would like to thank Shang-Jin Wei for sharing the data on financial openness, and Ilan Noy and Bill Koch for
excellent research assistance. Useful comments by Michael Hutchison, Phil McCalman and Ken Kletzer are
gratefully acknowledged. Any errors are mine. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Joshua Aizenman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

On the Hidden Links Between Financial and Trade Opening
Joshua Aizenman
NBER Working Paper No. 9906
August 2003
JEL No. F15, F21, F36
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates the association between commercial and financial openness of developing
countries. The data suggest that, controlling for GDP/Capita changes and allowing for country
specific effects, increase in a developing country's (exports + imports)/GDP is associated with a
highly significant increase in financial openness [measured by (gross private capital inflows + gross
private outflows)/GDP]. I outline a model accounting for some of the endogenous linkages between
financial and trade openness. I show that developing countries, characterized by high costs of tax
collection and enforcement, opt to use financial repression as an implicit tax on savings. The
resultant financial repression provides the impetus for capital flight. A frequent mechanism
facilitating illicit capital movements is to over invoice imports and under invoice exports with the
scale of these activities being proportional to the commercial openness of the economy. This linkage
is subject to costly control by the fiscal authorities, where curtailing illicit capital flows requires
spending resources on monitoring and enforcement of existing capital controls. The effectiveness
of capital controls would increase with the resources spent on monitoring and enforcement per one
dollar of international trade. Under these circumstances, greater commercial openness increases the
effective cost of enforcing financial repression, thereby reducing the usefulness of financial
repression as an implicit tax. This in turn implies that financial reforms tend to be the by-product
of greater trade integration.
Joshua Aizenman
Department of Economics
UCSC
1156 High Street
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
jaizen@ucsc.edu

1
1. Introduction and overview
A salient feature of the global economy in recent decades has been the embrace, by
developing countries, of financial reforms. The adjustment process to the growing financial
integration has been rocky, frequently associated with financial crises. These developments
have led to a spirited debate concerning the wisdom of unrestricted capital mobility between
OECD and emerging market countries. Various studies have identified circumstances in which
unlimited capital mobility may be sub-optimal.1 This paper argues that, notwithstanding the
above debate, the strongest argument for financial opening may be the pragmatic one. Like it
or not, greater trade integration erodes the effectiveness of restrictions on capital mobility.
Hence, for successful emerging markets that engage in trade integration, financial opening is
not a question of if, but of when and how.
Some insight into the possible linkages between financial and trade opening is obtained
by looking at the patterns of changes in openness in the last thirty years. Figure 1 traces the
association between changes in commercial openness and financial openness [plotted
horizontally and vertically, respectively].2 The units of observations are non-overlapping five
year changes in the openness measures, throughout 1969-1998, for all countries [subject to data
availability]. The figure suggests the presence of a positive association between the two.
Figure 2 reports a similar association, for a sample excluding extreme observations [defined by
financial openness exceeding 100%, or trade openness exceeding 60%]. It depicts a similar
1 A useful survey of financial liberalization is Williamson and Mahar (1998). See Diaz-
Alejandro, (1985), Rodrik (1999) and Hellmann, Murdock, and Stiglitz (2000) for skeptical
assessments of the gains from financial liberalization. See Arteta, Eichengreen and Wyplosz
(2001) for a cost/benefit study of financial opening. For studies dealing with the financial
instability associated with capital account opening see the papers in Edwards and Frankel
(2002) and Feldstein (2003), and Aizenman (2003) for an overview of the challenges
associated with financial opening.
2 Financial openness measures the (gross private capital inflows + gross private
outflows)100/GDP, using the data documented and applied by Wei and Wu (2002), and
Prasad, Rogoff, Wei and Kose (2003). Trade openness measures (exports + imports)100/GDP,
using the WDI data.

2
positive association between the two. In order to evaluate the statistical significance of these
linkages, I apply a panel regression methodology. Table 1 presents the regressions, where the
dependent variable is the change in financial openness. The explanatory variables are changes
in trade openness, and changes in the GDP per capita level, allowing for country fixed effects.3
Regression 1 reports all developing countries (subject to data availability). To control for the
possibility that the results are driven by extreme points, regression 2 excludes from the sample
developing economies countries that are characterized by financial openness that exceeds
100%, or by trade openness that exceeds 60%, and small island economies.4 Finally,
regression 3 deals only with the OECD countries.5 The first two regressions indicate a highly
significant positive association between changes in financial and commercial openness in
developing countries. A ten percent increase in commercial openness is associated with, on
average, a 2.6% increase in financial openness for all the developing countries, and with a
0.7% increase in financial openness in the trimmed sample of developing countries. The size
of this effect in the OECD countries is 2%, but at a substantially lower significance level. The
impact of changes in GDP per capita on financial openness are relatively large and highly
significant for the sample of all developing countries, and for the OECD countries, but weakly
significant in the trimmed developing countries sample.
Needless to say, these regressions are only suggestive, and do not provide information
on the economic forces inducing the existence of linkages between the two openness measures.
This paper outlines one possible linkage between the two, operating via public finance
channels. Specifically, I argue that the pragmatic case for financial reforms in the presence of
growing trade integration follows from the endogenous linkages between financial and trade
openness.
3 The inclusion of the GDP per capita as an explanatory variable is suggested by the linkages
between the GDP per capital level and financial depth.
4 Small island economies serve frequently as tax havens, inducing large financial openness
driven by gaps in tax codes.
5 The regressions covers 1969-1998, non overlapping observations, each reporting a five year
average.