NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
UNCOVERING THE RISK-RETURN RELATION IN THE STOCK MARKET
Hui Guo
Robert F. Whitelaw
Working Paper 9927
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9927
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2003
This paper formerly circulated under the title “Risk and Return: Some New Evidence”. We thank N.R.
Prabhala for providing the implied volatility data and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York, the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, the University of Texas, Austin, Vanderbilt
University, the Australian Graduate School of Management, and the University of Queensland for helpful
comments. Financial support from the C. V. Starr Center for Applied Economics is gratefully acknowledged
by the first author. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily relect
the official positions of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis or the Federal Reserve System. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2003 by Hui Guo and Robert F. Whitelaw. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Uncovering the Risk-Return Relation in the Stock Market
Hui Guo and Robert F. Whitelaw
NBER Working Paper No. 9927
August 2003
JEL No. G1
ABSTRACT
There is an ongoing debate in the literature about the apparent weak or negative relation between
risk (conditional variance) and return (expected returns) in the aggregate stock market. We develop
and estimate an empirical model based on the ICAPM to investigate this relation. Our primary
innovation is to model and identify empirically the two components of expected returns--the risk
component and the component due to the desire to hedge changes in investment opportunities. We
also explicitly model the effect of shocks to expected returns on ex post returns and use implied
volatility from traded options to increase estimation efficiency. As a result, the coefficient of relative
risk aversion is estimated more precisely, and we find it to be positive and reasonable in magnitude.
Although volatility risk is priced, as theory dictates, it contributes only a small amount to the time-
variation in expected returns. Expected returns are driven primarily by the desire to hedge changes
in investment opportunities. It is the omission of this hedge component that is responsible for the
contradictory and counter-intuitive results in the existing literature.
Hui Guo
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
P.O. Box 442
St. Louis, Missouri 63166
hui.gao@stls.frb.org
Robert F. Whitelaw
New York University
Stern School of Business
44 W. 4th Street, Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
rwhitela@stern.nyu.edu

1 Introduction
The return on the market portfolio plays a central role in the capital asset pricing model (CAPM),
the financial theory widely used by both academics and practitioners. However, the intertemporal
1
properties of stock market returns are not yet fully understood. In particular, there is an ongoing
debate in the literature aboutthe relationship between stock market risk and returnand the extent
to which stock market volatility moves stock prices. This paper provides new evidence on the
risk-return relation by estimating a variant of Merton’s (1973) intertemporal capital asset pricing
model (ICAPM).
Inhisseminalpaper,Merton(1973)showsthattheconditionalexcessmarketreturn,E
t−1
r
M,t
−
r f,t, is a linear function of its conditional variance, σ
M
2
,t−1
, (the risk component) and its covariance
with investment opportunities, σ MF,t−1, (the hedge component), i.e.,
−J W −J
E t−1 r M,t −r f,t = [ W J W ]σ M 2 ,t−1 +[ J WF ]σ MF,t−1 , (1)
W W
where J(W(t),F(t),t) is the indirect utility function with subscripts denoting partial derivatives,
W(t) is wealth, and F(t) is a vector of state variables that describe investment opportunities. 2
−J W
WW is a measure of relative risk aversion, which is usually assumed to be constant over time.
J
W
If people are risk averse, then this quantity should be positive.
Under certain conditions, Merton (1980) argues that the hedge component is negligible and
the conditional excess market return is proportional to its conditional variance. Since Merton’s
work, this specification has been subject to dozens of empirical investigations, but these papers
have drawn conflicting conclusions on thesign of the coefficient of relative risk aversion. In general,
however, despite widely differing specifications and estimation techniques, most studies find a weak
or negative relation. Examples include French, Schwert and Stambaugh (1987), Campbell (1987),
Glosten, Jagannathan and Runkle (1993), Whitelaw (1994), and more recent papers, including
Goyal and Santa-Clara (2003) and Lettau and Ludvigson (2003).
1The expected stock market return was long considered to be constant until relatively recent work documenting
the predictability of market returns (e.g., Fama and French (1989)). It is now well understood that time-varying
expected returns are consistent with rational expectations. See Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and Guo (2003) for
recent examples of this literature.
2Strictly speaking, equation (1) is the discrete time version of Merton’s ICAPM (see Long [1974]). In addition,
theequation holds for the aggregate wealth portfolio for which we usethe market portfolio as a proxy.
1

The failure to reach a definitive conclusion on the risk-return relation can be attributed to two
factors. First, neither the conditional return nor the conditional variance are directly observable;
certain restrictions must be imposed to identify these two variables. Instrumental variable (IV)
models and autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity (ARCH) models are the two most com-
monly used identification methods. In general, empirical results are sensitive to the restrictions
imposed by these models. For example, Campbell (1987) finds that the results depend on the
choice of instrumental variables. Specifically, the nominal risk-free rate is negatively related to
the expected return and positively related to the variance, and “these two results together give
a perverse negative relationship between the conditional mean and variance for common stock”
(Campbell (1987, p.391)). In the context of ARCH models, if the conditional distribution of the
return shock is changed from normal to student-t, the positive relation found by French, Schwert
and Stambaugh (1987) disappears (see Baillie and DeGennaro (1990)).
Second, there are no theoretical restrictions on the sign of the correlation between risk and
return. Backus and Gregory (1993) show that in a Lucas exchange economy, the correlation can
be positive or negative depending on the time series properties of the pricing kernel. This result
suggests that the hedge component can be a significant pricing factor and can have an important
effectontherisk-returnrelation. Ingeneral,therisk-returnrelationcanbetime-varyingasobserved
byWhitelaw(1994). Thetheory,however,stillrequiresapositivepartial relationshipbetweenstock
market risk and return. The more relevant empirical issue is to disentangle the risk component
from the hedge component.
Scruggs (1998) presents some initial results on the decomposition of the expected excess market
return into risk and hedge components. Assuming that the long-term government bond return rep-
resents investment opportunities, he estimates equation (1) using a bivariate exponential GARCH
model and finds that the coefficient of relative risk aversion is positive and statistically significant.
However, his approach has some weaknesses. For example, he assumes that the conditional corre-
lation between stock returns and bond returns is constant, but Ibbotson Associates (1997) provide
evidence that it actually changes sign over time in historical data. After relaxing this assumption,
Scruggs and Glabadanidis (2003) fail to replicate the earlier results. Of course, this latter result
does not imply a rejection of equation (1); rather, it challenges the assumption that bond returns
are perfectly correlated with investment opportunities.
2