NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANK CONCENTRATION AND CRISES
Thorsten Beck
Asli Demirgüç-Kunt
Ross Levine
Working Paper 9921
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9921
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2003
We thank John Boyd, Jerry Caprio, Maria Carkovic, Patrick Honohan and participants in the World Bank
Concentration and Competition Conference for comments and Paramjit K. Gill for outstanding research
assistance. This paper’s findings, interpretations, and conclusions are entirely those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2003 by Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Bank Concentration and Crises
Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 9921
August 2003
JEL No. G21, G28, L16
ABSTRACT
Motivated by public policy debates about bank consolidation and conflicting theoretical predictions
about the relationship between the market structure of the banking industry and bank fragility, this
paper studies the impact of bank concentration, bank regulations, and national institutions on the
likelihood of suffering a systemic banking crisis. Using data on 70 countries from 1980 to 1997, we
find that crises are less likely in economies with (i) more concentrated banking systems, (ii) fewer
regulatory restrictions on bank competition and activities, and (iii) national institutions that
encourage competition.
Thorsten Beck
World Bank
Washington, DC 20433
tbeck@worldbank.org
Asli Demirguc-Kunt
World Bank
Washington, DC 20433
ademirguckunt@worldbank.org
Ross Levine
Carlson School of Management
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
rlevine@csom.umn.edu

I. Introduction
The consolidation of banks around the globe is fueling an active public policy debate on the
impact of consolidation on financial stability.1 Indeed, economic theory provides conflicting
predictions about the relationship between the market structure of the banking industry and banking
system fragility. Motivated by public policy debates and ambiguous theoretical predictions, this
paper investigates empirically the impact of bank concentration on banking system stability.
Some theoretical arguments and country comparisons suggest that a less concentrated banking
sector with many small banks is more prone to financial crises than a concentrated banking sector
with a few large banks (Allen and Gale, 2000, 2003). First, proponents of the “concentration-
stability” view hold that large banks can diversify better so that banking systems characterized by a
few large banks will be less fragile than banking systems with many small banks.2 Second,
concentrated banking systems may enhance profits and therefore lower bank fragility. High profits
provide a “buffer” against adverse shocks and increase the franchise value of the bank, reducing
incentives for bank owners to take excessive risk (Hellmann, Murdoch, and Stiglitz, 2000). Third,
some hold that a few large banks are easier to monitor than many small banks, so that corporate
control of banks will be more effective and the risks of contagion less pronounced in a concentrated
banking system. According to Allen and Gale (2000), the U.S., with its large number of small banks,
supports this “concentration-stability” view since it has had a history of much greater financial
instability than the U.K or Canada, where the banking sector is dominated by fewer larger banks.
1 See Group of Ten (2001), Bank for International Settlements (2001), International Monetary Fund (2001), and Boyd and
Graham (1998, 1991).
2 Models by Diamond (1984), Ramakrishnan and Thakor (1984), Boyd and Prescott (1986), Williamson (1986), Allen
(1990), and others predict economies of scale in intermediation.
1

An opposing view is that a more concentrated banking structure enhances bank fragility.
First, advocates of the “concentration-fragility” view note that large banks frequently receive
subsidies through implicit “too big to fail” policies.3 This greater subsidy for large banks may in turn
intensify risk-taking incentives, increasing the fragility of concentrated banking systems (Boyd and
Runkle, 1992 and Mishkin, 1999).4 Second, proponents of the concentration-fragility view would
disagree with the proposition that a few large banks are easier to monitor than many small banks. If
size is positively correlated with complexity, then large banks may be more opaque than small banks,
which would tend to produce a positive relationship between concentration and fragility. Finally,
Boyd, and De Nicolo (2003) stress that banks with greater market power tend to charge higher
interest rates to firms, which induces firms to assume greater risk. If concentration is positively
associated with banks having market power, this model predicts a positive relationship between
concentration and bank fragility.
Despite conflicting theoretical predictions and policy debates, there is surprisingly little cross-
country empirical evidence on bank structure and fragility. For the United States, Boyd and Runkle
(1993) examine 122 bank holding companies. They find that there is an inverse relationship between
size and the volatility of asset returns, but no evidence that large banks are less likely to fail. In fact
they observe that large banks failed somewhat more often in the 1971-90 period. They explain this
result by showing that larger banks are more highly leveraged and less profitable in terms of asset
returns.
3 Even in the absence of deposit insurance, banks are prone to excessive risk-taking due to limited liability for their equity
holders and to their high leverage (Stiglitz, 1972).
4 There is a literature that examines deposit insurance and its effect on bank decisions. According to this literature (e.g.
Merton (1977), Sharpe (1978), Flannery (1989), Kane (1989), and Chan, Greenbaum and Thakor (1992)) – mis-priced
deposit insurance produces an incentive for banks to take risk. If the regulatory treatment were the same for insured
banks of all sizes, these models would predict no relationship between bank size and riskiness. Since regulators fear
potential macroeconomic consequences of large bank failures, most countries have implicit “too large to fail” policies
which protect all liabilities of very large banks whether they are insured or not. Thus, largest banks frequently receive a
2