NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DOES THE SOURCE OF CAPITAL
AFFECT CAPITAL STRUCTURE?
Michael Faulkender
Mitchell A. Petersen
Working Paper 9930
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9930
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2003
Petersen thanks the Financial Institutions and Markets Research Center at Northwestern University’s Kellogg
School for support. We also appreciate the suggestions and advice of Allen Berger, Mark Carey, Hamid
Mehran, Todd Pulvino, and Greg Udell as well as seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago’s Bank Structure Conference, the National Bureau of Economic Research, Northwestern University,
and the Universities of Laussane, Maryland and Missouri. The research assistance of Eric Hovey, Jan
Zasowski, Tasuku Miuri, and Daniel Sheyner is greatly appreciated.The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Michael Faulkender and Mitchell A. Petersen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Does the Source of Capital Affect Capital Structure?
Michael Faulkender and Mitchell A. Petersen
NBER Working Paper No. 9930
August 2003
JEL No. G3
ABSTRACT
Empirical examinations of capital structure have led some to conclude that firms are under-levered.
Implicit in this argument and much of the empirical work on leverage is the assumption that the
availability of incremental capital depends solely on the risk of the firm's cash flows and
characteristics of the firm. However, the same market frictions that make capital structure relevant
suggest that firms may be rationed by lenders, leading some firms to appear to be under-levered
relative to unconstrained firms. We examine this theory, arguing that the same characteristics that
may be associated with firms being rationed by the debt markets are also associated with financial
intermediaries, opposed to bond markets, being the source of a firm's debt capital. We find that firms
have significantly different leverage ratios based on whether they have access to public bond
markets as measured by the firm having a debt rating. Although firms with a debt rating are
fundamentally different, these differences do not explain our findings. Even after controlling for the
firm characteristics previously found to determine observed capital structure and the possible
endogeneity of having a bond rating, we find that firms which are able to raise debt from public
markets have 40 percent more debt.
Michael Faulkender Mitchell A. Petersen
Olin School of Business Kellogg Graduate School of Management
Washington University Northwestern University
aulkender@olin.wustl.edu 2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
mpetersen@northwestern.edu

I) Introduction
Absent the assumption of Modigliani-Miller (1958), firms have an optimal capital structure.
By calculating the tax advantages, costs of financial distress, mispricing, and incentive effects of
debt versus equity, firms arrive at their optimal leverage ratio. The empirical literature has searched
for evidence that firms choose their capital structure as theory predicts by estimating firm leverage
as a function of firm characteristics. Firms for whom the tax shields of debt are greater, the costs of
financial distress are lower, and the mispricing of debt relative to equity is smaller are expected to
be more highly levered. When these firms find that the net benefit of debt is positive, they will move
toward their optimal capital structure by issuing additional debt and/or reducing their equity. The
implicit assumption has been that a firm’s leverage is completely a function of the firm’s demand.
In other words, the supply of capital is infinitely elastic at the correct price and the cost of capital
depends only upon the risk of the firm’s projects.
Although the empirical literature has been successful in the sense that many of the proposed
proxies are correlated with firms’ actual capital structure choices, some authors have argued that
some firms appear to be significantly under-levered. Based on estimated tax benefits of debt,
Graham (2000) argues that firms appear to be missing the opportunity to create significant value by
increasing their leverage and thus reducing their tax payments, assuming that the other costs of debt
have been correctly measured.1 This interpretation also assumes that firms have the opportunity to
increase their leverage and are choosing to leave money on the table. Alternatively, firms may be
unable to issue additional debt. The same type of market frictions that make capital structure choices
relevant (information asymmetry and investment distortions) also imply that firms are sometimes
1 Using a calibrated dynamic capital structure model Ju, Parrino, Poteshman, and Weisbach (2003) argue that
firms are not under levered.
1

rationed by their lenders (Stiglitz and Weiss, 1981). Thus when estimating a firm’s leverage, it is
important to include not only determinants of its desired leverage (the demand side) but also
variables which measure the constraints on a firm’s ability to increase its leverage (the supply side).2
The literature has often described banks (or private lenders) as being particularly good at
investigating informationally opaque firms and deciding which are viable borrowers. This suggests
that the source of capital may be intimately related to firms’ ability to access debt markets. Firms
which are opaque (and thus difficult to investigate ex-ante) or which have more discretion in their
investment opportunities (and thus difficult for lenders to constrain contractually) are more likely
to borrow from active lenders and are also the type of firms which theory predicts may be
constrained. In this paper we investigate the link between where firms obtain their capital (the
private versus the public debt markets) and their capital structure (their leverage ratio). In the next
section we briefly describe the tradeoff between financial intermediaries (the private debt markets)
which have an advantage at collecting information and restructuring firms, but are a potentially more
expensive source of capital, and arm’s length lenders (the public debt markets). The higher cost of
capital may be due to the expenditure on monitoring or because of the tax disadvantage of the
lender’s organizational form. Additionally, not all firms may be able to choose the source of their
debt capital. If firms which do not have access to the public debt markets are constrained by lenders
in the amount of debt capital they may raise, we should see this in their lower debt ratios. This is
what we find in Section II. Firms which have access to the public debt markets (defined as having
a debt rating) have leverage ratios which are fifty percent higher than firms which do not have access
2 Titman and Wessels (1988) explicitly model a difference between the firm’s desired leverage and their actual
leverage. However, the difference is due to adjustment costs opposed to a limit on the abilities of firms to increase their
leverage. The adjustment cost should not, therefore, lead to systematically low leverage relative to that predicted by
theory.
2