NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PROPPING AND TUNNELING
Eric Friedman
Simon Johnson
Todd Mitton
Working Paper 9949
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9949
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2003
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2003 by Eric Friedman, Simon Johnson, and Todd Mitton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Propping and Tunneling
Eric Friedman, Simon Johnson, and Todd Mitton
NBER Working Paper No. 9949
September 2003
JEL No. G33, P12, K12
ABSTRACT
In countries with weak legal systems, there is a great deal of tunnelling by the entrepreneurs
who control publicly traded firms. However, under some conditions entrepreneurs prop up their
firms, i.e., they use their private funds to benefit minority shareholders. We provide evidence and
a model that explains propping. In particular, we suggest that issuing debt can credibly commit an
entrepreneur to propping, even though creditors can never take possession of any underlying
collateral. This helps to explain why emerging markets with weak institutions sometimes grow
rapidly and why they are also subject to frequent economic and financial crises.
Eric Friedman
School of Operations Research and Industrial Engineering
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
ejf27@cornell.edu
Simon Johnson
E52-652
50 Memorial Drive
Sloan School of Management
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
sjohnson@mit.edu
Todd Mitton
Marriott School
Brigham Young Unversity
Provo, UT 84602
todd.mitton@byu.edu

1. Introduction
In countries with weak legal protection for investors, strong evidence indicates
that entrepreneurs often tunnel resources out of firms, i.e., expropriate funds that
rightfully belong to minority shareholders (Johnson, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and
Shleifer 2000, Glaeser, Johnson, and Shleifer 2001). However, the anecdotal evidence
also suggests that sometimes entrepreneurs in these countries transfer private resources
into firms that have minority shareholders. Propping is often clandestine, but several
examples came to light in the aftermath of the Asian financial crisis of 1997 and 1998.
Lee Kun Hee, chairman of Samsung Electronics and head of the family that controls
Samsung Group, donated some of his personal wealth to pay off the debts of Samsung
Motors Inc, which was a subsidiary on the verge of bankruptcy in summer 1999 (Wall
Street Journal, July 1, 1999, p. A19).2 The controlling shareholders in CP Group sold
assets in Thailand and China apparently in order to inject cash into publicly listed Thai
companies (Far Eastern Economic Review, 1998a.)3 The Salim group sold privately
held assets in the Netherlands in order to bail out publicly listed operations in both the
Philippines and Indonesia (Far Eastern Economic Review, 1998b); it also injected funds
from a publicly listed Hong Kong company into a publicly listed Indonesian company
(Asian Wall Street Journal, 1999).4 In many countries, the evidence suggests controlling
shareholders use private funds to provide temporary support to a firm that is in trouble.5
This paper suggests that propping may be an important part of how firms operate
in countries with weak legal environments. In particular, it helps to explain why many
firms in these countries rely heavily on debt finance. A weak legal system would seem to
make debt unappealing because creditors can never effectively take control of collateral.6
3

For example, most collapses of banks and firms in Russia after the devaluation of August
1998 were associated with complete looting so that creditors and minority shareholders
got nothing while the firms went out of business (Troika Dialog 1999).7 The experience
of creditors in Hong Kong who lent to firms doing business in Mainland China is
similar.8 Bankruptcy in Thailand typically takes up to 10 years and anecdotal evidence
indicates that creditors ultimately receive very little through either court settlement
(Foley 1999) or private debt renegotiations.9 This paper suggests that the possibility of
propping makes issuing debt attractive to entrepreneurs and investors, when courts cannot
enforce contracts.
Our interpretation of the evidence suggests that large business groups exhibit a
form of the soft budget constraint, which is usually associated with government-backed
enterprises or bank-supported firms (Dewatripont and Maskin 1995). Because the
funding source cannot commit not to bail out firms, it is tempted to bail them out ex post;
hence, this expectation induces inefficient behavior (Roland 2000, p.215). In contrast,
we suggest that budget constraints are soft for large conglomerates in developing
countries because the legal and regulatory environment is weak. In this context, debt is a
commitment by the entrepreneur to bail out a firm when there is a moderately bad shock.
However, this debt also creates a potential cost in that it makes it more likely that the
entrepreneur will abandon the firm, i.e., take the money and run when there is a very bad
shock.
Our analysis has three parts. First, we establish that firms in developing countries
with weaker corporate governance also have a higher ratio of debt to total assets. Firm-
level corporate governance and debt appear to be substitutes. This relationship is most
4