NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANKS’ ADVANTAGE IN HEDGING LIQUIDITY RISK:
THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM THE
COMMERCIAL PAPER MARKET
Evan Gatev
Philip E. Strahan
Working Paper 9956
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9956
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2003
We thank Viral Acharya, Pierluigi Balduzzi, Daniel Covitz, Wayne Ferson, Mark Flannery, Ed Kane, Arvind
Krishnamurthy, George Pennacchi, Jeff Pontiff, and Jeremy Stein for helpful comments, as well as seminar
participants at Boston College, the NBER, the Western Finance Association 2003 Annual Meeting, and the
Federal Reserve Banks of New York and Chicago. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Evan Gatev and Philip E. Strahan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Banks’ Advantage in Hedging Liquidity Risk:
Theory and Evidence from the Commercial Paper Market
Evan Gatev and Philip E. Strahan
NBER Working Paper No. 9956
September 2003
JEL No. G2
ABSTRACT
This paper argues that banks have a unique ability to hedge against market-wide liquidity shocks.
Deposit inflows provide funding for loan demand shocks that follow declines in market liquidity.
Consequently, one dimension of bank “specialness” is that banks can insure firms against systematic
declines in market liquidity at lower cost than other financial institutions. We provide supporting
empirical evidence from the commercial paper (CP) market. When market liquidity dries up and CP
spreads increase, banks experience funding inflows. These flows allow banks to meet increased loan
demand from borrowers drawing funds from pre-existing commercial paper backup lines, without
running down their holdings of liquid assets. Moreover, the supply of cheap funds is sufficiently
large so that pricing on new lines of credit actually falls as market spreads widen.
Evan Gatev
Carroll School of Management
Boston College
Fulton Hall
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
evan.gatev@bc.edu
Philip E. Strahan
Carroll School of Management
Boston College
Fulton Hall
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
philip.strahan@bc.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
The rise of the commercial paper market, which resumed following the demise of the
Penn Central Railroad in the early 1970s, followed by the growth of the junk bond market in the
1980s and 1990s, has seemingly reduced the role of banks in providing financing to large
businesses (Mishkin and Strahan, 1998). This much-remarked-upon evolution away from banks
and toward the securities markets, though, has not rendered banks irrelevant (Boyd and Gertler,
1994). While they do provide less funding than before, banks remain important, even for large
firms, as the “liquidity provider of last resort.”1 This liquidity insurance role is notable in the
commercial paper market, where issuers invariably secure a backup line of credit from their bank
as protection against market pullbacks. Banks have also traditionally provided liquidity
insurance in the form of loan commitments to many classes of borrowers. In the case of the
commercial paper backup lines, these contracts allow firms to borrow (or “take down”) up to a
pre-determined amount of funds at a fixed spread over a safe market benchmark interest rate such
as LIBOR. This liquidity insurance softens the blow of reduced liquidity, where liquidity can be
defined as the firm’s ability to access the capital markets at attractive (fair) prices.2
Why do commercial banks, as opposed to some other kind of financial institutions,
provide this liquidity insurance? In this paper, we argue that banks can provide firms insurance
against market-wide liquidity shocks at lower cost than other financial intermediaries because
deposit inflows provide a hedge for loan demand shocks. Figure 1 illustrates our main argument
1Banks also continue to bear significant credit risk through off-balance sheet guarantees such as standby letters of
credit.
2According to this definition, a decline of liquidity is typically caused by an increase in arm’s length investors’
perceived opaqueness of firms. Asymmetric information can lead to equilibrium credit rationing in the commercial paper
market. Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) show that credit rationing is optimal due to both adverse selection and moral hazard.
-1-

graphically. During normal times (high liquidity), funds flow directly from investors to firms
(broken line in Figure 1). Because banks are viewed as a safe haven by investors, funding tends
to become available to them during periods of market stress (low liquidity), just when borrowers
want to draw funds from their loan commitments. Hence, the funding flows within a bank
complement each other, with deposit inflows serving as a hedge for outflows from loan
commitment take-downs (solid lines in Figure 1). Because of this hedge, banks can offer the
lowest-cost insurance against a systematic shock to liquidity. The banks’ ability to sell liquidity
insurance more cheaply than other financial institutions provides an explanation for the viability
of their business in this particular market.
Our argument complements Kashyap, Rajan and Stein (2002), who propose a risk-
management motive as a defining characteristic of a commercial bank: a financial intermediary
that combines demand deposits with loan commitments and lines of credit (we use these two
terms synonymously).3 In effect, banks offer liquidity to both households and firms with these
two products. As long as the demand for liquidity from depositors and borrowers is not too
highly correlated, the intermediary will pool these two classes of customers together to conserve
on its need to hold costly liquid assets – the buffer against unexpected deposit withdrawals and
loan take downs.4 Our argument extends the KRS rationale to highlight an additional specialty of
3Some early studies analyzed loan commitments as a hedge against changes in interest rates or credit quality (see, for
example Thakor (1982) and Kanatas (1987)), and others analyzed the pricing structure of loan commitments as a way to
separate high-quality from low-quality borrowers (see, for example, Boot, Thakor and Udell (1987) and Thakor and Udell
(1987)). Other studies have emphasized loan commitments as protection for borrowers against credit rationing by their
bank (see, for example, Berger and Udell (1992) and Morgan (1998)). For more recent studies on pricing of loan
commitments as options, see Shockley and Thakor (1997) and Chava (2002).
4Holding liquid assets is costly because these assets earn low returns and create additional agency problems for the
financial institution (Myers and Rajan, 1998).
-2-