NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CAPITAL INVESTMENTS AND STOCK RETURNS
Sheridan Titman
K.C. John Wei
Feixue Xie
Working Paper 9951
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9951
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2003
The authors appreciate the helpful comments of the seminar participants at Peking University, the Hong Kong
University of Science and Technology, National Central University, National Chengchi University,
University of Arizona, and the Ninth SFM Conference held in Kaoshiung, Taiwan. The authors also thank
Andres Almazan, Paul Malatesta (the editor), and two anonymous referees for insightful comments and Dr.
Virginia Unkefer for editorial assistance. Sheridan Titman and John Wei acknowledge the financial support
from an RGC Competitive Earmarked Research Grant of the Hong Kong Special Administration Region, China
(HKUST6014/99H). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Sheridan Titman, K.C. John Wei, and Feixue Xie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Capital Investments and Stock Returns
Sheridan Titman, K.C. John Wei, and Feixue Xie
NBER Working Paper No. 9951
September 2003
JEL No. G1, G3
ABSTRACT
Firms that substantially increase capital investments subsequently achieve negative benchmark-
adjusted returns. The negative abnormal capital investment/return relation is shown to be stronger for
firms that have greater investment discretion, i.e., firms with higher cash flows and lower debt ratios, and
is shown to be significant only in time periods when hostile takeovers were less prevalent. These
observations are consistent with the hypothesis that investors tend to underreact to the empire building
implications of increased investment expenditures. Although firms that increase capital investments tend
to have high past returns and often issue equity, the negative abnormal capital investment/return relation
is independent of the previously documented long-term return reversal and secondary equity issue
anomalies.
Sheridan Titman
Department of Finance
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712-1179
and NBER
titman@mail.utexas.edu
K.C. John Wei
Department of Finance
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Clearwater Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong
johnwei@ust.hk
Feixue Xie
Department of Economics and Finance
Southern Connecticut State University
New Haven, CT 06515
xief1@southernct.edu

Capital Investments and Stock Returns
I. Introduction
There is now a substantial literature that examines corporate capital expenditures. For
example, although firms tend to invest more following increases in their stock prices, cash flows
tend to be the best predictor of a firm’s investment expenditures (see, for example, Fazzari,
Hubbard and Peterson (1988) and Morck, Shleifer and Vishny (1990)).1 It is also the case that
stock prices tend to respond favorably to announcements of major capital investment.2 However,
financing choices that are associated with increased investment, such as equity issuances,
generally result in negative stock returns (see for example, Loughran and Ritter (1995) and
others), while those choices associated with decreased investment, such as repurchases, generally
result in positive returns (see, for example, Ikenberry, Lakonishok, and Vermaelen (1995) and
others).
There are a number of reasons why increased investment expenditures should be viewed
favorably. First, higher investment expenditures are likely to be associated with greater
investment opportunities. Second, higher investment expenditures may also indicate that the
capital markets, which provide financing for the investments, have greater confidence in the firm
and its management. The above-cited event studies provide evidence that is consistent with
these views, and our own evidence also indicates that stock prices do quite well in those years in
which capital expenditures increase. However, it is difficult to interpret either the event studies
or the evidence of higher stock returns in years in which firms increase capital expenditures.
First, there is likely to be a tendency for firms to publicly announce only those investment
1 See Hubbard (1998) for an excellent review of this literature.
2 McConnell and Muscarella (1985) indicate that announcements of increases in planned capital investments are
generally associated with significantly positive excess stock returns. In follow-up studies, Blose and Shieh (1997)
1

expenditures that are likely to be viewed favorably. Second, higher stock prices may make it
easier for firms to increase investment expenditures, so that higher stock prices in years where
investment expenditures are higher need not indicate that the market views the investment
expenditures favorably.
There are also reasons why increased investment expenditures may result in negative stock
returns. For example, managers have an incentive to put the best possible spin on both their new
opportunities as well their overall business when their investment expenditures are especially
high because of their need to raise capital as well as to justify their expenditures. If investors fail
to appreciate managements’ incentive to oversell their firms in these situations, stock returns
subsequent to an increase in investment expenditures are likely to be negative. This effect is
likely to be especially important for managers who are “empire builders,” and invest for their
own benefits rather than the benefits of the firm’s shareholders (see Jensen (1986)).
The evidence provided in this paper is consistent with the idea that investors tend to
underreact to the empire building implications of increased investment expenditures.
Specifically, we find that firms that increase their investment expenditures the most tend to
underperform their benchmarks over the following five years. A significant amount of this
abnormal performance occurs around earnings announcements, providing additional evidence
that our findings are generated because investors incorrectly assess the empire building
tendencies of managers rather than because of benchmark errors. Moreover, this negative
relation between increased capital expenditures and subsequent returns tends to be stronger for
firms with greater investment discretion, i.e., firms with less debt or more cash flows. In
and Vogt (1997) find a significant positive relation between the magnitude of the stock market reaction to capital
investment announcements and the level of new investment.
2