NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOUSING COLLATERAL, CONSUMPTION INSURANCE
AND RISK PREMIA:
AN EMPIRICAL PERSPECTIVE
Hanno Lustig
Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Working Paper 9959
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9959
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2003
First version August 2002. The authors thank Thomas Sargent, Robert Hall, Dirk Krueger, Steven Grenadier,
Narayana Kocherlakota, Andrew Abel, Fernando Alvarez, Andrew Atkeson, Patrick Bajari, John Cochrane,
Timothey Cogley, Harold Cole, Marco Del Negro, Lars Peter Hansen, John Heaton, Christobal Huneuus,
Kenneth Judd, Sydney Ludvigson, Sergei Morozov, Lee Ohanian, Monika Piazzesi, Luigi Pistaferri, Esteban
Rossi-Hansberg, Kenneth Singleton, Laura Veldkamp, Pierre-Olivier Weill, and Amir Yaron. We also
benefited from comments from seminar participants at Duke University, Stanford GSB, University of Iowa,
Universite de Montreal, New York University Stern, University of Wisconsin, University of California at San
Diego, London Business School, London School of Economics, University College London, University of
North Carolina, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Yale University, University of Minnesota, University
of Maryland, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Boston University, University of Pennsylvania Wharton,
University of Pittsburgh, Carnegie Mellon University GSIA, Northwestern University Kellogg, University
of Texas at Austin, Federal Reserve Board of Governors, University of Gent, UCLA, University of Chicago,
Stanford University, the 2003 NBER Asset Pricing Meeting in Cambridge, the Society for Economic
Dynamics Meeting in New York, and the North American Meeting of the Econometric Society in Los
Angeles. For help with the data, we thank Kenneth French, Chris Lundblad, and Savina Rizova. Stijn Van
Nieuwerburgh acknowledges financial support from the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy research and
the Flanders Fund for Scientific Research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Hanno Lustig and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Housing Collateral, Consumption Insurance and Risk Premia: An Empirical Perspective
Hanno Lustig and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
NBER Working Paper No. 9959
September 2003
JEL No. G1
ABSTRACT
In a model with housing collateral, the ratio of housing wealth to human wealth shifts the conditional
distribution of asset prices and consumption growth. A decrease in house prices reduces the
collateral value of housing, increases household exposure to idiosyncratic risk, and increases the
conditional market price of risk. Using aggregate data for the US, we find that a decrease in the ratio
of housing wealth to human wealth predicts higher returns on stocks. Conditional on this ratio, the
covariance of returns with aggregate risk factors explains eighty percent of the cross-sectional
variation in annual size and book-to-market portfolio returns.
An electronic data appendix for this paper is available at www.nber.org/data-appendix/w9959.
Hanno Lustig
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60657
and NBER
hlustig@uchicago.edu
Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Stern School of Business
Department of Finance
Suite 9-190
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
svnieuwe@stern.nyu.edu

Introduction
Weidentifyanovelcollateralchannelthattransmitsshocksinthehousingmarkettoriskpremia.
In a model with collateralized borrowing and lending, the ratio of housing wealth to human
wealth, the housing collateral ratio, changes the conditional distribution of consumption growth
acrosshouseholds. Whenthecollateralratioislow, thedispersionofconsumptiongrowthacross
households is more sensitive to aggregate consumption growth shocks and this raises the market
price of aggregate risk.
The model predicts that risk premia fluctuate predictably over time and in the cross-section.
ThesepredictionsareconfirmedbyUSequityreturndata. Investorsdemandalargercompensa-
tion for a given amount of aggregate risk in times when the housing collateral ratio is low. This
implies that the housing collateral ratio predicts aggregate stock returns over time. In the cross-
section, the model predicts that assets whose returns are more tightly correlated with aggregate
consumption growth shocks when collateral is scarce trade at a discount. Conditional on the
housing collateral ratio, the covariance of returns with aggregate consumption growth shocks
explains about eighty percent of the cross-sectional variation in US stock returns, because the
returns of value stocks are more correlated with aggregate consumption growth shocks during
lowcollateralperiodsthanaregrowthstocks. InLustig&VanNieuwerburgh(2003)wecalibrate
this model and we show that the collateral effect can match the time-series and cross-sectional
variation in risk premia in US data at moderate levels of risk aversion.
There are two main channels that transmit shocks originating in the housing market to
the risk premia in asset markets. First, households want to hedge against rental price shocks
or consumption basket composition shocks when the utility function is non-separable in non-
durable consumption and housing services. This introduces a new risk factor which is the
focus of recent work by Piazzesi, Schneider, & Tuzel (2002) and Yogo (2003). In particular,
if housing services and consumption are complements then households command a larger risk
premium if returns and rental price growth are positively correlated. This approach relies on a
particular type of non-separability to generate large risk premia, but does not rely on imperfect
consumptioninsurance. Wearguethatthemarketpriceofcompositionriskissmallandroughly
constantforplausibleparametervalues,inlinewithearlierworkbyDunn&Singleton(1986)and
Eichenbaum & Hansen (1990). They report substantial evidence against the null of separability
in a representative agent model with non-durable consumption and durables, but they conclude
that introducing durables does not help in reducing the pricing errors for stocks.
Second, a drop in the housing collateral ratio adversely affects the risk sharing technology
2

that enables households to insulate consumption from labor income shocks, and the distribution
of consumption growth fans out as this ratio decreases. When housing prices decrease, collateral
is destroyed and households are more exposed to idiosyncratic labor income risk. The risk asso-
ciated with these collateral constraints contributes a liquidity factor to the stochastic discount
factor. The collateraleffectdoesnot hinge onwhether andhow preferencesovernondurable and
housing consumption are non-separable. Instead, it relies on imperfect consumption insurance
among households induced by occasionally binding collateral constraints. The housing market
delivers shocks to the risk-sharing technology.
Without these collateral constraints our model collapses to the standard consumption-based
capital-asset-pricing model of Lucas (1978) and Breeden (1979). That model prices only aggre-
gate consumption growth risk and it has been rejected by the data (e.g. Hansen & Singleton
(1983)). Our paper addresses two empirical failures of the consumption-based capital-asset-
pricing model (CCAPM).
First,becauseUSaggregateconsumptiongrowthisapproximatelyi.i.d.,theCCAPMimplies
a market price of risk that is approximately constant. However, in the data, stock market
returns are predictable and this suggests that the market price of aggregate risk varies over
time (e.g. Fama & French (1988), Campbell & Shiller (1988), Ferson, Kandel, & Stambaugh
(1987), Whitelaw (1997), Lamont (1998), Lettau & Ludvigson (2003) and Campbell (2000) for
an overview). Our model delivers time variation in the market price endogenously through
the housing market. As the housing collateral ratio decreases, the conditional volatility of the
liquidity factor increases. In the data, the housing collateral ratio does predict the aggregate
US stock market return, mainly at lower frequencies.
Second, the covariance of asset returns with consumption growth explains only a small frac-
tionofthevariationinthecross-sectionofstockreturnsoffirmssortedinportfoliosaccordingto
size (market capitalization) and value (book-value to market-value ratio) characteristics (Fama
&French(1992)). Inresponsetothisfailure, Fama&French(1993)directlyspecifythestochas-
tic discount factor as a linear function of the market return, the return on a small minus big
firmportfolio, andahighminuslowbook-to-marketfirmportfolio. Theempiricalsuccessofthis
three-factor model has motivated quite some more recent research on the underlying macroeco-
nomic sources of risk for which their factors proxy (e.g. Bansal, Dittmar, & Lundblad (2002),
Lettau & Ludvigson (2001b), Santos & Veronesi (2001) and Cochrane (2001) for an overview).
Our model generates large value premia for stocks whose dividends are more sensitive to the
housing collateral ratio. In the data, the collateral model explains eighty percent of the vari-
ability in annual returns of the Fama-French size and book-to-market portfolios. For annual
3