NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INTERNATIONAL ADVERSE SELECTION IN
LIFE INSURANCE AND ANNUITIES
David McCarthy
Olivia S. Mitchell
Working Paper 9975
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9975
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2003
Support for this research was provided by the Pension Research Council at the Wharton School, the National
Bureau of Economic Research, the Economic and Social Research Institute of the Government of Japan, and
the Wharton-SMU Research Center at Singapore Management University. This study is part of the NBER
program on the Economics of Aging. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not of the
institutions with whom the authors are affiliated. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by David McCarthy and Olivia S. Mitchell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

International Adverse Selection in Life Insurance and Annuities
David McCarthy and Olivia S. Mitchell
NBER Working Paper No. 9975
September 2003
JEL No. G2, J1, J3
ABSTRACT
This paper evaluates the extent of adverse selection in life insurance and annuities in international
markets, for both group and individual products. We also compare results with prior analyses of
adverse selection in international annuity markets, focusing on the US, the UK, and Japan. Our
results help assess the extent to which life insurers can hedge mortality exposure by writing both life
insurance and annuities, and they may be used to determine a normal range for adverse selection in
international insurance markets.
David McCarthy
Imperial College Business School
Room 312
South Kensington
London SW7 2AZ
david.mccarthy@ageing.ox.ac.uk
Olivia S. Mitchell
The Wharton School
3641 Locust Walk
Room 304 CPC
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6218
and NBER
mitchelo@wharton.upenn.edu

1
International Adverse Selection in Life Insurance and Annuities
David McCarthy and Olivia S. Mitchell
Insurance specialists recognize that well-functioning insurance markets – in the form of
both life insurance products and annuities – are necessary to ensure effective funded retirement
systems and efficient national saving. This is because annuities play an essential role in
converting asset accumulations into a regular flow of retirement income guaranteed for life, and
classical life insurance protects individuals and their dependants from the risk of early death.
But as actuaries know, it takes a great deal of statistical information on mortality patterns by age
and sex to develop the necessary survival forecasts needed for valuing annuity and insurance
products. And in practice, many countries lack a vital statistics collection mechanism, especially
for insured lives and annuitants, causing analysts there to rely on mortality data from other
countries in order to value insurance products of all types. This paper uses data from three
relatively well-developed insurance markets to analyze the differences between the mortality of
individuals who have purchased non-annuity insurance products and the general population in
these countries. Comparison with previous results permits a comprehensive picture of the effects
of adverse selection on mortality and hence on valuation of insurance products in these three
markets.
Theory predicts that in the absence of insurance company underwriting, adverse selection
will improve the mortality (i.e. increase the life expectancy) of annuity purchasers, but worsen
that of purchasers of other life insurance products relative to the general population. We explore
the difference between mortality tables for this group in the United States, the United Kingdom,
and Japan. Many other countries in the Americas, in Europe, and in Asia use either the US or
UK tables to value annuities and insurance. Somewhat surprisingly, our results indicate that

adverse selection reduces mortality for both life insurance and annuities, contrary to what theory
would suggest. This indicates that insurance company screening of potential poorer risks in
classic life insurance (“underwriting”) is very effective, possibly even eliminating any
asymmetric information held by policyholders.
In Section I we examine the construction of aggregate mortality data (of the type we use
here) from records of individual deaths and survivals. Section II briefly presents the standard
theory of adverse election in insurance and life annuities. Section III describes the data and
results, and Section IV offers conclusions.
I. Raw and Aggregate Mortality
It is useful to describe the process by which “raw” data about deaths in a group of people
is transformed into aggregate mortality data of the type commonly used by insurance experts.
As a rule, “raw” mortality data consists of records of individual deaths and survivals in a
population, while aggregate mortality data is usually presented in the form of a mortality table.
Such a table is an estimate of the statistical distribution of the remaining life span that can be
expected for members of a given population.1 A mortality table is generally derived by
performing an investigation of deaths occurring in this given population over a specific period of
time. Each individual in the population will have one raw data record, which will normally
consist of the following information:
1. The date at which the individual entered the investigation;
2. Risk characteristics of the individual (usually age and sex, but may include date
of inception of the policy, the type of policy and the reason for the purchase of the
policy);
1 For additional background see Bowers et al. (1986), and Faculty and Institute of Actuaries (1999).