NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DEMAND AND PRICING IN ELECTRICITY MARKETS:
EVIDENCE FROM SAN DIEGO
DURING CALIFORNIA’S ENERGY CRISIS
Peter C. Reiss
Matthew W. White
Working Paper 9986
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9986
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2003
We thank San Diego Gas and Electric Company for providing access to non-public billing data for this
research, and staff at the California Public Utilities Commission for assistance and comments. White
gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Russell Ackoff Endowment Fund in the Wharton Risk
Management and Decision Processes Center. The opinions and conclusions expressed in this paper are solely
those of the authors and should not be construed as representing the opinions or policies of the California
Public Utilities Commission or the San Diego Gas and Electric Company. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Peter C. Reiss and Matthew W. White. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Demand and Pricing in Electricity Markets: Evidence from San Diego During California’s
Energy Crisis
Peter C. Reiss and Matthew W. White
NBER Working Paper No. 9986
September 2003
JEL No. D1, L5, L9
ABSTRACT
We study the electricity consumption of San Diego-area households following a series of
price changes and related events during California's energy crisis in 2000-01. The analysis uses a
five-year panel of disaggregate billing and weather data for a random sample of 70,000 households.
In contrast to prior work, these data allow us to proceed without behavioral assumptions regarding
a consumer's knowledge of energy prices.
We find that after a rapid price increase in summer 2000, consumption fell substantially over
about 60 days, averaging 12% per household; consumption then rebounded to within 3% of pre-
crisis levels after a price cap was imposed. Under the price cap, public appeals for energy
conservation and a remunerative voluntary conservation program had significant, but transitory,
effects. Further, a large share of households reduced electricity consumption substantially (over
10%) but saved small monetary amounts ($10 or less). Overall, the results indicate consumers may
be far more responsive to pecuniary and non-pecuniary incentives for altering their energy use than
is commonly believed.
Peter C. Reiss
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
518 Memorial Way
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
preiss@stanford.edu
Matthew W. White
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6372
and NBER
mawhite@wharton.upenn.edu

1 Introduction
Households in the United States are billed for their electricity use monthly, based on
tariffs that change much less frequently. This practice leaves utilities with few options
that theycanuse tomoderatedemand during times oftight supply. Traditionally, the
industry has dealt with this lack of flexibility by ensuring that utilities have sufficient
capacity or import capability to meet all but extreme demands.
In 1998, California implemented an electricity industry restructuring plan that
loosened regulatory control over wholesale electricity prices and capacity decisions.
Beginning in June 2000, a variety of factors led to a lengthy period of unexpectedly
tight supplies. Because most consumers’ electric rates remained fixed at or near
pre-restructuring levels, the state and utilities had few short-run options they could
employ to reduce demand. This inflexibility of retail electricity prices, combined
with escalating wholesale costs, pushed several of the state’s utilities to the brink of
bankruptcy and left a costly financial burden on the state.
In the wake of the California crisis and problems elsewhere, numerous propos-
als have been put forward to reform the basic structure of retail electricity pricing.
Many of these proposals envision making consumer prices much more responsive to
supply conditions.1 Unfortunately, there is limited evidence available on how house-
holds might respond in aggregate or individually to the types of price changes seen
during the California crisis. Moreover, it remains an open question how quickly—or
even whether—California’s households are willing and able to reduce their electricity
consumption over short-term horizons.
This paper uses a unique household-level data set to assess consumer reactions
to tight supply conditions both when prices freely vary and when prices are capped.
Our analyses speak not only to energy policy issues, but also more broadly to eco-
nomic questions about whether and how consumers respond to price versus non-price
incentives. Specifically, we examine the responses of San Diego-area households to
an unprecedented rise and fall in electricity prices, and their response to voluntary
energy conservation incentives when residential prices were subsequently capped. We
use San Diego-area households because at the start of the state’s electricity crisis in
June 2000, a provision of California law allowed the utility serving the San Diego
region to raise its electric rates commensurate with escalating wholesale prices. The
1See, for example, Lafferty et al. (2001), Borenstein (2002), or CPUC (2002).
1

subsequent retail price increases in San Diego led to an emergency legislative ‘fix’ of
price caps, which remained in effect as the state’s crisis deepened.
Our analysis also complements prior electricity demand studies. Despite several
decades of research, economists’ understanding of how households respond to en-
ergy price changes—both in speed and magnitude—remains far from complete. This
shortcoming persists forelectricity because regulatoryauthoritiestightly controlprice
changes. Thus, discerning the effect of modest price ‘signals’ amid the wide varia-
tion in demand from other sources (such as weather or geography) has long posed
a difficult problem for econometric studies, regardless of technique.2 The experience
of San Diego is valuable because it overcomes this canonical econometric problem in
two unique ways: The industry briefly vacated its traditional checks on consumers’
prices and consumers experienced unprecedented price changes.3
A second feature of the paper examines two post-price cap efforts to curb retail
consumer demand. The first of these was an extensive media campaign by the state
of California to promote voluntary energy conservation during the state-wide crisis
in the spring of 2001. The second offered households financial rewards for reducing
electricity use during the summer of 2001. We find that San Diego-area household
electricity consumption fell substantially during the spring of 2001, the period of ex-
tensive public appeals for energy conservation and media attention to the escalating
crisis. This occurred even though there were no significant changes in households’
economic incentives to reduce electricity use. The subsequent remunerative volun-
tary conservation program in the summer of 2001 further reduced demand, and by
magnitudes roughly proportionate to households’ responses to the price spike in 2000.
Nevertheless, both of these programs effects were transitory, ending promptly after
2Someprogressonthisproblemhasbeenmadethroughformalpricingexperiments. Seeespecially
CavesandChristensen(1980),ParksandWeitzel(1984),Ham,MountainandLuke(1997),orCPUC
(2002) and references therein. Unfortunately, truly randomized pricing experiments are rare in this
industry. Most rely upon voluntary participation and small samples, raising familiar attrition- and
selection-bias concerns that impair generalization to the broader population. A recent effort to
address the latter is Ham et al. (1997).
3Ours is not the only examination of San Diegans’ experience. Tabulations in Goldman et
al. (2002) and contemporaneous work by Bushnell and Mansur (2003) examine aggregate data,
reportingsmallerresultsthanourstudy. This is possibly due to compositionaleffects fromdifferent
residentialandindustrial-consumerpricechangesanddemandresponses,whichareinseparableinthe
aggregatedata. Smallereffectsinaggregatedatamightalsobepartlyattributabletothedifficultyof
controllingmeasurementerrorinaggregatedemandmodelsusingstandardmacroeconomiccontrols.
Survey work by Lutzenhiser (2002) provides complementary information on San Diegans’ energy
consumption behavior during this time, which we address further below.
2