NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MONETARY TRANSMISSION IN THE EURO AREA:
DOES THE INTEREST RATE CHANNEL EXPLAIN ALL?
Ignazio Angeloni
Anil K. Kashyap
Benoît Mojon
Daniele Terlizzese
Working Paper 9984
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9984
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2003
An earlier version of this paper was circulated as ECB Working Paper 114, titled “Monetary Transmission
in the Euro Area: Where Do We Stand?". Kashyap thanks the ECB, the Houblon Norman Fund and the
National Science Foundation (through a grant administered by the National Bureau of Economic Research)
for financial support. The views expressed in this paper are not necessarily shared by the institutions to which
the authors are affiliated. We are grateful to all members of the Eurosystem Monetary Transmission Network
for their continuous co-operation and to the participants in the conference “Monetary Policy Transmission
in the Euro Area”, held at the ECB on 18 and 19 December 2001, for many helpful comments. We
particularly thank A. Dieppe, M. Ehrmann and L. Monteforte for helping us assemble some of the data and
S. Sommaggio for editing the text. All errors and shortcomings are our responsibility alone. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2003 by Ignazio Angeloni, Anil K. Kashyap, Benoît Mojon, and Daniele Terlizzese. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Monetary Transmission in the Euro Area: Does the Interest Rate Channel Explain All?
Ignazio Angeloni, Anil K. Kashyap, Benoît Mojon, and Daniele Terlizzese
NBER Working Paper No. 9984
September 2003
JEL No. E52, E20
ABSTRACT
Drawing on recent Eurosystem research that uses a range of econometric techniques and a number
of new data sets, we propose a comprehensive description of how monetary policy affects the euro
area economy. We focus mainly on three questions: (1) what are the stylized facts concerning the
transmission of monetary policy for the area as a whole and for individual countries? (2) can the
“classic” interest rate channel (IRC) alone, without capital market imperfections, explain these facts?
(3) if not, is the bank lending channel a likely candidate to complete the story? We find plausible
euro-area wide monetary policy responses for prices and output that are similar to those generally
reported for the U.S. However, investment (relative to consumption) seems to play a larger role in
euro area monetary policy transmission than in the U.S. We cannot reject the hypothesis that the IRC
completely characterizes transmission in a few countries, and estimate it to be substantial in almost
all. Where the IRC is not dominant, there is normally some direct evidence supporting the presence
of a bank lending channel (or other financial transmission channel). The cases where financial
effects appear important can be further split according to whether they primarily relate to
consumption or investment.
Ignazio Angeloni Benoît Mojon
European Central Bank, European Central Bank
Kaiserstrasse 29, D-60311 Kaisersrasse 29, D-60 311
Frankfurt am Main Frankfurt am Main
Germany Germany
ignazio.angeloni@ecb.int benoit.mojon@ecb.int
Anil Kashyap Daniele Terlizzese
University of Chicago Banca d'Italia
Graduate School of Business Servizio Studi
1101 E. 58th Street Via Nazionale 91, 00184
Chicago, IL 60637 Roma
and NBER daniele.terlizzese@bancaditalia.it
anil.kashyap@gsb.uchicago.edu

1. Introduction
In late 1999, the European Central Bank (ECB) launched, together with the National
Central Banks (NCBs) of the countries that had just adopted the euro, a major research initiative
to study the transmission of monetary policy. The objective was to put together, in a reasonably
short time, a comprehensive set of information on how the monetary policy of the newly created
central bank would affect the economy of the so-called “euro area”1. In this paper we provide a
selective summary of the main findings contained in the 23 papers that were produced during this
project – the full results, including a more complete version of this paper, are forthcoming in
Angeloni, Kashyap, and Mojon (2003).
In doing so, we draw on three types of analyses that were conducted during the project.
The first consists of (six) macroeconomic studies of both the entire euro area economy and the
constituent countries. The second of (seven) studies of firm-level investment behavior. The third
of (ten) studies that analyze bank-level balance sheets and income statements. The goal of this
paper is to bring together disparate pieces of evidence to produce a unified picture. We put the
emphasis on cross-checking these various pieces of evidence, with the belief that when many
indicators point in a similar direction this is unlikely to be due to chance, while a finding that
different indicators yield different conclusions suggests more cautious conclusions should be
drawn. The stress on the need for cross-checking was indeed a central theme of the whole project.
The reader interested in more details regarding the results should consult Angeloni, Kashyap, and
Mojon (2003).
One important caveat to this exercise is that almost all of the empirical work relies on pre-
1999 data, before the introduction of the euro and the structural break associated with the creation
of the ECB. As a result, the Lucas critique no doubt applies forcefully. Still, we believe that the
evidence collected is relevant for several reasons.
First, the European Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) was a gradual process. It
included a prior convergence in policies and economic performance during which agents had time
to prepare and adjust. Much of this adjustment is likely to have occurred before 1999, some to be
ongoing after the new currency is introduced. Data prior to 1999 are likely to contain early
information about the new regime. Second, the use of panel data on firms and banks is intended
1 The euro area is composed of all the countries that have adopted the euro as their currency. Currently, the area
includes 12 of the 15 countries belonging to the European Union (the exceptions being Denmark, Sweden and the
United Kingdom). The Eurosystem includes the ECB and the euro area National Central Banks.
3

inter alia to reduce the need for a long time-series dimension. Moreover, panel data might help
identifying structural parameters that can be viewed as approximately constant during the
transition. Finally, the aforementioned emphasis on cross-checking different sources of evidence
using alternative methodologies and data should be of help in uncovering unreliable results.
To organize the discussion in an interesting fashion (as opposed to offering a laundry list
of results), we ask whether the evidence is consistent with the view that monetary policy
transmission in the euro area can broadly be described as taking place through the classical
interest rate channel (IRC). By IRC we mean the response of aggregate demand components,
GDP and prices to the change in the policy controlled interest rate that would take place if there
were no capital (and insurance) market imperfections2. Equivalently, the question we ask is
whether such imperfections are crucial to understand the main features of monetary transmission
in the euro area.
We focus on this specific “null hypothesis” for several reasons. First, since the IRC is the
conventional way in which monetary policy is presumed to operate in a large, fairly closed
economy with a developed financial system, it is logical to ask whether it can explain the facts
before looking at alternatives. Second, the commonly accepted — if not always fully accurate —
picture of the euro area financial market is one in which banks play a dominant role. To check
whether this prominence has implications for the transmission mechanism it is methodologically
sound to start with a working assumption that denies any such assumption. Third, much of the
concern that has been voiced about the potentially asymmetric effects of the single monetary
policy appears to be grounded in observed asymmetries in the financial structure of firms or
banks, as well as in their vulnerability to informational problems. These features would be clearly
of little relevance if the IRC were to account for the bulk of the transmission mechanism. Finally,
taking IRC dominance as the null hypothesis provides a disciplined way to look for alternative
explanations. Highlighting the places where the interest rate effects do not appear to be the whole
story helps identify where other channels (such as balance sheet, liquidity constraints, bank credit
supply, and the like) may be important. This in turn can help guide the measurement and
monitoring of the most relevant information for policymakers.
2 The IRC would be the only channel through which monetary policy would affect aggregate spending in a closed
economy where: (1) the central bank was able to influence the term structure of market real interest rates; (2) all
agents were able to borrow and lend at those rates and, (3) all insurance possibilities with respect to credit risks were
available. In this world, no agent’s expenditure would be affected by the availability of liquidity or collateral, nor
would precautionary motives to hold wealth arise.
4