NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE OUTPUT COMPOSITION PUZZLE:
A DIFFERENCE IN THE MONETARY TRANSMISSION
MECHANISM IN THE EURO AREA AND U.S.
Ignazio Angeloni
Anil K. Kashyap
Benoît Mojon
Daniele Terlizzese
Working Paper 9985
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9985
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2003
Kashyap thanks the ECB, the University of Chicago George J. Stigler Center for the Study of the Economy
and the State, and the National Science Foundation (through a grant administered by the National Bureau of
Economic Research) for financial support. The views expressed in this paper are not necessarily shared by
the institutions to which the authors are affiliated. We thank Michel Aglietta, Filippo Altissimo, Jean-Pascal
Benassy, Alan Blinder, Larry Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum, Chris Erceg, Charlie Evans, Andrea Gerali,
Luigi Guiso, Jean Pisani-Ferry, Rob McCulloch, Jean-Paul Pollin, David Reifschneider, Peter Rossi, Chris
Sims, Frank Smets, Luca Sessa and Raf Wouters for helpful conversations, our discussants Jesper Lindé and
Richard Clarida and seminar participants at the Central Bank of Chile, the European Central Bank, the
University of Chicago, and the Wharton School for useful comments, Anna-Maria Agresti for excellent
research assistance. Flint Brayton and Chris Erceg are thanking for running the FRB/US simulations that we
report. Frank Smets and Raf Wouters are thanked for sharing with us the programs with which we ran
simulations of the Smets-Wouters DSGE model. We also thank Jennifer Roush for assistance in calculating
the standard errors in the Gordon and Leeper model and Andrea Gerali for assistance in calculating the Monte
Carlo simulations of the DSGE models. All errors and shortcomings are our responsibility alone. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2003 by Ignazio Angeloni, Anil K. Kashyap, Benoît Mojon, and Daniele Terlizzese. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Output Composition Puzzle: A Difference in the Monetary Transmission Mechanism in the
Euro Area and U.S.
Ignazio Angeloni, Anil K. Kashyap, Benoît Mojon, and Daniele Terlizzese
NBER Working Paper No. 9985
September 2003
JEL No. E21, E22, E30, E52
ABSTRACT
We revisit recent evidence on how monetary policy affects output and prices in the U.S. and in the
euro area. The response patterns to a shift in monetary policy are similar in most respects, but differ
noticeably as to the composition of output changes. In the euro area investment is the predominant
driver of output changes, while in the U.S. consumption shifts are significantly more important. We
dub this difference the output composition puzzle and explore its implications and several potential
explanations for it. While the evidence seems to point at differences in consumption responses,
rather than investment, as the proximate cause for this fact, the source of the consumption difference
remains a puzzle.
Ignazio Angeloni Benoît Mojon
European Central Bank, European Central Bank
Kaiserstrasse 29, D-60311 Kaisersrasse 29, D-60 311
Frankfurt am Main Frankfurt am Main
Germany Germany
ignazio.angeloni@ecb.int benoit.mojon@ecb.int
Anil Kashyap Daniele Terlizzese
University of Chicago Banca d'Italia
Graduate School of Business Servizio Studi
1101 E. 58th Street Via Nazionale 91, 00184
Chicago, IL 60637 Roma
and NBER daniele.terlizzese@bancaditalia.it
anil.kashyap@gsb.uchicago.edu

Introduction
A consensus has emerged during the last twenty years, over the way that the actions of
central banks affect the economy (the monetary transmission mechanism). In a nutshell,
changes in monetary policy have a persistent, though not permanent, effect on output,
with the output change being humped-shaped; prices react with some delay, and
eventually settle down to a new level, with no permanent effect on inflation.
Much of this consensus is based on the examination of the U.S. experience. Yet, recently,
twelve European countries embarked upon an unprecedented grand monetary experiment.
A new central bank was created from scratch and the currencies of twelve sovereign
nations were replaced with the euro. A natural question is whether the consensus view on
the monetary transmission mechanism holds for the euro area as well.
While we expect this question will be the subject of intense research in the future, some
first answers were provided by a momentous research effort involving the staffs of the
European Central Bank (ECB) and of the twelve national central banks (NCB) forming
the euro area (Angeloni, Kashyap and Mojon (2003). Some surprising similarities were
found, together with some interesting differences.
In this paper, drawing from that body of work, we first check the robustness of the
similarities. These are important because, as the euro area is only about five years old,
any time series analysis of the euro area transmission necessarily uses mostly data from
the previous monetary policy regime. This confounds analyses based on either synthetic
data of euro area aggregates or the aggregation of country-level findings. However, some
of the uncertainty over the transmission mechanism may be reduced if the time series
facts that can be compiled for the euro area resemble those for the U.S., a long
functioning monetary union of similar size and openness as the euro area.
The bulk of our analysis will focus on an intriguing difference between the two currency
areas. In particular, we call attention to one aspect of the transmission mechanism that
has previously received little attention: the composition of the output adjustments that
follow a change in monetary policy. Along this dimension, an interesting contrast
emerges between the euro area findings and those for the U.S. In the U.S. changes in
consumption spending appear to be a much more important component of monetary
adjustment than in the euro area (where investment spending changes appear to be pre-
eminent). We dub this difference the output composition puzzle.
We see the motivation for studying the composition of the output response as threefold.
First, better understanding the composition effects can improve the central bank’s ability
to monitor the economy. For instance, knowledge that consumption adjustments are
typically dominant in the U.S. would suggest that consumer behavior is what needs to be
watched carefully to see whether policy changes are working through the economy in the
expected way. This ultimately would help determining whether the current monetary
stance is appropriate or policy changes are called for.
2

A second, broader motivation is that knowledge of the composition can improve our
understanding of the factors behind the monetary transmission mechanism. As will be
discussed later on, the differences between a dominant consumption response in the U.S.
and a dominant investment response in the euro area could be due to a variety of
institutional or legal constraints, or frictions, linked for example to the structure of
financial or labor markets, or differences in the levels of social insurance. Better
understanding the composition seems a useful first step to uncover the relevance of these
different factors. Moreover, having identified the relevant factors one could then discuss
whether structural policies, e.g. in the financial or labor markets, might be warranted to
alter these institutions.
A third, and closely related, consideration is that this analysis can be informative about
the stability of the transmission mechanism. By understanding which transmission
channels are dominant and which are dormant, one can decide which changes to the
economy merit most attention. For instance, if the consumption response in the U.S. is
dominant a policymaker might conclude that paying close attention to changes in the
mortgage markets is more important than studying changes in the tax treatment of
depreciation.
We organize the paper into three parts. We begin with a brief review of the stylized facts
about the basic statistical properties of the data and on the transmission mechanisms for
the U.S. and euro area, showing a number of similarities.
In the next section we document the output composition puzzle, arguing that it is a robust
feature of the two economies that can be confirmed using a host of statistical techniques
and data.
In the following section, we provide tentative interpretations and explanations for it. We
first explore the puzzle in the class of tractable dynamic stochastic general equilibrium
(DSGE) models that have recently been proposed as an accurate description of the
monetary policy transmission (prominent examples are Christiano, Eichenbaum and
Evans (2001) for the U.S. and Smets and Wouters (2002) for the euro area). The idea is to
trace the differences in output composition to differences in “deep” parameters
characterizing the two economies. We verify that these models, in their current estimated
(or calibrated) version, have trouble fully accounting for the differences in the
composition of output adjustments that we observe in the data.
To do this we identify the mechanisms in the model that give rise to differences in the
output composition, isolating a small subset of the models’ parameters that essentially
govern the output composition. The differences estimated for these parameters are
however too small, and sometimes even of the wrong sign, to fully account for the
differences in the output composition between the two areas. Moreover, the mechanisms
identified do not appear to be very powerful. It appears that large changes in these
parameters are needed to bring the models in line with our data-based estimates of the
consumption contributions to output adjustment.
3