NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INSTITUTIONAL AND NON-INSTITUTIONAL
EXPLANATIONS OF ECONOMIC DIFFERENCES
Stanley L. Engerman
Kenneth L. Sokoloff
Working Paper 9989
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9989
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2003
We would like to express deep appreciation for the research assistance of Elisa Mariscal, Patricia Juarez, and
Luis Zegarra. We have also benefited from discussions with Daron Acemoglu, Lance Davis, David Dollar,
David Eltis, Jeff Frieden, Avner Greif, Stephen Haber, Karla Hoff, Daniel Kaufmann, Zorina Khan, Naomi
Lamoreaux, Frank Lewis, Peter Lindert, John Majewski, Douglass North, James Robinson, Jean-Laurent
Rosenthal, Mary Shirley, Joel Slemrod, Peter Temin, John Wallis, and Jeffrey Williamson. We gratefully
acknowledge the financial support we have received from the National Science Foundation, as well as from
the Academic Senate at the University of California, Los Angeles. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Stanley L. Engerman and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Institutional and Non-Institutional Explanations of Economic Differences
Stanley L. Engerman and Kenneth L Sokoloff
NBER Working Paper No. 9989
September 2003
JEL No. N10
ABSTRACT
Although we cannot conceive of processes of economic growth that do not involve
institutional change, in this essay we outline some reasons why one should be cautious about
grounding a theory of growth on institutions. We emphasize how very different institutional
structures have often been found to be reasonable substitutes for each other, both in dissimilar as
well as similar contexts. The historical record, therefore, does not seem to support the notion that
any particular institution, narrowly defined, is indispensable for growth. Moreover, we discuss how
the evidence that there are systematic patterns to the ways institutions evolve undercuts the idea that
exogenous change in institutions is what powers growth. Institutions matter, but our thinking of how
they matter should recognize that they are profoundly influenced by the political and economic
environment, and that if any aspect of institutions is crucial for growth, it is that institutions change
over time as circumstances change.
Stanley L. Engerman
Department of Economics
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
enge@troi.cc.rochester.edu
Kenneth L. Sokoloff
Department of Economics
U.C.L.A
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
sokoloff@ucla.edu

Economists have long been concerned with the explanation of differences across
countries in levels of national income, population, and per capita incomes, as well as in
their rates of growth. Because many of the processes of economic development are
presumed to operate over long periods of time, those studying the sources of these
differences have quite naturally turned to the historical record for relevant evidence.
Their concern with economic history thus comes not only from a desire to achieve a
better understanding of the past, but also from by a belief that such knowledge can serve
as a guide for policymakers striving to improve the economic and social conditions of
currently less developed nations. Many scholars have set about making contributions to
knowledge through detailed investigations of the processes of growth in individual
countries. Others have sought to discern what factors were crucial through comparative
studies, focusing on issues such as why nations differed with regard to the timing of the
onset of growth or how and why their records of achieved rates of growth varied over a
long period of time.
Recently considerable attention has been given to the question of why European
nations and some of their overseas offshoots expanded more rapidly than did the
economies of Asia, Africa, and Latin America after the eighteenth century, either
generating new gaps in levels of income and rates of growth, or else greatly widening
whatever differentials may have previously existed (see Table 1).1 Previously the
principal focus of historians examining the basis for differences in long-term economic
performance had been with what led Great Britain to accomplish an Industrial Revolution
sometime after the middle of the eighteenth century, and ahead of its European rivals (see
Table 2).2 Given the greater similarity of economic, political, and social structures
2

among the European nations than those between Europe and the rest of the world, the
factors highlighted in the discussions of the development of the Industrial Revolution are
rather different from those generally featured in the broader geographic comparisons. In
both cases, however, what the economists and economic historians are seeking to explain
is why some nations in today’s world remain poor, relatively and absolutely, and what
conditions can be changed in order to achieve success in spurring growth and improving
the welfare of the respective populations. It is this problem that the recent study of
institutions has sought to help resolve and that probably represents its most significant
contribution.
It is not necessary here to attempt to catalogue the full set of explanations that
have been given for differences in economic development, since many books and articles,
published and forthcoming, have already done that. For present purposes, however, we
highlight a transition over the last few decades from a concentration on the role of
narrowly-defined economic factors to a focus on the significance of various social
structures and culture in providing the conditions conducive to economic development.3
Arguments based on conditions such as favorable natural resources (including accessible
coal and iron, in the case of Britain), high rates of capital formation, and extensive
markets or other circumstances that encourage a faster pace of technological change,
which had long been central to our understanding of why some economies enjoyed better
performance, have been replaced (or supplemented) by arguments concerned with how
differences across societies in political and cultural institutions arose, and how they
influence the processes of growth.4 Although we cannot conceive of processes of
economic growth that do not involve institutional change, in this essay we outline some
3