NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ARE MENTAL HEALTH INSURANCE MANDATES EFFECTIVE?:
EVIDENCE FROM SUICIDES
Jonathan Klick
Sara Markowitz
Working Paper 9994
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9994
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2003
The authors would like to thank Jennifer Tennant, Dan Grossman and Richard Flom for excellent research
assistance. In addition, we would like to express our appreciation for helpful comments and suggestions
provided by Peter Loeb, Ted Joyce, Will Dow and participants at the NBER Summer Institute in Health
Economics. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Jonathan Klick and Sara Markowitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Are Mental Health Insurance Mandates Effective?: Evidence from Suicides
Jonathan Klick and Sara Markowitz
NBER Working Paper No. 9994
September 2003
JEL No. I0, K0
ABSTRACT
Many states have passed laws mandating insurance companies to provide or offer some form of
mental health benefits. These laws presumably lower the price of obtaining mental health services
for many adults, and as a result, might improve health outcomes. This paper analyzes the
effectiveness of mental health insurance mandates by examining the influence of mandates on adult
suicides, which are strongly correlated with mental illness. Data on completed suicides in each state
for the period 1981-2000 are analyzed. Ordinary least squares and two-stage least squares results
show that mental health mandates are not effective in reducing suicide rates.
Jonathan Klick
The American Enterprise Institute
1150 Seventeenth Street, NW
Washington, DC 20036
jklick@aei.org
Sara Markowitz
NBER
365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10016
and Rutgers University, Newark
smarkow@newark.rutgers.edu

INTRODUCTION
Mental illnesses are debilitating diseases affecting millions of people each year. These
conditions constituted five of the top ten leading causes of disability worldwide in 1990,
measured in years lived with a disability. Unipolar depression is the largest cause of disability
(Murray and Lopez 1996). Despite the severity of the burden of mental illness, many cases of
mental disorders remain untreated. Estimates show that about 28 percent of the U.S. adult
population in any year has a diagnosable mental or addictive disorder, yet only 8 percent seeks
treatment (USDHHS 1999).
In response to the increasing scope of the problems associated with mental illness,
coupled with improvements in the diagnosis and treatment of mental disorders, a number of
states and the federal government have taken steps to improve access to mental illness services in
the form of mandated mental health benefits, including mental health parity laws. These laws
have the potential to lower the effective price of mental health services, increasing utilization.
However, it is possible these laws might raise the cost of providing insurance thereby reducing
access.
Evaluating the effectiveness of mental health insurance mandates requires analysts to
answer three major questions: 1) do mandates successfully lower the price of obtaining mental
health services; 2) do mandates increase access to mental health services; and 3) do mandates
contribute to improvements in mental health outcomes? Conclusive answers to these questions
are elusive, primarily because work in this area suffers from significant data limitations. While
existing research provides some insights into the first two questions, no research to date attempts
to answer the third question.
This paper examines the question of whether or not mandates directly contribute to
1

improvements in mental health. The answer to this question is crucial to policymakers at the
state and federal levels as they consider implementing and expanding mental health insurance
mandates. The results of this study provide evidence of the impact of mental health and
substance abuse treatment mandates, including parity laws, on adult suicides, a measurable
outcome of poor mental health. In considering the efficacy of mental health mandates in
reducing suicides, instrumental variables are used to control for potential simultaneity between
suicide rates and mandate adoption. The results indicate that mental health mandates are
exogenous, and they are also ineffective in reducing suicide rates.
In the sections that follow, background information is provided regarding the impetus for
the mental health insurance mandate movement, as well as a discussion of prior analyses of the
effects of mandates. We then discuss research design, data, and empirical results, concluding
with directions for future research.
BACKGROUND
Although a few states enacted mental health insurance mandates in the 1970s and 1980s,
a nationwide push for mandates, especially so-called mental health parity mandates, began in
earnest in the early 1990s. Mental health parity laws require insurers to provide parity in
coverage between mental health and physical health coverage. These laws typically prohibit
insurance companies from offering plans that place greater financial burden on access to
diagnostic or treatment services for mental health conditions than for physical health conditions.
Such laws are designed to lower the price of mental health services faced by insured individuals,
improve access to treatment, and ultimately to improve mental health outcomes. Other types of
laws include mandated mental health benefits and mandated mental health benefit offerings.
2